 BANNON-William A. on May 8, 2000 of Mattituck, formerly of Flatbush. World War II D Day Army veteran. Beloved husband of the late Muriel. Devoted father of Dennis and the late William. Also survived by three grandchildren and two great grandchildren. Reposing at the Willaim F. Coster Funeral Home, Main Rd., route 25, Cutchogue, New York, Wednesday and Thursday 2 PM to 4 PM and 7 PM to 9 PM. Funeral Mass 11 AM, Friday at Our Lady of Good Cousel Church, Mattituck. Burial to follow in Sacred Heart Cemetery. Memorials may be sent to East End Hospice. BANNON-William A. on May 8, 2000 of Mattituck, formerly of Flatbush. World War II D Day Army veteran. Beloved husband of the late Muriel. Devoted father of Dennis and the late William. Also survived by three grandchildren and two great grandchildren. Reposing at the Willaim F. Coster Funeral Home, Main Rd., route 25, Cutchogue, New York, Wednesday and Thursday 2 PM to 4 PM and 7 PM to 9 PM. Funeral Mass 11 AM, Friday at Our Lady of Good Cousel Church, Mattituck. Burial to follow in Sacred Heart Cemetery. Memorials may be sent to East End Hospice. WEKSELBLATT-Raymond, on May 8, at 79 years. Beloved husband of the late Beverly. Devoted father of Joseph and Abbe. Dear father-in-law of Maureen and Mitchell. Loving grandfather of Rachel, Beth, Sara, Shelby and Brooke. Service today, 10 AM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York (near Avenue V). WEKSELBLATT-Raymond, on May 8, at 79 years. Beloved husband of the late Beverly. Devoted father of Joseph and Abbe. Dear father-in-law of Maureen and Mitchell. Loving grandfather of Rachel, Beth, Sara, Shelby and Brooke. Service today, 10 AM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York (near Avenue V). The drama in Sierra Leone, where a rebel group is holding 500 United Nations peacekeepers hostage, is all the more distressing because of the circumstances: the soldiers wandered into the West African bush with outdated maps, got lost, and then were captured and stripped of their weapons by the very guerrillas they were sent to disarm. The rebels also made off with armored personnel carriers and other military gear. The drama in Sierra Leone, where a rebel group is holding 500 United Nations peacekeepers hostage, is all the more distressing because of the circumstances: the soldiers wandered into the West African bush with outdated maps, got lost, and then were captured and stripped of their weapons by the very guerrillas they were sent to disarm. The rebels also made off with armored personnel carriers and other military gear. BANNON-William A. on May 8, 2000 of Mattituck, formerly of Flatbush. World War II D Day Army veteran. Beloved husband of the late Muriel. Devoted father of Dennis and the late William. Also survived by three grandchildren and two great grandchildren. Reposing at the Willaim F. Coster Funeral Home, Main Rd., route 25, Cutchogue, New York, Wednesday and Thursday 2 PM to 4 PM and 7 PM to 9 PM. Funeral Mass 11 AM, Friday at Our Lady of Good Cousel Church, Mattituck. Burial to follow in Sacred Heart Cemetery. Memorials may be sent to East End Hospice. BANNON-William A. on May 8, 2000 of Mattituck, formerly of Flatbush. World War II D Day Army veteran. Beloved husband of the late Muriel. Devoted father of Dennis and the late William. Also survived by three grandchildren and two great grandchildren. Reposing at the Willaim F. Coster Funeral Home, Main Rd., route 25, Cutchogue, New York, Wednesday and Thursday 2 PM to 4 PM and 7 PM to 9 PM. Funeral Mass 11 AM, Friday at Our Lady of Good Cousel Church, Mattituck. Burial to follow in Sacred Heart Cemetery. Memorials may be sent to East End Hospice. WEKSELBLATT-Raymond, on May 8, at 79 years. Beloved husband of the late Beverly. Devoted father of Joseph and Abbe. Dear father-in-law of Maureen and Mitchell. Loving grandfather of Rachel, Beth, Sara, Shelby and Brooke. Service today, 10 AM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York (near Avenue V). WEKSELBLATT-Raymond, on May 8, at 79 years. Beloved husband of the late Beverly. Devoted father of Joseph and Abbe. Dear father-in-law of Maureen and Mitchell. Loving grandfather of Rachel, Beth, Sara, Shelby and Brooke. Service today, 10 AM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York (near Avenue V). The drama in Sierra Leone, where a rebel group is holding 500 United Nations peacekeepers hostage, is all the more distressing because of the circumstances: the soldiers wandered into the West African bush with outdated maps, got lost, and then were captured and stripped of their weapons by the very guerrillas they were sent to disarm. The rebels also made off with armored personnel carriers and other military gear. The drama in Sierra Leone, where a rebel group is holding 500 United Nations peacekeepers hostage, is all the more distressing because of the circumstances: the soldiers wandered into the West African bush with outdated maps, got lost, and then were captured and stripped of their weapons by the very guerrillas they were sent to disarm. The rebels also made off with armored personnel carriers and other military gear.