 Paulette Satur, owner of the organic Satur Farms in Cutchogue, on Long Island, grows heirloom dwarf sugar snap peas called Sugar Ann to supply restaurants (although the season has ended). She said the decline of commercial peas began when scientists started creating hybrids on a large scale after World War II, crossing a very sweet pea with one that shipped well, for instance, or with one that grew on a bush rather than on a vine. Those hybrids, she said, were ''selected for certain characteristics that aren't necessarily good for the flavor.'' One of the hardest, and perhaps most unheralded, aspects of moving is leaving summertime rituals behind. I'm thinking of beloved places like the crystalline swimming hole beside the pasture in the Berkshires, or the trail fragrant with wild raspberry bushes in the Adirondacks. So my spirits lifted when my friend told me about Berkeley Tuolumne Camp (pronounced too-WAH-la-me), a camp for families managed by the city of Berkeley, nestled beside the south fork of the Tuolumne River, just up the road from Yosemite National Park. One of the hardest, and perhaps most unheralded, aspects of moving is leaving summertime rituals behind. I'm thinking of beloved places like the crystalline swimming hole beside the pasture in the Berkshires, or the trail fragrant with wild raspberry bushes in the Adirondacks. So my spirits lifted when my friend told me about Berkeley Tuolumne Camp (pronounced too-WAH-la-me), a camp for families managed by the city of Berkeley, nestled beside the south fork of the Tuolumne River, just up the road from Yosemite National Park. The third attack, the police said, occurred around 2 a.m. last Friday near the zoo entrance. A man, 36, was walking on Flatbush Avenue when he was slashed across the face by a man who then fled. Within an hour, a 43-year-old man near the Vale of Cashmere was slashed on his head, neck, hands and arms. BROOKLYN: MAN KILLED IN SHOOTING -- One man was killed and four were wounded early yesterday morning when they were fired on by three gunmen as they stood on a sidewalk in Flatbush, the police said. The police said they had been unable to identify a motive in the shooting, which occurred about 12:30 a.m. on the corner of East 22nd Street and Newkirk Avenue. The gunmen, who have not been identified, fled in a vehicle. The dead man was identified as Andre Jones, 20, of East 23rd Street in Brooklyn.