 Corn plunges after new forecasts predict showers in part of US Midwest where long drought has threatened crop production; in Chicago, corn for July delivery falls 7 cents, to $2.3875 a bushel; graph; chart (S) CORN PRICES FALL. Corn plunged after new forecasts predicted showers in parts of the Midwest where a long drought has threatened crop production. In Chicago, corn for July delivery fell 7 cents, to $2.3875 a bushel. CORN PRICES FALL. Corn plunged after new forecasts predicted showers in parts of the Midwest where a long drought has threatened crop production. In Chicago, corn for July delivery fell 7 cents, to $2.3875 a bushel. ALBERT HADLEY, the interior designer, stood at the bar with his bushy eyebrows and cunning sense of celebrity, smiling like a little fox. ''At five feet something, I never thought of myself as a giant,'' he said. The woman, Digna Fontanez, was trying to cross Livingston Street, a busy four-lane street, just west of its intersection with Flatbush Avenue at 3:10 p.m., and she made it only halfway across, witnesses told the police. Witnesses said she backed up a few steps to avoid eastbound traffic and stumbled and fell into a westbound lane, said Detective John Giammarino, a police spokesman. The woman, Digna Fontanez, was trying to cross Livingston Street, a busy four-lane street, just west of its intersection with Flatbush Avenue at 3:10 p.m., and she made it only halfway across, witnesses told the police. Witnesses said she backed up a few steps to avoid eastbound traffic and stumbled and fell into a westbound lane, said Detective John Giammarino, a police spokesman. Corn plunges after new forecasts predict showers in part of US Midwest where long drought has threatened crop production; in Chicago, corn for July delivery falls 7 cents, to $2.3875 a bushel; graph; chart (S) CORN PRICES FALL. Corn plunged after new forecasts predicted showers in parts of the Midwest where a long drought has threatened crop production. In Chicago, corn for July delivery fell 7 cents, to $2.3875 a bushel. CORN PRICES FALL. Corn plunged after new forecasts predicted showers in parts of the Midwest where a long drought has threatened crop production. In Chicago, corn for July delivery fell 7 cents, to $2.3875 a bushel. ALBERT HADLEY, the interior designer, stood at the bar with his bushy eyebrows and cunning sense of celebrity, smiling like a little fox. ''At five feet something, I never thought of myself as a giant,'' he said. The woman, Digna Fontanez, was trying to cross Livingston Street, a busy four-lane street, just west of its intersection with Flatbush Avenue at 3:10 p.m., and she made it only halfway across, witnesses told the police. Witnesses said she backed up a few steps to avoid eastbound traffic and stumbled and fell into a westbound lane, said Detective John Giammarino, a police spokesman. The woman, Digna Fontanez, was trying to cross Livingston Street, a busy four-lane street, just west of its intersection with Flatbush Avenue at 3:10 p.m., and she made it only halfway across, witnesses told the police. Witnesses said she backed up a few steps to avoid eastbound traffic and stumbled and fell into a westbound lane, said Detective John Giammarino, a police spokesman.