 But Seattle is different. It is less full of itself than its rival down the coast. Less cynical, too. Young families and the middle class here have resisted the stampede to the suburbs. People worry that they'll be spoiled by success, yes. They worry that they will have to wear neckties. But on balance they are optimistic, even about the weather, smiling through the mist; it is all that water, after all, that turns buddleias from butterfly bushes into 20-foot butterfly trees and brings out the flashing crimsons of the fuchsias. McGLINN-Joseph P. 58. Of Monroe, New York. Died Wednesday, August 16, 2000, at his residence. Beloved husband of Mary (nee Cuddy). Devoted father of Ellen Wilson, Clare, Tim and Matt. Loving brother of Mary Dallow, Ann Comeau, Bernard and Michael and the late Margaret McGlinn and beloved grandfather of Luke and Mark Wilson. Friends may call from 2-4 and 7-9 P.M. today, at Quackenbush Funeral Home, 117 Maple Avenue, Monroe, NY. Funeral Mass on Saturday at 10:00 A.M. from St. Anastasia Parish Church, Route 17 M, Harriman, NY. Interment in St. Anastasia Cemetery. Contributions may be made to Juvenile Diabetes Foundation-Mid Hudson Chapter, 45 Crown Street, Kingston, NY 12401. McGLINN-Joseph P. 58. Of Monroe, New York. Died Wednesday, August 16, 2000, at his residence. Beloved husband of Mary (nee Cuddy). Devoted father of Ellen Wilson, Clare, Tim and Matt. Loving brother of Mary Dallow, Ann Comeau, Bernard and Michael and the late Margaret McGlinn and beloved grandfather of Luke and Mark Wilson. Friends may call from 2-4 and 7-9 P.M. today, at Quackenbush Funeral Home, 117 Maple Avenue, Monroe, NY. Funeral Mass on Saturday at 10:00 A.M. from St. Anastasia Parish Church, Route 17 M, Harriman, NY. Interment in St. Anastasia Cemetery. Contributions may be made to Juvenile Diabetes Foundation-Mid Hudson Chapter, 45 Crown Street, Kingston, NY 12401. ''SURFACE TRANSIT.'' It was smart of the organizers of the first New York Hip-Hop Theater Festival to make Sarah Jones's one-person play its centerpiece. Ms. Jones first presented it a couple of years ago in the East Village, and since then she and the show have grown. Among artists most respected by other hip-hop poets and performers, Ms. Jones has the clearest sense of distance; she can satirize the phenomenon in ways that open it up for people who think there is something mysterious about it. The eight characters she creates include an octogenarian who burns with the desire to be with it, whatever ''it'' is; a Russian immigrant trying to persuade her small black daughter to ignore racial slurs hurled at her by their Flatbush neighbors; a West Indian black woman with a British accent who pops into a studio for an MTV spot audition; and a white policeman who abuses women and hates gay men but could not possibly have anything against gays because his best friend from childhood ''is one of those'' (2:00). P.S. 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, (212) 477-5288. Wednesdays through Saturdays, at 8:30 p.m.; also 11 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. Tickets: $25; $15 student tickets with identification (D. J. R. Bruckner). * STEVE WILSON QUARTET, Up Over Jazz Cafe, 351 Flatbush Avenue, at Seventh Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, (718) 398-5413. It's good to have Mr. Wilson's own band performing again; the alto saxophonist is so busy with other bands -- these days, his main employer is Chick Corea -- that one seldom hears him as a leader. His sound is warm, human, light toned, fleet; he has dealt with the living landmarks of his instrument, Ornette Coleman and Wayne Shorter, as well as anyone out there today. His band, made up of musicians who have spent a long time in one another's company, is especially reactive; it includes the pianist Bruce Barth, the bassist Eric Revis and the drummer Adam Cruz. Sets are tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30 and midnight; cover charge is $15, with a $5 minimum (Ratliff).