 ''We're trying to help a team whose light has been under a bushel to get the recognition it deserves,'' said John Krimsky, chief marketing officer of YankeeNets. ''America doesn't know our players. Some companies are coming forward and saying to us, 'We didn't know you had such great players.' '' MILLENNIUM MARBLES TOURNAMENT,  an attempt to surpass the Guinness Book of Records entry for the most people to play marbles at the same time in the same place. It will also be part of the 18th Annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn festival, Sunday from 1 to 4 p.m. at Grand Army Plaza at the junction of Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway. The record is 569 people. Registration begins at noon, with warm-up tutorial sessions from 1 to 2 p.m. Information: (718) 855-7882. The No. 2 and No. 3 trains and the B41 and B69 buses go to Grand Army Plaza. Free. Nimbly ducking under branches and stepping over fallen logs, Mr. Rezendes was clearly someone who had spent a lot of time bushwhacking. I've logged countless hours hiking on backcountry trails, but this was a completely different experience. Following a well-marked trail, you are free to get lost in your  thoughts, checking in every now and then to admire the scenery. Off the trail, you are part of the scenery. You either pay attention or walk into an overhanging branch. Mr. Rezendes rarely knows where he's going in the forest. ''Once I begin tracking, I let the animal guide me,'' he said. VINCENT HERRING QUINTET, Up Over Jazz Cafe, 351 Flatbush Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, (718) 398-5413. Mr. Herring, a dark horse of the tenor saxophone since the 80's, has one of the most forceful, commanding sounds around, and in this band, paired with the equally strong trumpeter Eddie Henderson, he'll be in competitive surroundings. Sets are tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30, and midnight; there is a $15 cover with a $5 minimum per set (Ratliff). He stood before the Thunderbolt, an abandoned 1926 roller coaster that is literally being pulled apart by bushes and vines that have wrapped around the tracks like the tentacles of an octopus. ''One of the great ruins in America,'' he called it, before asking ever so gently, ''Would that $91 million be better spent building up better housing? WELCOME BACK TO BROOKLYN FESTIVAL, Grand Army Plaza, at the intersection of Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway. Annual event with entertainment, food and crafts. Sunday, noon to 6 p.m. Related events include a free walking tour of Prospect Park at 2 p.m. sponsored by the Brooklyn Museum of Art (meets at the statue of John Stranahan,  off Grand Army Plaza); and the Pathmark Multicultural Arts Festival, featuring performances of Middle Eastern and West Indian music. Sponsored by Brooklyn Information and Culture (BRIC). Information: (718) 855-7882; Web site; www.brooklynX.org. VISHNER-Esther Dobkin. 90, formerly of the Bronx, died May 22 under care of friends in Oxnard, CA. Illness only deprived Esther of her independence in her last two months. Esther didn't have an easy life, but no one would have known it. Her infectious laughter and positive outlook were a gift to all. A love of ''good dark choclate'' and yellow roses evidenced the joy she took in simple pleasures. She presented her family with a steady stream of lovingly crafted knitted garments. Esther was born in Waterbury,CT, earned her AB degree from Hunter College, did allergy research at Mt. Sinai and Brooklyn Jewish Hospitals and was the first to publish the pollen count in the New York Times. Later she helped her brothers at Pioneer Fence Co. In 1948 she married the late Joseph Vishnevetsky (changed to Vishner). She was active in the PTAs of P.S. 94, J.H.S. 80, Sholem Aleichem Shul 21, served on Local School Board 10 and with Sholem Aleichem Folk Institute. In WWII she was a volunteer ''tracker'' of air traffic. She was a member of Workmen's Circle, National Yiddish Book Center and YIVO. Esther sang in the Kultur Gezelshaft Chorus and supported cultural, women's, social service, pacifist and environmental organizations. Daughter of the late Isaac and Jennie Dobkin, sister of the late Dr. Julius Dobkin, Solomon A. Dobkin and Abraham Dobkin, Esq., survived by sons Mayer Jacob Vishner, J. Marcus Newman (Nonnie Morris Vishner), Ira Vishner and wife Susan; brother Machbi Dobkin, sisters Hannah Doberne and Eva Dobkin; sistersin-law Lillian K. Dobkin, MarjorieHousepian Dobkin and Hedvig Suess; grandchildren Jess, Nathaniel and Polly Vishner; 13 nieces and nephews, 26 grandnieces and nephews. And many friends -generations of them. In accordance with Esther's wishes, there were no funeral services. In memoriam, plant a rosebush, eat choclate, or make donations to: YIVO, 15 W. 16th St., New York, NY 10011. VISHNER-Esther Dobkin. 90, formerly of the Bronx, died May 22 under care of friends in Oxnard, CA. Illness only deprived Esther of her independence in her last two months. Esther didn't have an easy life, but no one would have known it. Her infectious laughter and positive outlook were a gift to all. A love of ''good dark choclate'' and yellow roses evidenced the joy she took in simple pleasures. She presented her family with a steady stream of lovingly crafted knitted garments. Esther was born in Waterbury,CT, earned her AB degree from Hunter College, did allergy research at Mt. Sinai and Brooklyn Jewish Hospitals and was the first to publish the pollen count in the New York Times. Later she helped her brothers at Pioneer Fence Co. In 1948 she married the late Joseph Vishnevetsky (changed to Vishner). She was active in the PTAs of P.S. 94, J.H.S. 80, Sholem Aleichem Shul 21, served on Local School Board 10 and with Sholem Aleichem Folk Institute. In WWII she was a volunteer ''tracker'' of air traffic. She was a member of Workmen's Circle, National Yiddish Book Center and YIVO. Esther sang in the Kultur Gezelshaft Chorus and supported cultural, women's, social service, pacifist and environmental organizations. Daughter of the late Isaac and Jennie Dobkin, sister of the late Dr. Julius Dobkin, Solomon A. Dobkin and Abraham Dobkin, Esq., survived by sons Mayer Jacob Vishner, J. Marcus Newman (Nonnie Morris Vishner), Ira Vishner and wife Susan; brother Machbi Dobkin, sisters Hannah Doberne and Eva Dobkin; sistersin-law Lillian K. Dobkin, MarjorieHousepian Dobkin and Hedvig Suess; grandchildren Jess, Nathaniel and Polly Vishner; 13 nieces and nephews, 26 grandnieces and nephews. And many friends -generations of them. In accordance with Esther's wishes, there were no funeral services. In memoriam, plant a rosebush, eat choclate, or make donations to: YIVO, 15 W. 16th St., New York, NY 10011.