 So, a television commercial depicts a young man clipping hedges while drinking Lipton's. The owner of the house whose hedges he has been clipping asks him what he is doing.  When the homeowner discovers his bush has been trimmed into the shape of a giant rabbit, he asks the young man to leave. As he departs, viewers see that the young man has cut all the bushes on the block into giant animal shapes. CORN PRICES RISE. Corn for July delivery rose 4.5 cents, or 1.8 percent, to $2.5075 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade, the highest closing price since June 1998, on forecasts for warm, dry weather in the Midwest. CORN PRICES RISE. Corn for July delivery rose 4.5 cents, or 1.8 percent, to $2.5075 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade, the highest closing price since June 1998, on forecasts for warm, dry weather in the Midwest. In the winter, we (the class of 1946) would ride sleighs down the hill in front of the main building pictured (where a student was using her laptop under a tree), and in the spring we would walk along a path bordered with lilac bushes. Such a flood of memories. You made my day. In the winter, we (the class of 1946) would ride sleighs down the hill in front of the main building pictured (where a student was using her laptop under a tree), and in the spring we would walk along a path bordered with lilac bushes. Such a flood of memories. You made my day. So, a television commercial depicts a young man clipping hedges while drinking Lipton's. The owner of the house whose hedges he has been clipping asks him what he is doing.  When the homeowner discovers his bush has been trimmed into the shape of a giant rabbit, he asks the young man to leave. As he departs, viewers see that the young man has cut all the bushes on the block into giant animal shapes. CORN PRICES RISE. Corn for July delivery rose 4.5 cents, or 1.8 percent, to $2.5075 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade, the highest closing price since June 1998, on forecasts for warm, dry weather in the Midwest. CORN PRICES RISE. Corn for July delivery rose 4.5 cents, or 1.8 percent, to $2.5075 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade, the highest closing price since June 1998, on forecasts for warm, dry weather in the Midwest. In the winter, we (the class of 1946) would ride sleighs down the hill in front of the main building pictured (where a student was using her laptop under a tree), and in the spring we would walk along a path bordered with lilac bushes. Such a flood of memories. You made my day. In the winter, we (the class of 1946) would ride sleighs down the hill in front of the main building pictured (where a student was using her laptop under a tree), and in the spring we would walk along a path bordered with lilac bushes. Such a flood of memories. You made my day.