 KOLLIGS-George W., 71, of Chester, New York. Retired pressman for New York Times, on June 26th at his residence, son of the late Robert & Emily Boucher Kolligs, loving husband of Lois, (nee McComiskey), devoted father of Dennis & Wayne Kolligs. Beloved brother of Robert Kolligs & Evelyn Brandafino & loving grandfather of four. Visitation Thursday, June 29, 2-4 & 7-9 PM at Smith, Seaman & Quackenbush Funeral Home, 117 Maple Avenue, Monroe, New York. Funeral Friday, June 30th, at 10 AM at the Funeral Home. KOLLIGS-George W., 71, of Chester, New York. Retired pressman for New York Times, on June 26th at his residence, son of the late Robert & Emily Boucher Kolligs, loving husband of Lois, (nee McComiskey), devoted father of Dennis & Wayne Kolligs. Beloved brother of Robert Kolligs & Evelyn Brandafino & loving grandfather of four. Visitation Thursday, June 29, 2-4 & 7-9 PM at Smith, Seaman & Quackenbush Funeral Home, 117 Maple Avenue, Monroe, New York. Funeral Friday, June 30th, at 10 AM at the Funeral Home. The first officer, Charles Schwarz, who faced a life term, had steadfastly denied that he was anywhere near the bathroom of the 70th Precinct station house in Flatbush when Mr. Louima was sodomized there with a broken broom handle on Aug. 9, 1997. The first officer, Charles Schwarz, who faced a life term, had steadfastly denied that he was anywhere near the bathroom of the 70th Precinct station house in Flatbush when Mr. Louima was sodomized there with a broken broom handle on Aug. 9, 1997. Then, on a recent spring day at the Union Square Greenmarket, we came across a stall with 11 varieties of basil, with alluring, exotic names: Thai Siam Queen, Purple Ruffles, Mrs. Burns's lemon basil, and lime, cinnamon and holy basils. There were bushy plants with dainty, teardrop-shaped leaves and the pale tone of pea soup standing beside a lanky variety with razor-toothed leaves shot through with purple veins. One basil had the saturated color of inky zinfandel, and broad leaves that were ridiculously frilly at the edges. When you buy it, look for bushy vigorous plants. Leaves may be curled somewhat, but avoid plants with leaves that look closed up, or that have brown splotches. A few flowering tips are a sign of a healthy plant, but too many flowers indicate the plant may be past its peak and turning bitter. Conduct an on-site taste test. SPERBER-Louis. June 25, 2000. Beloved husband of Ruth (nee Cooper). Devoted father & fatherin-law of Jonathan, Nancy, Daniel and Laurie. Loving grandfather to Ian, Adam and Jesse. Services are at I.J. Morris, 1895 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, on Thursday at 12PM. SPERBER-Louis. June 25, 2000. Beloved husband of Ruth (nee Cooper). Devoted father & fatherin-law of Jonathan, Nancy, Daniel and Laurie. Loving grandfather to Ian, Adam and Jesse. Services are at I.J. Morris, 1895 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, on Thursday at 12PM.