 The fringe tree bumps shoulders with another wonderful toughy, the Japanese spicebush (Lindera obtusiloba), a shrub about 10 feet tall and just as wide, with grass-green lobed leaves that turn bright yellow in the fall. They were definitely a statement, and I wanted them both. I also changed my mind about the flame azalea, Rhododendron calendulaceum, which I've grown to loathe from seeing too many hot-pink gumdrops and salmon bushes pruned within an inch of their lives, baking under full sun on an emerald-green lawn. But here, dozens of them descended a wooded hill in varying shades of yellow, orange, pink and salmon. The dappled shade of tall oaks softened their jarring colors; no electric pruners had ruined their naturally graceful shape. If met as promised by 2010, this would mean a restoration to about 15 percent of the output of the bay's oyster heyday a century ago when 20 million bushels were harvested annually and the bay was one of the world's premier seafood resources. Development and pollution devastated the bay and reduced the take to less than 500,000 bushels. But scientists have developed a promising technique of recreating the high-rise oyster reefs of a century ago. Chuck Quackenbush, California state insurance commissioner under investigation for allegeldy diverting millions of dollars in earthquake settlements into personal political slush fund, resigns rather than face impeachment by Legislature; charges against him discussed (M) Chuck Quackenbush, the California state insurance commissioner who has been under investigation on accusations of diverting millions of dollars in earthquake insurance settlements into what amounted to a personal political slush fund, resigned today rather than face potential impeachment by the State Legislature. Mr. Quackenbush, one of only two Republican statewide officeholders, decided to quit after what politicians said were at least two days of negotiations with the Legislature aimed at limiting his potential civil and criminal liability. Mr. Quackenbush's lawyer said he had made no deal with legislative leaders, but they canceled a hearing scheduled for Thursday at which Mr. Quackenbush, under subpoena, would have faced extensive on-the-record questions about his dealings for the first time. Chuck Quackenbush, the California state insurance commissioner who has been under investigation on accusations of diverting millions of dollars in earthquake insurance settlements into what amounted to a personal political slush fund, resigned today rather than face potential impeachment by the State Legislature. Mr. Quackenbush, one of only two Republican statewide officeholders, decided to quit after what politicians said were at least two days of negotiations with the Legislature aimed at limiting his potential civil and criminal liability. Mr. Quackenbush's lawyer said he had made no deal with legislative leaders, but they canceled a hearing scheduled for Thursday at which Mr. Quackenbush, under subpoena, would have faced extensive on-the-record questions about his dealings for the first time. Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat, will appoint a successor to serve until the next scheduled statewide election in 2002, subject to confirmation by the Legislature, and Mr. Davis vowed today to choose someone of ''unquestioned integrity.'' Mr. Quackenbush, 46, offered his resignation, effective July 10, in a one-sentence letter to the only other Republican constitutional officer, Secretary of State Bill Jones. ''It reached the point with all of the controversy that he could no longer serve effectively as insurance commissioner, and so in the interests of the people of California, he stepped down,'' said Mr. Quackenbush's lawyer, Donald H. Heller. ''I think it needs to be very clear that he has done nothing illegal or criminal.'' Mr. Quackenbush's resignation followed three months of deepening scandal in Sacramento over accusations of misusing funds from nonprofit foundations for personal political purposes. The largest fund, the California Research and Assistance Fund, was financed by a half-dozen insurance companies accused of mishandling claims after the devastating 1994 Northridge earthquake. The insurance department had threatened the companies with nearly $4 billion in potential penalties, but Mr. Quackenbush agreed to let them settle the matter by donating some $12 million in tax-deductible contributions to the new fund. The fund was supposed to finance consumer assistance programs and earthquake research, but investigators found that money went instead for television commercials featuring Mr. Quackenbush and to other groups he favored, including $263,000 to a football camp attended by his children. While denying any wrongdoing, Mr. Quackenbush has said that he may have made mistakes in judgment, and, as Mr. Heller phrased it, ''put his trust in people who let him down.'' But Republican legislative leaders had warned that if Mr. Quackenbush refused to testify, or if he testified and could not refute the accusations against him, there would be a bipartisan impeachment inquiry. It was that collapse of political support that forced his hand today. Besides the Legislature, the state attorney general's office and the Fair Political Practices Commission, which oversees campaign finance, have been investigating Mr. Quackenbush, the fund and its contributors. State Attorney General Bill Lockyer said today that his office had made no deal with Mr. Quackenbush, ''and none is contemplated.'' Mr. Lockyer added: ''If crimes have been committed by anyone associated with these actions, my office will take action to see that they are prosecuted. We will seek civil penalties and restitution where appropriate.'' Mr. Quackenbush, a former state assemblyman, was elected to the insurance post in 1994, with strong support in campaign contributions from the industry he regulates. He replaced a Democrat, John Garamendi, whom the industry had regarded antagonistically. At one point, insurance agents who made campaign phone calls to voters on Mr. Quackenbush's behalf misrepresented themselves as police officers, and he was forced to apologize. In 1996, a state audit found that he had not reported $327,000 in 1994 contributions, much of it from the industry. California Official Steps Down  Chuck Quackenbush resigned as insurance commissioner rather than risk impeachment over accusations that he diverted millions in earthquake insurance settlements. California Official Steps Down  Chuck Quackenbush resigned as insurance commissioner rather than risk impeachment over accusations that he diverted millions in earthquake insurance settlements. President Yoweri Museveni is balder and bulkier than when he was a bush fighter, his once-brilliant reputation dulled recently at home and abroad. But he is still the man who brought Uganda back and did so with a certain steady charm -- on full display the other day when a group of college students heckled him for more than 20 minutes as he tried to give a speech. President Yoweri Museveni is balder and bulkier than when he was a bush fighter, his once-brilliant reputation dulled recently at home and abroad. But he is still the man who brought Uganda back and did so with a certain steady charm -- on full display the other day when a group of college students heckled him for more than 20 minutes as he tried to give a speech. Rockwell Place Garden, corner of Flatbush and Lafayette Avenues, Brooklyn; (212) 352-9330. Jeff Tarango's reputation as the menace to high society at the All England Lawn Tennis Club continued today when he refused to shake the hand of Paul Goldstein after his loss because of what he termed ''bush league'' gamesmanship. Jeff Tarango's reputation as the menace to high society at the All England Lawn Tennis Club continued today when he refused to shake the hand of Paul Goldstein after his loss because of what he termed ''bush league'' gamesmanship. ''Of course he was faking the injury,'' said Tarango, who lost his second-round match to Goldstein, a fellow former Stanford player, by 3-6, 6-2, 5-7, 6-2, 12-10. ''He was fine. Cramping is no excuse to get a trainer. I thought it was bush league. It's my call whether I want to shake a guy's hand or not.'' Their slim-jim trunks standing at attention like green sculptures in a pale marble room, a formal allee of Alexander coconut palms sprouts from a carpet of glistening white pebbles. ''It's very easy to maintain,'' Mr. Nievera said. ''You see every leaf that falls, so you have to pick it up.'' Soft mounds of Mexican heather and butterfly bush soften the edges of the formal French-influenced layout, and funky metal and wire chairs painted white or delicate hydrangea blue peek through the tropical greenery.