 FINE-David. Died in Tamarac, FL, on August 19. His life spanned three centuries and his contributions to his adopted country were many. Along with his late son Leon and late brother Norman, he built homes in Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties, which are a tribute to his accomplishments. His word and his bond were greatly respected by business colleagues. Active in community causes, he was a Founder and Past President of Congregation Beth Israel of East Flatbush, a proud member of the Bayside Jewish Center and Member of the Board of Directors of the Tamarac, FL, Jewish Center. His life, together with that of his late, beloved wife, Anna, ardently revolved about his synagogue activities and other aspects of Jewish community life. He was a truly good and pious man. He is survived by his daughters, Renee F. Stave and Nadine F. Stock, grandchildren Gregg, Marjorie, Richard, Matthew and Wayne, and greatgrandchildren Elise, Yasmin, Soraya and Gianna. Services at ''Riverside-Nassau North Chapels,'' 55 No. Station Plaza, Great Neck, NY, on August 21, at 1 PM. FINE-David. Died in Tamarac, FL, on August 19. His life spanned three centuries and his contributions to his adopted country were many. Along with his late son Leon and late brother Norman, he built homes in Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties, which are a tribute to his accomplishments. His word and his bond were greatly respected by business colleagues. Active in community causes, he was a Founder and Past President of Congregation Beth Israel of East Flatbush, a proud member of the Bayside Jewish Center and Member of the Board of Directors of the Tamarac, FL, Jewish Center. His life, together with that of his late, beloved wife, Anna, ardently revolved about his synagogue activities and other aspects of Jewish community life. He was a truly good and pious man. He is survived by his daughters, Renee F. Stave and Nadine F. Stock, grandchildren Gregg, Marjorie, Richard, Matthew and Wayne, and greatgrandchildren Elise, Yasmin, Soraya and Gianna. Services at ''Riverside-Nassau North Chapels,'' 55 No. Station Plaza, Great Neck, NY, on August 21, at 1 PM. Two of them were youngsters really, just 16 years old. They attacked her husband, Alberto Adriano, because he was black. Threw him down, kicked him in the head with force enough to dislodge his left eyeball, dragged his prone body into the city park, trampled on him. Finally, they removed his pants and hung them from a bush. Two of them were youngsters really, just 16 years old. They attacked her husband, Alberto Adriano, because he was black. Threw him down, kicked him in the head with force enough to dislodge his left eyeball, dragged his prone body into the city park, trampled on him. Finally, they removed his pants and hung them from a bush. IT'S called ''ambush marketing,'' and it refers to advertisers' attempts to capitalize on a sponsorship event without actually becoming sponsors. And with official sponsorships for the Summer Olympic Games selling for stratospheric sums, it is hardly surprising to officials at the United States Olympic Committee that the Games have frequently been targets of ambush. IT'S called ''ambush marketing,'' and it refers to advertisers' attempts to capitalize on a sponsorship event without actually becoming sponsors. And with official sponsorships for the Summer Olympic Games selling for stratospheric sums, it is hardly surprising to officials at the United States Olympic Committee that the Games have frequently been targets of ambush.