 She does receive a monthly rent subsidy of $250 for a $525-a-month vermin-infested studio apartment in Flatbush, where neither the heat nor the elevator are reliable. The spooky bushes that used to swallow Martina Navratilova's wayward lobs had been cleared away, and the wall that absorbed the backhands she belted with her grandmother's heavy wood racket was gone. The spooky bushes that used to swallow Martina Navratilova's wayward lobs had been cleared away, and the wall that absorbed the backhands she belted with her grandmother's heavy wood racket was gone. Today, 20 years later, nature has rebounded in surprising ways on the mountain, in southwest Washington State. There are some fledgling plants, trees and berry bushes, most from seeds reintroduced to the area by wandering elk. Today, 20 years later, nature has rebounded in surprising ways on the mountain, in southwest Washington State. There are some fledgling plants, trees and berry bushes, most from seeds reintroduced to the area by wandering elk. Which is appropriate, since the park is a hub for many neighborhoods. From the brownstones of Park Slope to the row houses  of Flatbush and Crown Heights, residents of Brooklyn and elsewhere converge for picnics, concerts, weddings and pick-up soccer. When Ms. Burgess told Mr. Purple that people were moving items from his former home, he had a request: ''He said to make sure we save the black raspberry bushes. At one time they were in the Garden of Eden.'' In a cage in Ms. Frati's office, four baby squirrels, two of whom fell from a nest, scratch on the wire as she approaches, clamoring for attention. Four baby chipmunks, rescued when their nest was bulldozed, scramble about in another cage.  ''They seem friendly, but that's only because I'm still nursing them,'' Ms. Frati said of her bushy-tailed charges, checking on a squirrel whose broken leg she put in a cast, then dispensing advice over the phone to someone who had just found a baby duck stuck in a bulkhead. In a cage in Ms. Frati's office, four baby squirrels, two of whom fell from a nest, scratch on the wire as she approaches, clamoring for attention. Four baby chipmunks, rescued when their nest was bulldozed, scramble about in another cage.  ''They seem friendly, but that's only because I'm still nursing them,'' Ms. Frati said of her bushy-tailed charges, checking on a squirrel whose broken leg she put in a cast, then dispensing advice over the phone to someone who had just found a baby duck stuck in a bulkhead.