 Article On the Record: Capital Punishment in Texas examines administration of death penalty in Texas, where 127 people have been executed during governorship of presidential aspirant George W Bush; Bush says he is confident that all were guilty and had full access to courts; Texas has under Bush executed more people than any other state; photos; graph; officials who administer system are not so sanguine, even though they support Bush and believe in death penalty; pardons board member Paddy Lann Burwell voices concern about fairness and executing innocent people, citing several cases in which prosecutors seemed more concerned with scoring victories than with justice; board members Tom Moss and Cynthia Tauss mention questions about guilt of Troy Farris, who was executed for killing police officer; Judge Charles Baird does not share Bush's certainty that 'very fallible' system works 'flawlessly'; New York Times examination of some cases reviewed, with questions raised about possible innocence and how system works (L) Gov. George W. Bush is certain that the 127 people who have been executed in Texas during his tenure were all guilty. ''I'm confident that every person that has been put to death in Texas, under my watch, has been guilty of the crime charged, and has had full access to the courts,'' Mr. Bush said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' in February. Gov. George W. Bush is certain that the 127 people who have been executed in Texas during his tenure were all guilty. ''I'm confident that every person that has been put to death in Texas, under my watch, has been guilty of the crime charged, and has had full access to the courts,'' Mr. Bush said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' in February. But here in Texas, which under Mr. Bush has executed more people than any other state, some of the officials who administer the death penalty, reviewing the case records, considering inmates' appeals and weighing final pleas for clemency, are not so sanguine. These officials, who support Mr. Bush's presidential candidacy and believe in the death penalty, said in interviews that they believed Texas ran the risk of executing an innocent person. ''I believe in the death penalty and I don't want to do anything that will cause George Bush to lose the election,'' said Paddy Lann Burwell, a retired Exxon manager who was appointed by the governor two years ago to the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, which reviews all clemency requests in capital cases and makes recommendations to the governor. Still, in an interview at his cattle ranch outside Westhof, south of Austin, Mr. Burwell voiced concerns about the fairness of the state's judicial system, particularly several cases in which he said prosecutors seemed more concerned with scoring victories, in the form of capital convictions, than with justice. Cynthia Tauss, who has studied law, is also on the board. She said she ''cried all day'' after Texas executed Mr. Farris. ''I wasn't sure he should have been given the death penalty,'' she said. ''That's why I voted to commute.'' A majority of the 18-member board would have to have voted for clemency in order to make a recommendation of it to Mr. Bush. Charles Baird, a judge on the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals until 1998, was in Washington this week to announce the formation of a national committee to prevent wrongful executions. Asked whether he agreed with Mr. Bush that no one had been wrongfully executed under his watch, Mr. Baird said:  ''Everyone in Texas hopes and prays that that's the case. I do not share his view.'' For such certainty to exist, he added, ''You have to take the position that this very fallible system has worked flawlessly.'' But a close look by The New York Times at a half dozen executions carried out during Governor Bush's tenure -- including interviews with jurors, prosecutors, judges, witnesses and co-defendants still on death row -- makes clear that a legal and judicial system rife with these conditions creates, at the very least, the risk of an innocent person being sent to death row. Although most of the officials interviewed said they believed that the executed men were guilty, they questioned aspects of the legal system that sent them to their deaths. Across the country there have been 87 exonerations in the last 27 years, more than a third of them in the last seven years. These cases have prompted a growing national concern over executions. In January, Gov. George Ryan of Illinois, a Republican who supports the death penalty, announced a moratorium on executions while a thorough review is conducted of the state's criminal justice system. Mr. Ryan, who is Mr. Bush's state campaign chairman, described his state's system, where 13 death row inmates have been exonerated since 1987, 11 of them since 1994, as ''fraught with error.'' In the last year, 13 states have had bills pending that would have halted executions. Asked on ''Meet the Press'' if he would consider following the lead of Governor Ryan, Mr. Bush said he would not. Asked why he thought Mr. Ryan had taken the action, Mr. Bush answered: ''Maybe they've had some problems in their courts. Maybe they've had some faulty judgments.'' Governor Bush declined an interview request for this article. His top criminal justice policy adviser, Johnny Sutton, answered questions about Mr. Bush's criminal justice record and some specific capital cases in a lengthy telephone interview. Then, in an unusual move, seven members of the state parole board voted for clemency, but 10 opposed it and one abstained. Mr. Farris was executed in January 1999. During Mr. Bush's tenure, the parole board has granted clemency to only one death row inmate, according to the board's statistics; as of the end of April, it had rejected 68 clemency petitions. Since George W. Bush took office in 1995, Texas has put to death more than twice as many people as the next state, Virginia, with 52, and more than all the executions put together in the next four states -- Missouri with 31, Oklahoma with 21, South Carolina with 20 and Arizona with 18. Texas has 12 executions scheduled for May and June. The state has 462 people on death row, second only to California, with 561 death row inmates (California, in contrast, has executed 8 people). Ann W. Richards, the liberal Democratic governor who preceded Mr. Bush, presided over the executions of a then-record 50 death row inmates. Mr. Bush has been praised by victims' rights groups. ''The families of victims want resolution,'' said Dianne Clements, the president of one group in Houston, Justice for All. Her 13-year-old son Zachary was killed nine years ago in an accidental shooting. Last year, Governor Bush vetoed a modest indigent defense bill that its backers said would have improved the quality of representation in criminal cases. It would have given counties the authority to set up public defender offices, which only a handful now have, and curbed the power of judges to appoint their friends and campaign contributors to represent indigents. For a small-town practitioner, these appointments can be a lucrative source of income; to remain in the good graces of the judges who dole them out, some lawyers feel bound to move cases quickly. The bill would also have required that a lawyer be appointed within 20 days after a person is arraigned. There is no limit now. Explaining his veto at the time, Mr. Bush said, among other things, that the bill would not improve legal counsel for the poor. Asked about the bill on ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Bush said he could not remember it, though he insisted that he was ''for public defenders.'' This emphasis on speed hurt Jerry Lee Hogue. Although there was strong evidence, including two eyewitnesses, that he had committed the arson-murder for which he was convicted, on the eve of his scheduled execution nearly 20 years later a law enforcement official had gnawing doubts. The official, Joseph Stewart, an arson investigator in Wichita Falls, arrested a man for a different arson who it turned out had been at the arson for which Mr. Hogue had been convicted. The arsons seemed disturbingly similar, Mr. Stewart said in an interview, and he called Governor Bush's office several times, pleading for a reprieve of 30 days in order to pursue the new evidence. ''I'm not a defense lawyer, I'm a Texas peace officer,'' said Mr. Stewart, a death penalty supporter who has voted for Mr. Bush and has been in law enforcement since he was 21. For this reason he thought Governor Bush would listen to him. He was wrong. ''The board would not have to sacrifice its conservative ideology to carry out its duties in a more fair and accurate fashion,'' the judge ruled. The judge said it was up to the Texas Legislature to make any changes. Governor Bush said he saw no need for a change. Perhaps because the rate of clemency is so low, lawyers may not always put their full energies into applying for it, said a former lawyer in the governor's general counsel office from 1989 to 1998, Jim Sallans, who reviewed hundreds of clemency petitions in capital cases. He said he ''supports the way Governor Bush handles clemency in capital cases,'' and he said he had no doubt that all those executed under the governor were guilty. Governor Bush, who has never witnessed an execution, weighs all clemency petitions, as well as all other cases set for execution, sometimes several days, or more, before an  execution, sometimes the morning of the lethal injection. His powers to act are limited by the recommendations of the parole board, except that he may grant a 30-day reprieve on his own. He has never done so. Correction:  June 17, 2000, Saturday  An article on May 14 about executions in Texas during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year in which a federal judge in Austin ruled that the Texas pardons and paroles board barely met minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution. It was 1998, not 1988. An article on May 14 about executions in Texas during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year in which a federal judge in Austin ruled that the Texas pardons and paroles board barely met minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution. It was 1998, not 1988.
 AT first glance, it was hard to say whether the scene looked more like a television chat show or a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody. There on a Washington stage last month sat Gov. George W. Bush, his wife, Laura, and two prominent Republican officeholders, both women, all in a semicircle and awaiting their first guest. On cue, out walked an adorable second grader with a giant white bow in her hair, along with one of her teachers. As the women beamed, Mr. Bush asked 7-year-old Elena Douglass, ''How is it here in the nation's capital? Are you having a good time?'' AT first glance, it was hard to say whether the scene looked more like a television chat show or a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody. There on a Washington stage last month sat Gov. George W. Bush, his wife, Laura, and two prominent Republican officeholders, both women, all in a semicircle and awaiting their first guest. On cue, out walked an adorable second grader with a giant white bow in her hair, along with one of her teachers. As the women beamed, Mr. Bush asked 7-year-old Elena Douglass, ''How is it here in the nation's capital? Are you having a good time?'' ''Me too,'' confided Mr. Bush, who was using her to showcase his interest in literacy and foreign language instruction. Yes, politicians have always kissed babies. And yes, even in 1988, both George Bush, the father, and Michael Dukakis were vying to be the education president. But it was Mr. Clinton who built a whole campaign around children, displaying his empathy for working parents by watching children make model airplanes, or dropping into a school that requires uniforms, or reading along with towheaded tykes. This time around there are no complaints. Everybody's doing it. Just try to count how many times over the last year that Mr. Bush has read ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar'' to kindergartners to demonstrate his commitment to literacy. He said it was his favorite book from childhood -- no matter that it wasn't published until 1969, a year after he graduated from Yale. Or how about Al Gore in New Hampshire, where he not only knelt to read ''Tikvah Means Hope'' to 6-year-old Nikkita Gottling, but bought her the book and autographed it? These days, Mr. Gore can regularly be found in schools, eating in the cafeteria or sitting at a student's desk. This habit may even have raised the level of debate. At one high school, students were discussing the Plessy v. Ferguson case of 1896, in which the United States Supreme Court upheld the concept of separate but equal facilities for blacks and whites. Several recent polls have shown Mr. Bush in the lead, and making a strong showing among married women, a swing group that Mr. Clinton won in 1996. So don't be surprised to see Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore surrounded by children, reading away like school librarians, right up to November.
 Mr. Sutton said that Governor Bush ''felt there was no reason'' not to execute Mr. Beathard. A jury had found that he participated in the murders, the appellate courts had determined that he had a fair trial, and there was ''no mitigation'' that would warrant not putting him to death, Mr. Sutton said. The case bothered members of the parole board more than just about any other that has come before them during Mr. Bush's tenure. Seven members voted for some form of clemency, either commutation or a 30-day reprieve. ''I had some questions on the fairness'' of the prosecution, explained Daniel Lang, a Bush appointee to the board, who has a National Rifle Association emblem on his desk and signed photographs of himself with Presidents Gerald R. Ford and George Bush on the walls of his office in Angleton. Mr. Sutton, the criminal adviser to Governor Bush, said that the governor could have granted a reprieve, but that he had ''looked at all the facts of the case and chose not to.'' Mr. Sutton, Governor Bush's criminal adviser, said it was difficult to know what it would have cost for a good investigation 17 years ago. He added, ''We do everything we can to put up enough money to represent these guys.'' It took the jury half an hour to vote the death sentence for Mr. Castillo, a sentence that Mr. Sutton, the Bush adviser, said was fair and supported by the case record. With Governor Bush running for president, and the Texas death penalty system under heavier scrutiny, one of Mr. Spence's post-conviction lawyers, Raoul Schonemann, says ruefully that Mr. Spence is receiving more attention now than he did when his lawyers were fighting to save his life.
 Mr. Montez said he borrowed the ending from the San Francisco Opera, whose audiences stood and applauded the modern twist. The opera, conducted by Neal Goren, can be seen at the Yorktown Stage in Yorktown on Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m. The production features two separate casts, a full orchestra and English supertitles. Tickets, from $32 to $47, can be reserved by calling 739-2165.
 Fears About Death Penalty  Texas has executed 127 people during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush. The governor is certain they all were guilty, but some Texas officials who administer the death penalty say the state runs the risk of executing an innocent person.
 Special-interest groups widen political attack ads in elections around country; examples include Michigan commercials by anti-immigrant group FAIR against Sen Spencer Abraham, and Handgun Control's spots implying that if George W Bush is elected president NRA will work out of Oval Office; photos (M) Just last week, for instance, Handgun Control, the antithesis of the National Rifle Association, began running a spot in eight cities around the country that implied that the N.R.A. would work out of the Oval Office if Gov. George W. Bush should be elected president.
 Melinda Henneberger article on Karl Rove, Republican Presidential candidate Gov George W Bush's chief campaign strategist; Rove's style detailed; photos (M)0 George W. Bush had just nailed down the Republican Party's presidential nomination with his Super Tuesday primary victories, and in Texas it was a night to celebrate. (The campaign contributions were not down the drain after all, thank you, Jesus.) Yet the winner's top strategist, Karl Rove, moved uncomfortably through the victory bash at the Four Seasons in Austin that evening. ''The king has arrived!'' someone shouted at Rove, and the king winced. ''This is because of you,'' said a woman who dribbled her drink on his jacket as she hugged him. When Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly, knelt before him with a flourish and pretended to kiss his ring, Rove turned around, bent over at the waist and hiked up his jacket. As in, ''Kiss this.'' George W. Bush had just nailed down the Republican Party's presidential nomination with his Super Tuesday primary victories, and in Texas it was a night to celebrate. (The campaign contributions were not down the drain after all, thank you, Jesus.) Yet the winner's top strategist, Karl Rove, moved uncomfortably through the victory bash at the Four Seasons in Austin that evening. ''The king has arrived!'' someone shouted at Rove, and the king winced. ''This is because of you,'' said a woman who dribbled her drink on his jacket as she hugged him. When Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly, knelt before him with a flourish and pretended to kiss his ring, Rove turned around, bent over at the waist and hiked up his jacket. As in, ''Kiss this.'' It was Rove who hatched the whole concept of the Bush campaign, starting with the parade of Republicans who showed up in Austin begging the governor to run. But after Bush lost to Senator John McCain in New Hampshire and later in Michigan, there was widespread panic among campaign contributors and plenty of grousing from Daddy Bush's old team: what did this Rove really know about running a national campaign? The question hasn't gone away either. In his own party, he is seen by many as both too inexperienced and too smitten by his candidate to be of much use. Yet the story here is not ''Jethro Runs a Presidential Campaign.'' If George W. Bush is not elected president, it won't be because Karl Rove isn't tough enough. And he is not in love. And when I brought up the talk about his experience being too provincial, his response again was pretty macho: ''No, I haven't run a national campaign, but who has? Jim Baker?'' This he said as if being James Baker, who reluctantly ran President Bush's 1992 campaign, is maybe not such a good thing. Rove said he would, of course, be bringing in reinforcements, and already, a number of better-known operatives, including Haley Barbour and Mary Matalin, have been hired to lend advice. Yet Rove could not help adding, sneeringly: ''But do you repopulate the campaign with people from 1908? No!'' There are other concerns about Rove: he cannot hope to maintain airtight message control -- the hallmark of his earlier campaigns, including W.'s gubernatorial runs -- in the circus atmosphere of a presidential race. And quite possibly, Rove's arrogance and his tendency to take politics personally are not the ideal check on Bush's arrogance and tendency to take politics personally. But Republicans can stop worrying that Karl Rove is too down-home, laid-back, blissed out or otherwise insufficiently aggressive for the job. At one point during that big evening at the Four Seasons, Rove retreated to a hotel suite upstairs to crunch numbers and monitor TV chat. He phoned the Bush campaign's communications director, Karen Hughes, to tell her what to say on the air. (Earlier, he had also told her what to tell Bush to say.) Then he disappeared into the bathroom with his cell phone to take a call from Bush. Rove and his boss had been on the phone throughout the day, and from his office at Bush central that afternoon, he gave Bush the good news from the exit polls, taking special pleasure in the McCain campaign ''meltdown,'' as he called it. ''It's not pretty, they say,'' he told Bush on the phone. ''It's not pretty how the numbers are being received. He's going to Arizona, and the scuttlebutt is he's going to his cabin and nobody thinks he can continue. Yeah, recriminations, finger-pointing. No, over there. Oh, big time. It's unbelievable.'' They dished McCain's campaign manager, Rick Davis, or at least Rove did: ''Yeah, he is a bad guy. This guy was a lobbyist for Imelda Marcos and General Abacha of Nigeria! Just the consummate inside-D.C. thug. He needs adult supervision.'' (Davis's firm, though not Davis himself, did some work for Marcos and for Nigeria when Abacha was in power.) Just as Rove finished talking to Bush from the hotel bathroom that evening, boisterous, good-natured Karen Hughes burst into the suite, and Rove told her he just wanted to ''get New York over with so we can go home.'' They hovered near the TV, and when Bush finally came on CNN, Hughes marveled at how well he was performing. ''He's really gotten good at doing these satellite feeds,'' she said. ''He'd never done any before.'' College was off and on: Rove began at the University of Utah in 1969, thinking of majoring in political science, but after his parents split up during his freshman year, he says, ''I had to start to fend for myself.'' To earn money for school, he worked in a convenience store and was robbed at gunpoint. And he never did get a degree, still a tender spot with him. One thing he seems to like best about Bush, in fact, is that the governor seems to share some of Rove's resentment of Ivy Leaguers, though he is one himself. ''I guess I'm more cerebral and lack his great people skills,'' Rove said. ''And I'm more of a nerd. Lee was a nerd in high school, but then he learned to play the guitar and talk to girls, and I never did. That's serious.'' They both met George Bush in that job, of course, and his son George W. too. And both Rove and Atwater ended up going to work for the elder Bush -- Rove down in Texas, where he has been ever since. When I asked people who have worked with Rove in Texas what makes a classic ''Karl campaign,'' they all used the same word: control. He picks a few campaign themes and goes to great pains to keep his candidates on message. A year before Bush first ran for governor, against Ann Richards in 1994, he was invited to participate in a little skit being put on by a Republican women's group in Dallas, and Rob Allyn, a Republican consultant who was working on the event, got a call from Rove. ''He said Bush would make fun of himself, his mother or whatever,'' Allyn recalled recently, ''but he would not under any circumstances make fun of Ann Richards and would appear only on that condition.'' Allyn was floored: ''It's a year out! Bush hasn't even said he's running. This is a skit for the faithful. But Karl has decided that they're not going to run against Ann's personality, because she has a great personality, so he's on the phone, all serious.'' There are also a lot of stories of Rove's bullying on behalf of Bush. Frank Cahoon, one of the first Republicans ever elected to the Texas House (he is now retired from politics and living in Midland) heard from Rove after Cahoon openly disagreed with some of the appointments Bush made upon being elected governor. He called one Sunday night and went on for an hour, Cahoon recalled: ''Karl was reading me the riot act as a traitor. I said, 'Who cares what some old man out here in the desert thinks?''' Cathie Adams, who heads the Texas Eagle Forum, a conservative antifeminist group, said that after she criticized some of Bush's policies, she got a call from Rove, too: ''You don't cross him unless you want a lot of grief and threats.'' A friend of mine in Texas, Anne Marie Kilday, a former colleague at The Dallas Morning News, says Rove called her at home early one morning during Bush's race against Richards. Republicans had been shopping a story about supposed malfeasance by a female state official Kilday covered. According to Kilday, Rove said he was looking over the telephone records of this official, who is a lesbian, and said he found it interesting that there had been a number of calls to Kilday from the official ''at your residence.'' Kilday recalled, ''He said, 'You've just got to be careful about your reputation and what people might think.''' The feeling in the Bush camp seems to be that whatever Rove has done has worked pretty well so far; he is fully in charge and likely to remain so. Rove's friend Reggie Bashur, who has worked for Bush in the past, probably summed it up best: ''They're winning, so it's like that old saying, 'If it ain't broke, don't fix it.''' And Rove himself sounds downright complacent about making the leap onto the national stage. ''It's not much different,'' he said. ''In some ways, it's easier, because there are more places where they haven't heard the same thing'' repeated over and over. Moving into the summer, Rove seems to be relying on classic back-to-the-middle moves, getting Bush talking about health care for the poor, for example. One piece of good news for Bush is that Rove is not starry-eyed about his man, as is widely believed -- he has enough distance to make cool decisions. There is no question he is wild about Bush as a candidate. But he seems to see Bush as much as a symbol as a man. Once, when I asked him if the Republican takeover in Texas would have been possible without a George W. Bush, he thought about it for a minute, then said, ''If George W. Bush didn't exist, we'd have to find a way to create somebody like him.'' She shook her head. ''I don't think so,'' she said. ''Neither one of them is going to volunteer their deepest feelings. It's a relationship where Bush just tells you how it is. If he's hungry, it's, 'When's dinner?' and if he's tired, it's, 'I'm going to bed.''' Bush has often said he loves Rove's loyalty, and there is the fact that Rove sold his business to devote all his energies to him. But how the candidate really feels about his chief handler is difficult to say; he doesn't like to see too many articles about the help and initially didn't want to be quoted in this one about Rove. ''We handed him the phone and he refused -- he said he just wasn't going to do it,'' a Bush aide explained apologetically. ''He doesn't mind you doing staff stories,'' this aide added, though no one had suggested that he did. ''But he doesn't always weigh in.'' Finally, the candidate did leave this phone message for me: ''This is Gov. George Bush. I understand you're writing an article on Karl. I've known Karl a long time, since about 1972. I know him as a friend, and I've been in combat with him, political combat, on more than one occasion. I think -- I know -- he's brilliant. He is very witty and fun to be around. He's well read and an all-around good man. Thank you for your interest'' -- long pause -- in Karl.''
 Vice Pres Gore vows to compete for Florida's big trove of electoral votes, despite George W Bush's apparent lead and fact that his brother, Jeb Bush, is governor (S)0 Florida looks like Bush country. The presidential preference polls there have Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Vice President Al Gore by half a dozen points or more. One reason: George W.'s brother Jeb is the Sunshine State's governor. Florida looks like Bush country. The presidential preference polls there have Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Vice President Al Gore by half a dozen points or more. One reason: George W.'s brother Jeb is the Sunshine State's governor. But Mr. Gore says he nevertheless intends to compete for Florida's big trove of electoral votes. And he insists he has a good shot. But this year there is trouble in Broward. Rather than concentrating at this point on drumming up support for Mr. Gore, the county's Democratic clubs are locked in a divisive squabble over who is to be chairman of the Council of Presidents, the umbrella organization for the clubs. Another meeting has been called for June and the county's Democratic leader, Mitch Ceasar, is working to cool tempers and restore unity lest Al Gore be the ultimate loser. Latest Polls Show Bush the Winner Gov. George W. Bush led in 23 states, worth 271 electoral votes. Vice President Al Gore led in 11 states, worth 160 electoral votes.
 Diamonds may be forever, but fashion faddists who think forever is too long are lusting after rhinestones. After Dolce & Gabbana sent rhinestones twinkling down its spring runway and Chloe used them to dress up retro aviator sunglasses, designers have been putting stones on everything from T-shirts (the one on left, from Studd, is $275 at Language) to cuff links (DieselStyleLab, $80; to order at 212-755-9200). Sonia Rykiel embellishes leather belts with square rhinestones ($315 at Kirna Zabete) and Noir offers suede versions at Calypso ($105 to $130) as well as rhinestone-strewn flip-flops ($60). Language sells ''skin jewelry'' ($35 to $250), rhinestone and glitter appliques in flower shapes by the British hair stylist J. Maskrey. In Los Angeles, Dana Bushkin turned Puma and Adidas sneakers into disco numbers ($120 for baby sizes; $160, adults; to order, 310-474-2526) that she has sold to Pamela Anderson and Sarah Jessica Parker. Why this rage? Sasha Charnin, fashion market director of Allure, who has been rhinestoning Back Street Boys bandanas ($235 at Kirna Zabete), says, ''If you can't be a rock star, you might as well dress like one.'' Diamonds may be forever, but fashion faddists who think forever is too long are lusting after rhinestones. After Dolce & Gabbana sent rhinestones twinkling down its spring runway and Chloe used them to dress up retro aviator sunglasses, designers have been putting stones on everything from T-shirts (the one on left, from Studd, is $275 at Language) to cuff links (DieselStyleLab, $80; to order at 212-755-9200). Sonia Rykiel embellishes leather belts with square rhinestones ($315 at Kirna Zabete) and Noir offers suede versions at Calypso ($105 to $130) as well as rhinestone-strewn flip-flops ($60). Language sells ''skin jewelry'' ($35 to $250), rhinestone and glitter appliques in flower shapes by the British hair stylist J. Maskrey. In Los Angeles, Dana Bushkin turned Puma and Adidas sneakers into disco numbers ($120 for baby sizes; $160, adults; to order, 310-474-2526) that she has sold to Pamela Anderson and Sarah Jessica Parker. Why this rage? Sasha Charnin, fashion market director of Allure, who has been rhinestoning Back Street Boys bandanas ($235 at Kirna Zabete), says, ''If you can't be a rock star, you might as well dress like one.''
 Richard W Stevenson Economic View Column compares 2000 presidential candidates Gore and Bush's vastly-different methods of computing US national debt; discusses their proposals for funding Social Security system; graph (M) Vice President Al Gore puts his emphasis on the national debt held by the public, the $3.5 trillion that the government has borrowed by selling Treasury securities to individual investors, banks, pension funds and foreign governments. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas is taking the view that the government's obligations include not just the public debt, but also the special bonds it is issuing to the Social Security system in ever-growing amounts, representing promises to pay retirement benefits in decades ahead. By that accounting, the current $5.6 trillion in total debt will grow inexorably for years to come. Mr. Gore has made paying off the entire public debt by 2013 the centerpiece of his economic agenda. He wants to use excess Social Security revenue -- more than $2 trillion over the next decade -- to do it. Mr. Gore would then channel the interest savings from debt reduction to Social Security, in effect committing trillions of dollars of general tax revenue to keep the system afloat. In that way, he would extend the system's solvency from 2037 to around 2050 without cutting benefits, raising payroll taxes or altering the way Social Security works. In addition to helping deal with Social Security in a relatively painless way, Mr. Gore's plan would free up trillions of dollars for other kinds of investment, helping to put downward pressure on interest rates and create new economic opportunities for companies and individuals. Mr. Bush's approach is different. This week he plans to set out a goal of adding private investment accounts to Social Security, a major change that would require hundreds of billions, if not trillions, of dollars over the next decade. The only place to find that money is the Social Security surplus. To the extent that the surplus is used to finance private accounts, it would not be available to reduce the public debt, a goal in which Mr. Gore sees both economic logic and considerable political appeal. But Mr. Bush's team argues that reducing the public debt is not the only way to improve the government's financial condition. Because the private investment accounts would replace part of the government's obligation to pay Social Security benefits in the long run, his approach would in effect reduce the debt, broadly defined. ''You'd be improving the government's balance sheet in an even more efficient way,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, the former Federal Reserve governor who is Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser. The scale of any reduction in total debt under Mr. Bush's approach would depend on the amount of money committed to the private accounts, a decision that Mr. Bush says should be made through bipartisan negotiations after he is elected. Under Mr. Gore's approach, the public debt would sink steadily, but all the while the Treasury's obligation to the Social Security trust fund would be rising even faster, from $855 billion today to $4.2 trillion in 2013. So even if the public debt is retired on Mr. Gore's schedule, the total debt would rise, from $5.6 trillion today to $6.8 trillion in 2013. Mr. Gore's approach is conservative in the sense that it is based on debt reduction, but it affirms Democratic orthodoxy by retaining Social Security as a guaranteed benefit, even if tax revenue must pay for it. Mr. Bush bucks mainstream economic thinking to a degree when he plays down the importance of wiping out the public debt. But at heart, his plan is about transferring some control of retirement finances from the government to individuals -- a most basic conservative value.
 Behind this long-running imperial racket is a crew of Dick Tracy-like characters, including the former prime minister Nobusuke Kishi, who ''resembled a salamander,'' and the ''prune-faced'' former prime minister Noboru Takeshita. (It's true that Kishi, whom I had occasion to interview, was no Clark Gable, and did have a complicated past, but I confess that I totally missed the face thing with Takeshita and, on the whole, found Japanese pols no slipperier, say, than Al Gore among the Buddhist nuns.)
 Presidential race between Al Gore and George Bush would be first between two politicians of baby-boom generation; photos (M) After decades of caricature as the most self-indulgent and permissive generation in American history, baby boomers -- including Al Gore and George W. Bush -- are realizing it is time to get with the program. After decades of caricature as the most self-indulgent and permissive generation in American history, baby boomers -- including Al Gore and George W. Bush -- are realizing it is time to get with the program. Moreover, the campaigns have sensed a new wrinkle, so to speak, in the ever-scrutinized lives of the boomers that has emerged as they have aged -- the oldest boomers are now in the unusual position of contemplating their own retirements even as their parents are living longer and requiring more care. At the same time, some, like Mr. Gore, whose mother is 87 and whose mother-in-law lives with him and his wife, are even becoming grandparents. This nexus of life-defining events for the biggest cohort in American history (the 76 million people born between 1946 and 1964) has infused the presidential campaign with a new urgency, especially regarding Social Security and health care. Both  Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have devoted much time on the campaign trail to Social Security and both plan to deliver major addresses on the topic on Monday. ''It's a response to what's happening in society,'' said John Rother, director of legislation and public policy for AARP, one of the biggest and most effective lobbying groups in the country. ''It's driven by demographics, the economy and technology. There's a growing awareness, particularly of people who are Bush's and Gore's age, that their parent's generation is becoming frail, we don't have support systems that are in very good shape, and the anxiety about your own retirement is on the top of people's minds.'' Al Gore was born March 31, 1948, making him 52. George W. Bush was born July 6, 1946, making him 53. And while they had different coming-of-age experiences during the 1960's and 1970's -- Mr. Gore was closer to the counterculture than was Mr. Bush, but still by no means a radical -- both are invoking their generational roots as themes in their campaigns and are developing ''responsibility'' as rationales for their candidacies. Here was Governor Bush in a recent interview with ''The News Hour'' on PBS: Here was Vice President Gore at a fund-raiser Thursdayin Los Angeles, explaining the strong economy: The likelihood of bankruptcy increases with age, as those facing retirement face mounting costs, particularly for prescription drugs and long-term care. Both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are offering proposals to help people meet these needs. Mr. Bush emphasizes personal responsibility as a direct counterweight to what he perceives as the irresponsibility of President Clinton (the first baby boomer president). The goal of his candidacy, Mr. Bush says, is to restore honor and dignity to the White House. Mr. Bush has emphasized the theme since he began his campaign last June, saying ''My first goal is to usher in the responsibility era -- an era that stands in stark contrast to the last few decades, where our culture has said: If it feels good, do it, and if you've got a problem, blame someone else.'' Mr. Bush has also used his emphasis on compassion to temper any impression that responsibility means harshness or sacrifice. For Mr. Gore, responsibility is a multipurpose concept, and he tends to use it both subliminally and overtly. He too is trying to distance himself from the actions of President Clinton. But he also wants to present himself as the logical successor to Mr. Clinton as the steward of the nation's current prosperity, and so he offers himself as the responsible heir apparent. This, of course, necessitates presenting Mr. Bush as the ''irresponsible'' alternative, a neat way, learned from President Clinton, of transforming a policy matter into a values judgment. Repeatedly, Mr. Gore casts Mr. Bush's proposals as ''reckless,'' a quality Mr. Gore conjures up with his relentless referencing to Mr. Bush's ''risky tax scheme.'' The contrast between the responsible Mr. Gore and the irresponsible Mr. Bush has fast become the organizing principle of the Gore campaign. Like Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore is using the idea of responsibility to reinforce one of the basic tenets of his party. While Mr. Bush's reference summons family values, Mr. Gore's highlights the Democrats' traditional advantage on preserving entitlement programs. The ''risky tax scheme'' that he invokes is a direct threat to two tenets of Democratic orthodoxy -- Social Security and Medicare -- that baby boomers are now either depending on to help their parents or expecting to receive themselves. ''It references the basic policy dilemma of his presidency,'' said  Elaine Kamark, Mr. Gore's chief domestic policy adviser. ''The challenge has gone from how to manage the insolvency of these programs to who can keep control of the surplus. The money guys on Wall Street understand this very well. They want confidence. You get it by running a straight, sound fiscal policy.'' Because Mr. Gore had children relatively early for his generation, he is now a grandparent. ''His life cycle is slightly ahead of his generation, so he can see ahead to the centrality of some of these issues,'' Ms. Kamark said. Still, Mr. Gore is more a creature of the popular image of the baby boom than is Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush exudes a more retro 1950's youth, one of hijinks and drinking and frat parties, remarkably detached from the Vietnam War or any kind of rebellion or existential angst. As he told an interviewer for GQ: ''I don't remember any kind of heaviness ruining my time at Yale.''
 Some parents at Public School 75 in Bushwick objected to her use of the book, and, calling her a racist, threatened her.
 Novak thinks that a big reason for the party's disarray is that it has succumbed to the illusion that it can govern the country from Capitol Hill. Republicans watched George Mitchell run rings around George Bush and concluded not just that they had landed a dud for a president but that the balance of power had shifted. The result was disaster. The White House is a centralized operation that can shape day-to-day political debate. Capitol Hill is a world of warring chieftains and headless chickens. The unequal battle has left the Republicans thoroughly ''Clintonized'': obsessed with polls and competing to spend more public money than their rivals. The only way that the Republicans can complete the revolution is to retake the White House.
 Article on upcoming daylong New England fiddle Contest at Bushnell Park in Hartford, Conn, revived in 1999 after 15-year hiatus and sponsored this year by Peace Train in partnership with Hartford Downtown Council; photos (M) IN its heyday, from the mid-1970's to the early 1980's, each year as many as 70,000 people attended the daylong New England Fiddle Contest in Hartford's Bushnell Park. Music lured people to the fiddle fest, but the easygoing camaraderie the tunes inspired made them want to linger. Picnic blankets were spread, babies were jiggled in time to the music, and Hartford basked in the glow of the event. IN its heyday, from the mid-1970's to the early 1980's, each year as many as 70,000 people attended the daylong New England Fiddle Contest in Hartford's Bushnell Park. Music lured people to the fiddle fest, but the easygoing camaraderie the tunes inspired made them want to linger. Picnic blankets were spread, babies were jiggled in time to the music, and Hartford basked in the glow of the event.
 Looking a bit like a teenager forced to attend a classical music concert, Senator John McCain stood shoulder to shoulder with Gov. George W. Bush at a news conference on Tuesday in Pittsburgh. ''I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush,'' Mr. McCain intoned over and over, after a reporter asked why he seemed so reluctant to use the word. Looking a bit like a teenager forced to attend a classical music concert, Senator John McCain stood shoulder to shoulder with Gov. George W. Bush at a news conference on Tuesday in Pittsburgh. ''I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush,'' Mr. McCain intoned over and over, after a reporter asked why he seemed so reluctant to use the word. The repetition probably had the effect Mr. McCain intended: it reduced the term to ridiculousness. Still smarting over the negative turn that the primary campaign -- and some of Mr. Bush's commercials -- had taken, Mr. McCain had for weeks resisted falling into line behind the presumptive Republican nominee. When he finally did so last week, saying Mr. Bush had the ''vision, knowledge and expertise'' to be president -- and that he himself had no interest in being Mr. Bush's vice president -- there was a tight, grudging quality to the event. Mr. Bush seemed pleased to have gotten over that hump, but Vice President Al Gore reminded audiences that the two Republicans were not all that in sync. Speaking that same day in Washington to the Anti-Defamation League, Mr. Gore brought up an issue that divides Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain, the Confederate flag that flies over the South Carolina statehouse. ''It is wrong to remain silent about it,'' Mr. Gore said, an allusion to Mr. Bush's deferring to the people of South Carolina on the issue. (Mr. McCain recently declared he had erred in not announcing earlier that he favors the flag's removal.) When it comes to politics, Mr. Gore's boss is not remaining silent, either. It was disclosed last week that President Clinton is serving as a behind-the-scenes adviser to many Democratic candidates across the country.
