 Former President George Bush called recently. So did Defense Secretary William S. Cohen. The congressman was given a special briefing by the Central Intelligence Agency. Dennis Hughes, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. in New York, visited him on Tuesday.
 Referring to Mr. Clinton, Mr. Chase said: ''I used to talk to him all the time when he was on his bus tour. TV is the issue. I told Bill when he started to campaign: 'You're answering questions too fast. You sound like a kid. George Bush is the president. He looks like it and he acts like it. Take more time, take a minute -- or what you think is a minute -- to answer a question. Look presidential.' He would call me and ask 'How'm I doing?' '' ''Right now, Bush comes off as the more competent fellow -- and he certainly has all the money to be on TV anytime he wants -- and Gore comes off a little stiff,'' he continued. ''But when it comes to substantive issues and the two of them debate, I think -- and hope -- that the country will see that Gore is way ahead of Bush.''
 In the end, the vote was more one-sided than many had predicted. The House speaker, Dennis Hastert, and his deputies Dick Armey and Tom DeLay were more successful than the president in bringing along their party faithful, many of whom were persuaded by the business interests lobbying furiously until the very end. Gov. George W. Bush and a raft of respected Republican former presidents, cabinet members and officeholders helped. On the Democratic side, Mr. Clinton got only 73 votes against a tough campaign waged by unions and by the House Democratic leadership. In the end, the vote was more one-sided than many had predicted. The House speaker, Dennis Hastert, and his deputies Dick Armey and Tom DeLay were more successful than the president in bringing along their party faithful, many of whom were persuaded by the business interests lobbying furiously until the very end. Gov. George W. Bush and a raft of respected Republican former presidents, cabinet members and officeholders helped. On the Democratic side, Mr. Clinton got only 73 votes against a tough campaign waged by unions and by the House Democratic leadership.
 BUSH ON CHARACTER -- Taking his campaign to a major swing state, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas declared yesterday in Detroit that education was ''the new civil right.'' With Michigan's popular Republican governor, John Engler, at his side, Mr. Bush spent more than an hour discussing the importance of equal access to education with students, teachers, parents and volunteers at the Cornerstone Schools, a private religion-oriented group of middle and elementary schools. ''We can't have any gaps of hope in the country,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The American dream is available for everyone, which means every child must be educated.'' BUSH ON CHARACTER -- Taking his campaign to a major swing state, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas declared yesterday in Detroit that education was ''the new civil right.'' With Michigan's popular Republican governor, John Engler, at his side, Mr. Bush spent more than an hour discussing the importance of equal access to education with students, teachers, parents and volunteers at the Cornerstone Schools, a private religion-oriented group of middle and elementary schools. ''We can't have any gaps of hope in the country,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The American dream is available for everyone, which means every child must be educated.'' Mr. Bush said he also believed character education courses should be available in every school. ''Public schools should not mix religion in the classroom.'' he said. ''But we should not fear teaching values that are embraced by all religions.'' HESTON AND GORE, ARMED -- Charlton Heston's vow as president of the National Rifle Association to defend to the death the right to bear arms drew a chuckle yesterday from Vice President Al Gore, the association's top political target. Mr. Gore said Mr. Heston and other association officials were dead wrong when they said last week at the association's annual convention in Charlotte, N.C., that he wanted to disarm America. Alluding to the moment at the convention when the Mr. Heston raised a flintlock musket over his head and pledged to die defending his constitutional right to have it, Mr. Gore said in an interview with National Public Radio: ''I have no intentions of proposing or supporting policies or allowing policies that would disarm America. What I have proposed that has upset him so much is a set of common-sense restrictions on the availability of handguns.'' Referring to defending his right to bear arms to the death, Mr. Heston said, ''So as we set out this year to defeat the divisive forces that would take freedom away, I want to say those fighting words, for everyone within the sound of my voice to hear and to heed, and especially you, Mr. Gore.'' When Mr. Heston's comment with musket raised was read to Mr. Gore yesterday, he chuckled.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column holds key issue in presidential election is Gov George W Bush's plan to name more 'right-wing' judges to Supreme Court; sees threat to key rights and liberties (M) Voters may not pay much attention to potential Supreme Court appointments, but interest groups sure do. And the National Rifle Association, the right-wing religious organizations, anti-abortion zealots and other extremist wanderers of the nation's far-right terrain are praying that George W. Bush becomes president and gets to appoint two or three more Clarence Thomases or Antonin Scalias to the court. Voters may not pay much attention to potential Supreme Court appointments, but interest groups sure do. And the National Rifle Association, the right-wing religious organizations, anti-abortion zealots and other extremist wanderers of the nation's far-right terrain are praying that George W. Bush becomes president and gets to appoint two or three more Clarence Thomases or Antonin Scalias to the court. Many of the rights and liberties that Americans have come to take for granted over the past few decades are now in the cross-hairs and well within range of the right-wing extremists. The next president will likely appoint two or three new justices to the court, and possibly four. (Three of the current justices are 70 or older.) And Mr. Bush has made it clear that he favors justices in the mold of Scalia and Thomas, the court's two most right-wing members. Last week's decision on the Violence Against Women Act affirmed a ruling by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, Va., one of the most right-wing courts in the nation. The Fourth Circuit opinion was written by Judge J. Michael Luttig, who is frequently mentioned as a potential George W. Bush appointee to the Supreme Court.
 William Safire Op-Ed column lauds Gov George W Bush's strategy for presenting his proposals for missile defense system and nuclear arms control in way that pre-empts efforts to portray him as cold war warrior (M) George W. Bush and a phalanx of famed cold warriors brought it off this week. They denounced the arms-control doves seeking to curry favor with Vladimir Putin at the forthcoming Moscow summit meeting as -- hold your breath -- a pack of unreconstructed cold-war relics. George W. Bush and a phalanx of famed cold warriors brought it off this week. They denounced the arms-control doves seeking to curry favor with Vladimir Putin at the forthcoming Moscow summit meeting as -- hold your breath -- a pack of unreconstructed cold-war relics. That effectively exposed the Putin-Clinton dealing on ABM and Start III as a meaningless charade. But it posed a political appearance problem for the Bush campaign. How to oppose the summit stunt without seeming to be obstructionist, triumphalist, nasty to the Russians or, worst of all, subject to accusations of being an unreconstructed cold warrior? Bush's answer: First, trot out the heavy hitters who helped win the cold war. He lined up Nixon-Ford's  Henry Kissinger and Don Rumsfeld, Reagan's George Shultz, his father's Colin Powell and Brent Scowcroft. (No James Baker; forgot his phone number.) One by one, these mainly hard-line heroes endorsed the candidate's call for a limited antimissile system. Kissinger, who wrote the ABM treaty, asserted that it belonged to a long-gone bipolar world. But this performance by the Bush front-line brain trust was played with a remarkable rhetorical twist. Instead of hunkering down to await the usual ''unreconstructed cold warriors'' blast from the White House,  Bush charged the Clinton-Gore administration with being ''locked in a cold-war mentality.'' That stole the opposition's clothes. Calling for ''a new era of nuclear security,'' Bush announced: ''The cold-war era is history. Our nation must recognize new threats, not fixate on old ones.'' He anticipated a knee-jerk Gore reaction with a built-in response: ''It is possible to build a missile defense and defuse confrontation with Russia. America should do both.'' He then showed arms-control sophisticates he had an understanding of the potential Putin-Clinton summit dodge: ''Start III should not be an excuse to limit our ability to build a missile defense system.'' Rather than let a Russian deal on amending ABM determine the number of missiles in our arsenal, the U.S. military would determine how few are required for our security; Bush would then ask Russia to match the cuts. Bush also made plain what Clintonites know but won't admit: ''This administration is not fully devoted to the development of an antiballistic missile system that will work.'' A serious issue is joined. Thanks to deft presentation, the Clinton-Gore side is the one lost in the mists of the old ''cold-war mentality.''
 Some of the rich and famous certainly think so. Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson came by two weeks ago. So did Robert DeNiro. Michael Jackson has dropped by. And George and Barbara Bush, whose photograph adorns his office. ''I've built them a presidential suite,'' Mr. Nygard said, pointing to a cabana built into artificial cliffs some 60 feet high. No, the former first couple haven't stayed over.
 Vice Pres Al Gore reiterates his strong opposition to Gov George W Bush's proposal to allow individuals to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes in stock market, interview; defends his own decision to back away from his early support for allowing government itself to invest in stocks on Social Security's behalf; says shift was driven by his recognition that allowing government to become big shareholder would create problems and that stock market had not generated as consistently strong returns as he had once assumed; some advisers to Gore say he dropped his support for government investment in part to make it easier for him to attack Bush's approach; Gore says he was swayed in part by criticism of idea from Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greespan; Greenspan fears politicians would be unable to resist using government's role as shareholder to favor or punish certain industries or to meddle in corporate decisions; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore said today that the stock market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but that it was the wrong place to seek a solution to Social Security's problems. In an interview, Mr. Gore reiterated his strong opposition to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow individuals to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes on Wall Street. And he defended his own decision to back away from his early support for allowing the government itself to invest in stocks on Social Security's behalf. He said that his shift was driven by a recognition that allowing the government to become a big shareholder would create problems and that the stock market had not generated as consistently strong returns as he had once assumed. Vice President Al Gore said today that the stock market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but that it was the wrong place to seek a solution to Social Security's problems. In an interview, Mr. Gore reiterated his strong opposition to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow individuals to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes on Wall Street. And he defended his own decision to back away from his early support for allowing the government itself to invest in stocks on Social Security's behalf. He said that his shift was driven by a recognition that allowing the government to become a big shareholder would create problems and that the stock market had not generated as consistently strong returns as he had once assumed. ''The learning experience that we went through convinced all of us that it was a bad idea,'' Mr. Gore said of government investment in the market. Tracing the evolution of his thinking about Social Security and the financial markets, Mr. Gore said that he had kept an open mind to many possible solutions to the retirement system's problems when the Clinton administration began examining the issue in earnest a few years ago. Last year the administration proposed a plan, backed by Mr. Gore, under which the government would begin channeling hundreds of billions of dollars in additional money into Social Security out of general tax revenues starting in 2011. Under the plan, half of the new money going to Social Security would be invested by the government in stocks, up to a maximum of 15 percent of Social Security's total reserves. The Bush campaign has sought to use Mr. Gore's on-again, off-again support for government investment in the stock market to undermine the vice president's assertions that Social Security benefits should not be dependent on Wall Street. And Mr. Bush's aides said Mr. Gore's reversal on the issue suggested that he was prepared to sacrifice principles to make a short-term political point. ''There is a growing sense that Al Gore has never had a conviction which he could not easily change,'' said Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman. ''He was clearly on record as advocating and supporting government investment in the market. Now he's walking away from something he advocated as recently as 1999.'' Some advisers to Mr. Gore said the vice president had dropped his support for government investment in part to make it easier for him to attack Mr. Bush's approach. But in the interview, on the porch of his home on the grounds of the Naval Observatory, Mr. Gore sought to play down the degree to which he had supported the concept, and said that in any case he had changed his mind as he learned more about the tradeoffs it would require. Mr. Gore said he had been swayed in part by criticism of the idea from Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve. Mr. Greenspan opposed the plan on the grounds that politicians would not be able to resist using the government's role as a shareholder to favor or punish certain industries or to meddle in corporate decisions. ''The magnitude of the government's stock ownership would be such that it would at least raise the question of whether or not we had begun to change the fundamental nature of our economy,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Upon reflection, it seemed to me that those problems were quite serious.'' Moreover, Mr. Gore said, he became convinced that Wall Street's ups and downs were large enough to create a risk that the government might be making a bad investment. During long stretches -- including from the late 1960's to the early 1980's, Wall Street was by no means the one-way bet it has often been viewed as in recent years. Although Mr. Gore receives income from some stock technically owned by his mother, he owns no stock, and has never actively invested in the market. He said he had chosen to stay out of the market when he first was elected to Congress in 1976 to avoid any conflicts of interest, not out of fear of risk, and that he supported a variety of proposals to promote savings and investment. But he said investment in the markets should ''come on top of Social Security,'' rather than as a replacement for it. And he said that Mr. Bush's economic policies, including his big tax cut and his need to use much of the Social Security surplus to pay for the creation of private accounts, would undermine the fiscal discipline that has helped propel the markets upward in recent years. Mr. Bush's approach ''contains the seeds of its own destruction by virtually guaranteeing a weaker economy, and thus, you would expect, a weaker market, with lower returns than what we've seen in these boom years,'' Mr. Gore said. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: SOCIAL SECURITY  Correction:  May 26, 2000, Friday  An article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's position on Social Security misstated one element of his personal finances. Mr. Gore receives no income from investments in the stock market. Although his financial disclosure form lists dividend income, the stock is held in trust for his mother, and the income goes only to her. An article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's position on Social Security misstated one element of his personal finances. Mr. Gore receives no income from investments in the stock market. Although his financial disclosure form lists dividend income, the stock is held in trust for his mother, and the income goes only to her.
 Rep Charles B Rangel, who has been campaigning across nation for fellow House Democrats, says local officials are concerned that Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign is adrift and could weaken Democratic drive to recapture House, interview; Sen Robert G Torricelli, who heads Senate Democrats' re-election committee, agrees; he and Rangel hold Gov George W Bush has made better use than Gore of post-primary season (M) Two important Democrats on Capitol Hill say that Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and can weaken the Democratic drive to recapture the House unless corrected. Representative Charles B. Rangel, the Manhattan Democrat who has been campaigning across the country for fellow House members, said local officials had expressed concern that the Gore campaign had not inspired confidence. Two important Democrats on Capitol Hill say that Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and can weaken the Democratic drive to recapture the House unless corrected. Representative Charles B. Rangel, the Manhattan Democrat who has been campaigning across the country for fellow House members, said local officials had expressed concern that the Gore campaign had not inspired confidence. ''People are starting to ask, 'When does he get started? When does he get focused? How did Bush catch up? When does the show hit the road?' '' Mr. Rangel said in an interview on Tuesday. ''They're saying, 'If this is a policy to lay back and wait for the debates, then share it with somebody!' There's no fiery speeches being given; we don't have the surrogates out there.'' Mr. Torricelli described the problem: ''Until Al Gore actually goes to Los Angeles and receives his party's nomination and campaigns in his own right, he will still be identified by most Americans as Bill Clinton's vice president. There is still not a separate identity, and only the dramatic departure from Los Angeles is going to create this new identity.'' Mr. Rangel and Mr. Torricelli, and others in their party, said they were concerned that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival, had made better use of the post-primary season than Mr. Gore had. They also worried that the Gore campaign did not seem to be responding to recent polls that have shown him trailing Mr. Bush and losing support among broad segments of the public, including suburban women, white men and every age group except the elderly. In a radio interview this morning, Mr. Gore brushed aside questions about being stalled in the polls, insisting that such surveys this far in advance of Election Day -- Nov. 7 -- are ''notoriously wrong.'' ''I'm not trying to have an impact on the polls,'' Mr. Gore said on the ''Diane Rehm Show'' on public radio station WAMU in Washington. ''I'm trying to deliver a message to the people of this country.'' Mr. Gore responded, ''The process of communication that takes place in a campaign is not best analyzed on a daily or hourly basis.'' He suggested that his strategy against Governor Bush -- which his advisers said was rooted in the compare-and-contrast method he used against former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey in the primaries -- would need time to yield results. ''I think that the dialogue on complex issues often takes time,'' Mr. Gore said. ''It takes time for facts to emerge, for judgments to sink in, for people to really come to a conclusion about how they feel about the candidates, about the positions on the issues and about where we're going in the future.'' Mr. Rangel and Mr. Torricelli said there was plenty of time for Mr. Gore to recover. Mr. Rangel described the atmosphere among his fellow Democrats as one of concern, not alarm. ''This is May,'' he said. ''When the question is raised'' with campaign officials, he said, ''they say no one gets serious until Labor Day.'' Of course, elected officials like Mr. Rangel have a huge stake in the party's success in November. If Democrats win back the House, Mr. Rangel is in line to become chairman of the powerful Ways and Means Committee, and broadcasting concern about the presidential campaign this early is one way of nudging Mr. Gore into trying to fix things before they become worse. Senator Torricelli said of the Gore campaign's problem: ''It is both manageable and, I suspect, temporary.'' For weeks now Mr. Bush has managed to dominate the race with a policy proposals intended to paint him as a more moderate candidate. Mr. Gore's supporters worry that during that same period, the vice president has appeared more reactive than proactive. Mr. Gore's last major address that drew front-page coverage was on April 30, when he spoke in Boston on foreign policy and raised questions about Mr. Bush's ''cold war'' mindset. Since then, Governor Bush has largely dictated the issues. Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Democrat who is the District of Columbia delegate, said Mr. Gore had ceded the spotlight to Mr. Bush. ''His poll numbers flow directly from his disappearance from the radar screen for a number of weeks while Bush pressed the 'on' button and kept himself on the screen,'' she said. Representative Eliot L. Engel, a Bronx Democrat, said that Mr. Gore had not capitalized on his victory in the primaries. ''We thought at the end of the primaries that Bush was all the way to the right and Gore was well-positioned and I had hoped we would see a change in the polls, but we're seeing slippage and that's disappointing,'' Mr. Engel said. ''With Bill Clinton, he gets up every morning and wants to meet voters. Al Gore, he does what he has to do, but I don't think he relishes that, and I think people pick up on that. He needs to talk very positively for what he stands for rather than being negative about Bush.'' Gore advisers keep saying that the vice president is ''right on the issues'' and that his positions, from tolerance on social matters like abortion to paying down the national debt, are more in tune with those of a majority of Americans. Nonetheless, political analysts say Mr. Gore seems to have trouble articulating that message. Prof. James A. Thurber, director of the Center for Congressional and Presidential Studies at American University and a member of the audience this morning while Mr. Gore was interviewed at the radio station, said that even after almost a quarter century in politics, Mr. Gore still did not grasp some of the fundamentals of political communication. The Democratic National Committee, which raised $26.5 million tonight, is gearing up to spend millions of dollars for commercials promoting Mr. Gore's biography -- to convey the human side of a candidate whom voters perceive as someone born in a blue suit behind a podium.
 House, in stunning victory for Clinton administration and corporate America, approves bill to grant China permanent normal trading privileges, 237-197, by surprisingly wide margin; vote follows months of fierce lobbying that pitted business against organized labor; three out of four Republicans vote for bill, larger-than-expected majority; two out of three Democrats vote against; Pres Clinton hails vote; Gov George W Bush, presumptive Republican presidential nominee, hails vote; Vice Pres Al Gore voices more qualified support; trade graphs; photos (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee who has often voiced support for the legislation, hailed the vote. ''Passage of this legislation will mean a stronger American economy, as well as more opportunity for liberty and freedom in China,'' Mr. Bush said in a statement. Vice President Al Gore, who has walked a political tightrope between his labor allies and President Clinton, also voiced support for the bill today, but qualified it by saying that more had to be done to guarantee American workers' rights. ''We must continue our efforts to assure that workers will succeed in a global economy,'' he said in a statement.
 Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19): The most significant argument against privatizing part of Social Security is that diverting tax dollars out of the Social Security system increases the projected long-term shortfall in the program, leading to major cuts in benefits, increases in the retirement age and cuts in annual cost-of-living adjustments. These are cuts that are typically not fully replaced by any income from a private account. Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19): The most significant argument against privatizing part of Social Security is that diverting tax dollars out of the Social Security system increases the projected long-term shortfall in the program, leading to major cuts in benefits, increases in the retirement age and cuts in annual cost-of-living adjustments. These are cuts that are typically not fully replaced by any income from a private account.
 One criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to carve out private investment accounts from Social Security (news article, May 19) involves the possibility that a stock market crash just before someone retires could ruin his retirement prospects. One criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to carve out private investment accounts from Social Security (news article, May 19) involves the possibility that a stock market crash just before someone retires could ruin his retirement prospects.
 Letter from Arturo Lask on Martin Feldstein's May 22 Op-Ed analyzing Gov George W Bush's proposal to allow people to invest part of their Social Security taxes in stock market; sees risk in that approach as ratio of working people to nonworking people begins to shrink as baby boomers retire Martin Feldstein's analysis of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow people to invest part of their Social Security taxes in the stock market (''Bush's Low-Risk Pension Reforms,'' Op-Ed, May 22) assumes that the last 50 years of stock market performance form a statistical basis for predicting the future. In fact, the stock market has been able to grow as it has in part because of an increasing ratio of working people to nonworking people. Martin Feldstein's analysis of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow people to invest part of their Social Security taxes in the stock market (''Bush's Low-Risk Pension Reforms,'' Op-Ed, May 22) assumes that the last 50 years of stock market performance form a statistical basis for predicting the future. In fact, the stock market has been able to grow as it has in part because of an increasing ratio of working people to nonworking people.
 Gore on Social Security  Vice President Al Gore, explaining a shift in his position, said the stock market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but not for seeking a solution to Social Security's problems. Representative Charles B. Rangel of New York and Senator Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey say Mr. Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and may weaken the Democratic drive to regain the House.
 Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19): Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19):
 Letter from Steve Buzbee, commenting on Gov George W Bush's Social Security reform plan, as outlined in Martin Feldstein's May 22 Op-Ed, says problem lies in occasional statistical aberration of full-blown stock market crash Martin Feldstein's defense of Gov. George W. Bush's Social Security reform plan (Op-Ed, May 22) seems to disregard the original rationale behind the creation of the Social Security system. Martin Feldstein's defense of Gov. George W. Bush's Social Security reform plan (Op-Ed, May 22) seems to disregard the original rationale behind the creation of the Social Security system.
 Gov George W Bush has established presidential campaign pattern of putting forward broad ideas with great appeal to Republican base and then leaving details to be filled in later should he win election; strategy allows him to look like leader while giving his opponents few details to attack; photo (M) With his recent speeches on Social Security and nuclear weapons defenses, Gov. George W. Bush this month has established a pattern:  He put forward broad ideas with great appeal to the Republican base and then left the details to be filled in later should he be elected. So in rapid succession, Mr. Bush  promised to introduce individual investment accounts into Social Security but left out fundamental details like what portion of the payroll tax he would devote to them. And similarly this week, he opened the door to unilateral nuclear weapons reductions coupled with a missile defense system that would protect all 50 states and many of America's allies. With his recent speeches on Social Security and nuclear weapons defenses, Gov. George W. Bush this month has established a pattern:  He put forward broad ideas with great appeal to the Republican base and then left the details to be filled in later should he be elected. So in rapid succession, Mr. Bush  promised to introduce individual investment accounts into Social Security but left out fundamental details like what portion of the payroll tax he would devote to them. And similarly this week, he opened the door to unilateral nuclear weapons reductions coupled with a missile defense system that would protect all 50 states and many of America's allies. Mr. Bush's aides and supporters argue that on certain kinds of issues this is the most effective way to lead, that locking into particulars now ensures failure later. Yet it is also the case that the governor's style has some other effects too: It allows him to look like a leader while making it much more difficult for his opponents to get a handhold to grapple with him and his ideas. Vice President Al Gore is the master of picking apart the details of a proposal. Just remember what he did to former Senator Bill Bradley's health care plan in the Democratic primaries. But in the Social Security debate he has been left assailing Mr. Bush's ''secret plan'' and trying to fill in the details for his Republican opponent, as he did today in an interview on National Public Radio. Mr. Gore said the transition to individual accounts would inevitably also entail ''raising the retirement age or cutting benefits.'' Still Douglas Hattaway, Mr. Gore's spokesman acknowledged, speaking of Mr. Bush, ''It's harder to have a real debate on the issues when he refuses to say what he really intends to do.'' The limited missile defense system under development, which envisions bases in Alaska with 100 interceptor missiles, has been estimated by the Congressional Budget Office to cost $60 billion. A broader system, which Mr. Bush is considering, might cost $116 billion or more. On Social Security, while many  Congressional plans contain some elements of individual accounts like those proposed by Mr. Bush, the details, too, have been problematic. A number of the plans also contain painful medicine like benefit cuts, lower cost-of-living increases or an increase in the retirement age. That is hardly what Mr. Bush has been describing when he says his  plans will allow Americans to build wealth that they can then pass on to their children. Should voters know the full costs and benefits of Mr. Bush's ideas? Anita Dunn, who was Mr. Bradley's communications director, argues that they should -- even if such details could make the plans a fat target in the way Mr. Bradley's health care proposal became. Mr. Bush's aides and some political scientists counter that there are some issues on which too much detail is counterproductive to governing. And they point to the fate of another doomed health care plan: the one championed by Hillary Rodham Clinton. By leaving out the details of Mr. Bush's Social Security plan, his aides say, Mr. Bush will allow Congress to help shape the plan and have pride of authorship. They note that this is how the governor operated in Texas, presenting basic concepts and allowing the Legislature to shape the details. ''It would be wrong for a politician to arbitrarily set the number of missiles needed to defend the nation,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''That's exactly why you have a Pentagon.'' Will Mr. Bush eventually have to provide more detail on these issues as November nears? Some supporters of Mr. Bush say no, that what voters want now -- particularly independent voters -- is a sign that a presidential candidate will put forward ideas that may break the gridlock in Washington. ''The initial excitement in getting a new idea out is not a measure of where the idea ends up,'' Ms. Dunn said, speaking from Mr. Bradley's primary experience. ''It is early. He hasn't had to debate Gore. And he hasn't been challenged.''
 Biggest political fund-raiser ever raises $26.5 million in three hours for Democratic National Committee; Democrats bill event as tribute to Pres Clinton, who attends with his wife, Hillary; Vice Pres Gore, designated beneficiary of party's treasure chest, attends with his wife, Tipper; event underscores sad reality for Gore: in joint appearances of Clintons and Gores, Pres Clinton steals the show; crowd greets him with rock-concert-like shrieks; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore, the designated beneficiary of the party's treasure chest, hailed Mr. McAuliffe as ''the greatest fund-raiser in the history of the universe.'' Mr. Gore, dressed in a sage polo shirt with his Palm Pilot clipped to his blue jeans, also declared that he would make reform of the campaign finance system a top priority if elected president. Unfortunately for Mr. Gore, this is the tune that his campaign has been road-testing as his campaign theme song. And it underscored a sad reality for Mr. Gore: As at some of the other joint appearances of the Clintons and Gores in the past, while Mr. Gore is meant to be the star, Mr. Clinton steals the show. ''Four more years!'' was shouted from the crowd as he spoke. Al DiRienzo, 68, a bricklayer from Maryland, reflected the sentiment. He said that he was supporting Mr. Gore but that his affection was for Mr. Clinton. After Tipper Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke, the arena fell dark for a video tribute to Mr. Clinton and his administration. It was a paean to overcoming adversity and was awash in sentimentality. Mr. Gore also confronted the notion that the event might be inappropriate, but with a suggestion that it would not be repeated. ''It's not that Vice President Gore falls short,'' he said, ''it's that we're talking about the king.''
 Letter from Israel M Bar-Nir says Gov George W Bush is latest in long line of presidential candidates who vow to move United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem (May 23 article); says once in power, every US president so far has reneged on this promise Every four years during the election campaign, presidential candidates go through the motions of promising to move the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. As you report (news article, May 23), Gov. George W. Bush has ''pledged that as president he would 'begin the process of moving the U.S. ambassador to the city Israel has chosen as its capital,' a reference to Jerusalem.'' Every four years during the election campaign, presidential candidates go through the motions of promising to move the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. As you report (news article, May 23), Gov. George W. Bush has ''pledged that as president he would 'begin the process of moving the U.S. ambassador to the city Israel has chosen as its capital,' a reference to Jerusalem.''
 Sam Tanenhaus Op-Ed article, citing failed bid to set deadline for troop withdrawal from Kosovo, deplores efforts by some Republicans in Congress to obstruct foreign policy out of dislike for Pres Clinton; urges them to follow Gov George W Bush's lead in putting foreign policy above partisanship (M) Such words found an echo last week when Gov. George W. Bush sided with the Clinton administration in opposing a measure pushed by Senate Republicans that would have set a strict deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo. He called it ''legislative overreach,'' which, if enacted, would hamper his ability to conduct policy should he be elected president in November. The bill failed, but 40 of the 55 Republican senators supported it. What exactly lay behind this rift between Mr. Bush and the Republican Congress? Important strategic or tactical differences? Evidently not. Nor are presidential candidates barred from developing their own foreign policy ideas. On the contrary, as Mr. Bush's recent comments on nuclear security show, he is willing to state his differences with President Clinton on sensitive matters. But in doing so, he has sent a broader message of continuity, most obviously by appearing at a news conference on Tuesday with Henry Kissinger and Colin Powell, two Republicans who are respected by Democrats. Unlike Congressional Republicans, Mr. Bush seems to recognize the distinction between principled opposition and vengeful obstructionism, and to know how destructive the latter can be. Senator Hagel hastens to assure us that Congressional Republicans are under control. ''If you have a President Bush,'' he said, ''you'll find all this settle down considerably.'' But if we have President Gore instead, the Republicans might grow even testier, battling the perceived usurper at every juncture. Will they attack Mr. Gore just as McCarthy and company attacked Harry Truman, not only for his sins but for those committed by the popular president whose coattails he rode into office?  Senator Hagel's words seem to carry an implicit threat: If our guy doesn't win, more trouble will come. Republicans would do far better to follow Mr. Bush's lead, not only because it is more statesmanlike but because history is on his side. In staking out common ground with the current administration, Mr. Bush is aligning himself with Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, all Republicans who came into office on the heels of Democratic presidents. Despite differences with their predecessors, each achieved triumphs by staying the course of a bipartisan foreign policy. And each had legislative help. If Mr. Bush is elected, he will need it, too. But he also needs it now if the country is to feel confident in Republican leadership. He needs an Arthur Vandenberg. Sadly, he doesn't appear to be in sight.
 Federal Bureau of Investigation aide Neil Gallagher tells Senate hearing that Justice Department aide Lee Radek told him at 1996 meeting that he was under heavy pressure in probe of 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign finances and that Atty Gen Janet Reno's job was at risk; Radek denies making remarks; holds Gallagher lies; disputed remarks were referred to in memo written by FBI Dir Louis J Freeh, who was not at meeting but said another official reported comments; Sen Arlen Specter reads memo at hearing (M) Top officials of the Justice Department and the F.B.I. engaged in an unusual public debate today at a Senate hearing over a 1996 memorandum about whether Attorney General Janet Reno's job was at risk as a result of the government's high-profile investigation into finances of the 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign. Top officials of the Justice Department and the F.B.I. engaged in an unusual public debate today at a Senate hearing over a 1996 memorandum about whether Attorney General Janet Reno's job was at risk as a result of the government's high-profile investigation into finances of the 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign.
 Labor unions fought fiercely against him -- and a pained Al Gore -- arguing that ''economic engagement'' was simply a code word for moving American jobs to China. Like Nixon and all the presidents who followed him, Mr. Clinton has become an engagement enthusiast. And while economic interdependence was the course advocated by George Bush, Mr. Clinton has become a far more articulate proponent than Mr. Bush ever was.
