 Then, noting that ''nothing says innovation and cutting edge like having a curved swoosh in your logo,'' the site presents more than a dozen examples -- from Ameritech, to Gore 2000, to tickets.com -- before producing a suitably swerving nameplate for Similant, replete with an ''@'' instead of the ''a.''
 Gore Ahead in Fund-Raising  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas raised three times more money than Vice President Al Gore last month, but Mr. Gore made up the difference with taxpayer funds and continued to have more money in the bank than his Republican opponent.
 Fortunately for the gun control side, N.R.A. leaders have a tendency to say offensive things that undermine their organizational and monetary advantages. In March the group's executive vice president, Wayne LaPierre, suggested that President Clinton was ''willing to accept a certain level of killing to further his political agenda.'' The recent boast by the N.R.A.'s first vice president, Kayne Robinson, that the N.R.A. would have an office in George W. Bush's White House was not a whole lot smarter.
 Pres Clinton will headline most lucrative political fund-raising event ever, collecting at least $25 million from 12,000 donors packed into MCI Center in Washington, DC; record-setting gala, salute to Clinton and Vice Pres Al Gore, will draw thousands of small donors who bought $50 tickets, but also large number of mega-givers, including 15 to 20 people who raised or pledged at least $500,000 each; will cement Clinton's legacy as most prodigious political fund-raiser ever; Democratic fund-raisers and White House estimate Clinton has raised at least $500 million and perhaps as much as $1 billion since 1992 for his own campaigns and for Democratic candidates; $500,000 donors represent new level of giving in arena of soft money; photos (M) The record-setting gala, a salute to Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, will draw thousands of small donors who bought $50 tickets, but also a large number of mega-givers, including 15 to 20 people who have raised or pledged at least $500,000 each. Some of these big givers will share a private dinner with the president and vice president the night before the gala at the BET Jazz club in downtown Washington. The record-setting gala, a salute to Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, will draw thousands of small donors who bought $50 tickets, but also a large number of mega-givers, including 15 to 20 people who have raised or pledged at least $500,000 each. Some of these big givers will share a private dinner with the president and vice president the night before the gala at the BET Jazz club in downtown Washington. The occasion cements the president's legacy as the most prodigious political fund-raiser ever. Democratic fund-raisers and the White House estimate that Mr. Clinton is responsible for raising at least $500 million and perhaps as much as $1 billion since 1992 for his own campaigns and for Democratic candidates. He is also helping Vice President Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton collect millions of dollars for their campaigns and is also soliciting money for his presidential library. Many of the givers also strongly agree with the president's agenda and want to see Vice President Gore and other Democratic candidates continue his policies. Although he has been tireless in his fund-raising duties, Mr. Clinton seldom directly asks his audiences for cash, leaving that task to others, most notably Terry McAuliffe, who is one of the president's closest friends. Mr. McAuliffe estimated that he had raised at least $300 million for Mr. Clinton and Democratic causes, including the 1997 inaugural, the White House millennium celebration, the president's legal defense fund and the campaigns of Mr. Gore and Mrs. Clinton. Vice President Gore has asked Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to join him in eschewing soft money, but the offer was rebuffed and the soft money race has continued unabated. The two political parties have raised $160.5 million in soft money for the 2000 election, a record for this point in an election cycle.
 Correction of caption with May 17 picture showing Vice Pres Al Gore and his daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, at her graduation from Columbia Law School A picture caption on Wednesday about the graduation of Vice President's Al Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff from Columbia Law School referred imprecisely to her degree. She is not the newest lawyer in her immediate family; she is the only one. While Mr. Gore's parents were both lawyers and he attended law school, he did not graduate. A picture caption on Wednesday about the graduation of Vice President's Al Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff from Columbia Law School referred imprecisely to her degree. She is not the newest lawyer in her immediate family; she is the only one. While Mr. Gore's parents were both lawyers and he attended law school, he did not graduate.
 Profile of late Sen Albert Arnold Gore, father of Vice Pres Al Gore, who never ran negative campaign in 18 years in public office (M) Senator Albert Arnold Gore of Tennessee never ran a negative campaign. In his first senatorial race, against an octogenarian incumbent, Kenneth McKellar, in the Democratic primary of 1952, he told friends it would be unseemly to make an issue of his opponent's age. That season's hot tag lines: ''Thinking feller, vote for McKellar,'' versus ''Think some more, and vote for Gore.'' Senator Albert Arnold Gore of Tennessee never ran a negative campaign. In his first senatorial race, against an octogenarian incumbent, Kenneth McKellar, in the Democratic primary of 1952, he told friends it would be unseemly to make an issue of his opponent's age. That season's hot tag lines: ''Thinking feller, vote for McKellar,'' versus ''Think some more, and vote for Gore.'' Mr. Gore won that one, and 18 years later his political career also ended on the high road. In that last losing race, against Bill Brock, a Republican, in 1970, he never aggressively answered a range of attacks, including the untrue accusation that he had personally benefited by routing Interstate 40 through land he owned and the unfair suggestion that he had forgotten his roots while chasing after the Kennedys at Georgetown dinner parties. And the man who defeated Senator Gore eventually apologized for the divisive tone of the campaign. His slogan, designed to appeal to disaffected whites supporting George Wallace, was ''Bill Brock believes in the things we believe in.'' Born poor in the remote settlement of Possum Hollow, Tenn., Mr. Gore lived through the worst of the Depression and spent seven years working his way through college by teaching in a one-room school -- he would spend one year earning money, then the next year spending it on his studies. Mr. Gore was hopeful again in 1960, but Kennedy chose Lyndon B. Johnson. At Mr. Gore's funeral, his son joked about the senator's longtime longing for the No. 2  job: ''Now that's humility.''
 Second article in series, Political Journeys, on lives of presidential candidates examines childhood and upbringing of Vice Pres Al Gore; even rawest and most initmate moments in his life are now widely seen as part of presidential campaign strategy designed by politically ambitious parents, and that perception has clearly become problem for vice president; much that is most widely doubted about Gore's life turns out to be demonstrably true, and some of what is assumed about his life is not; Gore himself has worked hard to discredit a lot of authentic stories about childhood--the very stories that would probably do him most good politically; his problem is that the scenes from his past that portray him sympathetically do so at expense of hard-driving parents, suggesting emotionally neglected boy forced to bear weight of enormous adult expectations; photos (L) The last thing Al Gore's father told him, a few days before he died, and just before he lost the ability to speak, was: ''Son, always do right. Always do right.'' His father, the senator, felt he had himself done right a lot of the time, and reliably kept after his son to follow suit. After the vice president talked about that last conversation, though, in a eulogy he had worked on without sleeping for two nights straight, even some friends wondered whether his father had tacked on a Hollywood ending, scripting his goodbyes at least in part for the benefit of the papers, and maybe the history books. This time, nobody came right out and accused Mr. Gore himself of tweaking the dialogue. The last thing Al Gore's father told him, a few days before he died, and just before he lost the ability to speak, was: ''Son, always do right. Always do right.'' His father, the senator, felt he had himself done right a lot of the time, and reliably kept after his son to follow suit. After the vice president talked about that last conversation, though, in a eulogy he had worked on without sleeping for two nights straight, even some friends wondered whether his father had tacked on a Hollywood ending, scripting his goodbyes at least in part for the benefit of the papers, and maybe the history books. This time, nobody came right out and accused Mr. Gore himself of tweaking the dialogue. Even the rawest and most intimate moments in his life are now widely seen as mere theatrics, all part of a presidential campaign strategy designed by his ambitious, up-from-nothing parents, Albert and Pauline LaFon Gore, before he was born, and even unto death. That perception has clearly become a political problem for the vice president. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas regularly suggests that Mr. Gore is a natural-born phony, and the vice president's every remark is now fact-checked so scrupulously that when he recently said he had once dreamed of becoming a teacher, reporters wondered if he could prove it. Had anyone ever heard that story before? The questions are about more than Mr. Gore's assertions about the Internet and ''Love Story.'' What in his life was scripted and what was real? Could even he know the difference? Where did his parents' hopes end and his own begin? And do you only get credit for hosing out hog parlors if you did it without an agenda? But in separating the facts from the fanciful in Mr. Gore's life, perhaps the most striking discovery is the extent to which the material that is the most widely doubted is also the most demonstrably true: Al Gore did do a lot of his growing up in Tennessee. He did work hard on the farm there -- so hard, in fact, that the hired help felt sorry for him, and thought his father should ease up. In the same way, some of what is generally assumed about Mr. Gore's life is not true: he did not, for example, live in luxury back in Washington during the school year. Mr. Gore's parents were both famously frugal and were not well off until after their son had grown and after the senator's political career had ended. Though they sent their children to exclusive schools and provided such social necessities as ballroom dancing lessons for their son, they also dressed him in a cousin's hand-me-downs and lived in a hotel because it was owned by a relative who gave them a break on the rent. Some summers, the Gores had to pack up their four-room suite and put their belongings in storage so the place could be sublet while they were in Tennessee. And Al shared a bedroom with his sister, Nancy, who was 10 years older, both before and after her college years. Part of the reason that the contours of Mr. Gore's unusual upbringing are not better known, however, is that he himself has worked so hard to discredit a lot of authentic stories about his childhood -- the very stories, in fact, that would probably do him the most good politically. The problem, for him, is the scenes from the past that portray Mr. Gore sympathetically at the expense of his hard-driving parents. They suggest an emotionally neglected boy forced to bear the weight of enormous adult expectations, and Mr. Gore, who is fiercely protective of his 87-year-old mother and the memory of his  father, categorically balks at that. For a time, a decade ago, after his unsuccessful 1988 presidential campaign and his son's near-fatal car accident the next year, Mr. Gore himself seemed determined to explore the meaning of his own life story. He made a serious study of family dysfunction -- the subtext of his 1992 environmental manifesto, ''Earth in the Balance'' -- and passed out copies of Alice Miller's ''Drama of the Gifted Child,'' a book about how narcissistic parents can leave their high-achieving children cut off from their own feelings and hazy on just what they want, other than to make Mom and Dad proud. Back then, friends said, he was absorbed by the need to figure things out, to emerge from his father's shadow. To decide. But today, Mr. Gore seems nothing if not decided. He does want to be president, and if he can never really know exactly how much of that want began with his parents, his current attitude seems to be: So what? ''One of the oldest plots in the human story is child follows parent,'' he said recently, with what sure seemed like authentic boredom. And looking back on his early years did not seem so very difficult. In a series of interviews about his life, he was relaxed and appeared at peace with the past. He frankly described a childhood in which even the usual juvenile scrapes might become part of continuing political calculations -- maybe the same way writers often end up milking their families for material. When he got in trouble for throwing whitewash on trucks as they passed the Gore farm when he was 12, for example, his father made him send letters of apology to a number of trucking companies. ''That was also an election year, I believe,'' he remarked wryly. But, he made clear, it was also just a kid's life. ''I was conceived in Tennessee,'' Mr. Gore began, drawling for effect, in a radio announcer voice that poked fun at the whole biographical exercise. His real childhood was in Tennessee; in Washington, he spent his time with adults --  important adults, in whose presence he was expected to behave beautifully, and did. Tennessee was, at the very least, where Al Gore wished he had grown up. His buddies in Tennessee certainly considered Carthage, the small community on the Cumberland and the Caney Fork Rivers, where the Gores spent summers and holidays, as his true home. ''There were not a lot of kids around the Fairfax,'' the Embassy Row hotel where the Gores lived while in Washington, ''so he could not wait to get back home,'' said Steve Armistead, Al Gore's closest childhood friend, and a good pal still. ''I went up there'' when Mr. Gore was in high school ''and the friend he had in the Fairfax was a bellhop,'' Mr. Armistead said. ''There were all these dignitaries, but not much for a kid. There was a dullness, a loneliness about it. He didn't lay around Washington much when he could have been in Carthage, and that's where he got his values, working on the farm and growing up around Smith County people.'' Of course, Mr. Gore is the product of both Washington and Tennessee -- and of the very fact of having grown up in two places, with two groups of friends and two ways of looking at the world. He was born in Washington, lived in Tennessee from the time he was 1 until he was 4, while his father ran for the Senate, and then moved between the two places until college. Mr. Gore himself seems to feel that his split-screen view of the world was a gift, at least in the end. Mr. Gore's father -- who also favored fancy words -- moved between two worlds, too, and for all his striving in Washington did not believe in leaving either Tennessee or his farm roots behind, ever, even after his career in politics ended. And he and his wife thought that working on the farm would be good for their son, whom they told friends they hoped would be president one day. ''It was expected from the time he was little,'' said James Fleming, a Nashville doctor and friend of Nancy Gore's, who for a time served as the Gore family physician. It was not so much that the Gores thought cleaning out barns would add just the right touch of ''log cabin'' to his resume, family friends said, as that they simply felt it would toughen him up and give him a proper work ethic. ''His daddy used to get him up about 6 o'clock in the morning,'' said Mattie Lucie Payne, who worked for the Gores as a housekeeper for more than 40 years. ''And Al would say, 'Daddy, we have men working,' and his daddy would say, 'I know, and you go on down and help them.' '' ''He'd drive him pretty hard,'' said Gordon Thompson, a friend whose family used to live on the Gore farm, back when his own father worked for the senator. Always, he was serious. ''He pretty much acted the same way when he was 13 as he does now,'' said Donna Armistead, Steve Armistead's sister and Mr. Gore's first real girlfriend, for several years, beginning when he was an extremely confident 13-year-old and she was 16. Mr. Gore's own mother ''was not very touchy,'' Ms. Armistead said, adding, ''When he came in she just wouldn't come running to hug him.'' Once, after Mr. Gore and Ms. Armistead  had done a particularly hard job on the farm, the senator told him to take her out for a meal at a certain cafe. ''We were so thrilled,'' she remembered. ''But after dinner Al gets up to the cash register and said, 'My dad said to charge it to him,' and the guy wouldn't do it.'' Still, his time in Tennessee was not all boot camp and character building, and Mr. Gore did manage to have some unscripted fun. Mr. Thompson remembers his friend as ''pranky,'' with a love of practical jokes that endures today. One New Year's Eve, several of his friends said, their whole group was snowed in at the Gore farm, so Pauline Gore corralled all the girls in an upstairs bedroom and the boys in Al's room on the lower level. The senator, dressed in his bathrobe, sat sentry duty at the top of the stairs all night long, and every so often yelled downstairs to his son and the other boys, who were busy sharing one bottle of beer. But there were also times, even as a kid, when Mr. Gore flouted authority more directly. Once, while staying with the Thompsons, he heard that his father, who was away, was going to be giving a speech in Nashville, 55 miles east. His parents, though, had decided that their son should not come to the event. Like a lot of mothers, Pauline Gore always insisted publicly that her son was at all times the perfect boy. Mr. Gore was not shy about expressing affection for his girlfriend in front of his mother. ''I remember Pauline and I drove him to the airport one time,'' said Ms.  Armistead, ''and he kissed her on the cheek and then he kissed me. I mean, he laid one on me, honey.'' But she also says Mrs. Gore need not have worried. ''Sex was sex even then,'' Ms. Armistead said, ''but Al and I both had goals.'' Today, the vice president seems to enjoy looking back on the benign pleasures of the summers when he got to be a kid in Tennessee -- skinny-dipping with Mr. Thompson in a cattle trough or hypnotizing chickens, which Mr. Gore says is ''a little-known farm skill passed down from adolescent wizard to adolescent wizard.'' Mr. Gore also situates himself politically in Tennessee, as heir not only to his father but to Cordell Hull, whom he describes as ''the model for public service in our part of the country.'' Mr. Hull floated logs down the Cumberland River with Mr. Gore's grandfather, settled in Carthage and became the congressman in the seat the Gore father and son later held. An ardent free-trader, Mr. Hull won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role in founding GATT, now the World Trade Organization, and was secretary of state in World War II. ''But before that he was a judge on the circuit, and in 10 counties there, the picture above the judge's chair in the courtroom is neither George Washington, Thomas Jefferson nor Franklin Roosevelt,'' Mr. Gore said, with the greatest possible reverence. ''It's Cordell Hull to this day.'' Asked to name the most important things he had inherited from his parents, Mr. Gore  talked for a long time about his father and his father's ideals. But the first thing he said in answer to the question was this: ''But he became a statesman,'' too, Mr. Gore said. ''I've often thought in my father's persona he continued to manifest both.'' His friends feel sure Mr. Gore would move back to Carthage if, as Mr. Thompson delicately put it, ''worse comes to worst.'' The vice president laughed at that, but agreed. ''Well, I'll retire in Carthage for sure,'' he said. ''You know, I hope that's many years from now.'' But Mr. Gore, who had his boots up on the table in front of him as he talked, snorted when he heard this. ''I guess maybe they were thinking that Washington is such a neat place,'' he said, ''that I would naturally want to tell them all about the great things there.'' The owner, Grady Gore, was a cousin of the senator's. Louise Gore, one of Grady's daughters, lived in the hotel. Her sister, Mary Gore Dean, moved in, too, after her husband died in a plane crash. For a while, their brother Jimmy Gore and his family were on the premises, as well. When they moved, it was just down the block. The senator's correspondence makes clear that he and his family were there because the price was right. The Gores looked for a house in Washington for years, but never found anything they felt they could afford. And one thing that seems to bother Mr. Gore -- far more, in fact, than the idea that his 52 years add up to something that is not so much a life as a story line -- is the perception that ''I was in this luxury apartment eating room service, sort of like Eloise.'' He got pretty creative about making his own fun, sometimes upending all the furniture in the living room to construct an elaborate fort. But activity was supposed to be purposeful. ''His dad was a very, very proud man and believed that old Cordell Hull thing of you're put on earth for a purpose and it's to improve the condition of life,'' said Mr. Gore's cousin, Mark Gore, who lived down the block. (His cousin also remembers Senator Gore teaching him to swim by throwing him into a pool when he was 4, while Al, who was 7, looked on, laughing.) Two of Mr. Gore's closest Washington friends recall that while Al Gore was the focus of his parents' fondest hopes, it was his free-spirited, rebellious sister, Nancy, who took more of their energy. ''The general topic of conversation over there was what outrageous thing Nancy did this week,'' said one of these friends. ''She got a lot of attention and Al was kind of an afterthought, because he never misbehaved.'' For him, the best times were those spent throwing a ball around with his father at Grady Gore's estate in Potomac, Md. ''He had some cattle from the Tennessee farm brought up there,'' Mr. Gore said, smirking like he knows that sounds kind of crazy. ''And a lot of times on weekends we'd go up there and he'd work with the cattle and I'd help him and then we'd take a break.'' Sometimes, too, they played catch in the Russell building, outside the senator's office, though if someone walked by, ''he'd duck back into the office until they passed'' because ''it wasn't very dignified,'' the son recalled. When Al Gore had real ballgames, though, it was his sister, not his father, who would come. More often, his father took him to Senate hearings. He sat through long stretches of discussion over the bill, co-sponsored by his father, that created the Interstate System of highways. How wide would the new roads be? Green or blue for the road signs? As a kid, Mr. Gore followed these developments avidly, keeping track of the miles of completed highway the way other kids his age followed the Yankees' box scores. ''He also took me on the Senate floor, even though he wasn't supposed to,'' Mr. Gore remembered. And one day, when Al was 5, he was invited to come up front to meet the vice president, Richard M. Nixon, who was presiding that day: ''He put me on his knee and was very nice to me, and the experience forever after deprived me of the more sublime pleasures of Nixon hatred.'' Once, Mr. Gore's father let his son listen in on an extension while he spoke to President John F. Kennedy, who at the time was furious at a certain steel executive for raising prices after the steel workers had agreed not to seek a wage increase. ''The family anecdote that my father always told after that -- like a lot of family anecdotes I can't really vouch for -- but he said that I said, 'Dad, I didn't know presidents talked that way.' '' They all wanted, each in their own way, to be part of that excitement. And the entire family talked a lot about not just the bills before Congress but the big issues of the day, especially civil rights. In these discussions, was his mother more liberal than his father, as some who knew the couple have suggested? ''Mmmmm, my dad was pretty liberal,'' Mr. Gore answered. ''She was, like most moms, the conscience of the family, but they didn't really disagree. And my sister was more liberal than both of them put together.'' Then Mr. Gore started to laugh, and kept on for a good long time. ''It was a family of many consciences,'' he said. This is the second in a series of articals on the lives of the presidential candidates. The next article will explore George W. Bush's prep school experience at the Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
 Mr. Giuliani, 55, who has 18 months left in office, deferred questions about his own political future, not indicating if he might make a run for governor or accept an appointment to the cabinet of George W. Bush, if Mr. Bush wins his bid for president.
 Vice Pres Al Gore revisits former Fairfax Hotel in Washington, DC, where he grew up and where he often played pranks on guests; photo (S) Up on the roof of the Washington hotel where he grew up, the old Fairfax, now a much tonier Westin, Vice President Al Gore was standing at the edge. There is no railing on the roof of the eight-story building and Mr. Gore was trying to goad a reporter into following him there. ''I'd catch you,'' he said, and he seemed amazed that anyone would decline such a sporting challenge. Mr. Gore had taken a reporter and photographer back to his former home on Massachusetts Avenue, and while the return visit did not seem particularly emotional -- no Barbara Walters moments, certainly -- it did bring back memories of how cranky old Senator John McClellan of Arkansas would get, in the suite below the Gores, when Al Gore dribbled his basketball. Up on the roof of the Washington hotel where he grew up, the old Fairfax, now a much tonier Westin, Vice President Al Gore was standing at the edge. There is no railing on the roof of the eight-story building and Mr. Gore was trying to goad a reporter into following him there. ''I'd catch you,'' he said, and he seemed amazed that anyone would decline such a sporting challenge. Mr. Gore had taken a reporter and photographer back to his former home on Massachusetts Avenue, and while the return visit did not seem particularly emotional -- no Barbara Walters moments, certainly -- it did bring back memories of how cranky old Senator John McClellan of Arkansas would get, in the suite below the Gores, when Al Gore dribbled his basketball. Inside the building, Mr. Gore gestured toward a door. ''This woman down here had great Jell-O, so I'd go down and visit with her,'' he said, as if he were half-hoping that she might still come out and invite him in. The Gores' two-bedroom apartment has been totally rebuilt, but the view from the roof is still mostly unaltered. ''This was a key escape route,'' he said, taking the stairs up into the open air. And on the roof, he was reminded of some of the childish tricks he used to spend hours there perfecting.
 For Mr. Clinton, the problem has not been a lack of vision. Once in office, he quickly cast away his campaign attacks on President Bush for ''coddling dictators'' in Beijing. And since 1994, he has steadily built on his theme that the Internet and China's growing economic ties to the West would ultimately create pressures for political openness that Beijing will not be able to control. For Mr. Clinton, the problem has not been a lack of vision. Once in office, he quickly cast away his campaign attacks on President Bush for ''coddling dictators'' in Beijing. And since 1994, he has steadily built on his theme that the Internet and China's growing economic ties to the West would ultimately create pressures for political openness that Beijing will not be able to control.
 Mr. Lazio said he opposed handgun registration, which he described as ''invasive,'' in contrast to Mrs. Clinton, and supported a ''significant tax cut,'' though he stopped short of endorsing the one supported by his party's presumptive presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. He also said he was open to allowing some private investments of Social Security funds.
 The Bill Brock who came to Washington in 1963, or even the one who beat Al Gore Sr. for the Senate in 1970, would not have been tolerant of Democrats. But he changed in the Senate.
 With both parties trying to attract the support -- and dollars -- of the technology industry, the issue could become a tricky one politically for Vice President Al Gore.
