 SEX AND THE CITY. Here is the whole first season of the HBO series, based on Candace Bushnell's book, starring Sarah Jessica Parker as a sex columnist who gets much of her material from her own experiences and those of her friends (Kim Cattrall, Kristin Davis and Cynthia Nixon). 1999. HBO. VHS, $39.92; DVD, $39.99. 300 minutes.
 Neither Mr. Clinton nor any of his aides have made the point -- at least not publicly -- that the administration's plan is far less ambitious than one proposed by George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, who is ready to abandon the ABM treaty as a relic of the past.
 Gail Sheehy Op-Ed article holds that Vice Pres Al Gore is swaying voters on policy issues, but alienating them by coming across as a man without messy personal flaws or strong convictions; drawing The more meticulously Al Gore articulates his message, the better he scores with voters on issues high on their agenda -- health care, education and Social Security -- but the less they like him. Why do so many voters wish they could take the Al Gore out of Al Gore's positions? The more meticulously Al Gore articulates his message, the better he scores with voters on issues high on their agenda -- health care, education and Social Security -- but the less they like him. Why do so many voters wish they could take the Al Gore out of Al Gore's positions? Perfection is a serious flaw for a modern politician. Mr. Gore has suffered from it all his life. In his senior yearbook, his prep school classmates at St. Albans called him ''frighteningly good at many things,'' but his habitual perfectionism didn't make people like him; rather, it provoked the meanspiritedness of envy. Behind his back some classmates called him ''Ozymandias,'' after the king in the Shelley poem who cries, ''Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair!'' But Al Gore doesn't need to be loved. He needs to be right. Al Gore's goody-goodiness deprives him of the messy imperfections that allow voters to get past their envy of the famous and powerful. Unlike Bill Clinton, who stole the show at a recent fund-raiser by mocking his own aging in office -- ''I was always the youngest person who did everything. Now . . . I'm just kind of an old, gray-haired redneck'' -- the vice president has scarcely aged in his seven White House years. No love handles or shoe-polish hair color. He is fanatic about preserving a near-perfect physique.  On the day in 1976 when he learned a congressional seat was coming vacant, he immediately dropped to the floor and started doing push-ups. Today he does crunches on Air Force Two. His perfect abs are a silent rebuke to all those boomer men who have graduated beyond size 36 belts. Al Gore is ridiculed for his slow, deliberate speaking style. Why does he plait each sentence as if he were teaching macrame to kindergartners? Does he have to enunciate every consonant? Must he use Tidewater Gentleman grammar at truck stops? Probably, yes. There is a plausible reason that Al Gore speaks the way he does. Unlike George W. Bush, he does not have patrician roots. His father was born in a place called Possum Hollow, in a home without running water or electricity, surrounded by folks who spoke Tennessee hillbilly.  Albert Gore Sr. had to commute to Nashville to take night classes in law. He disciplined himself to speak with formal precision, and he raised his boy to be a more perfect version of himself, sending him to St. Albans for polish. When his son last ran for president, in 1988, Senator Gore Sr. boasted to me: ''Al's grammar is as near perfect in extemporaneous speeches as you can come by. You can just see the commas falling in.'' Overt intellectualism is another flaw the American public does not easily forgive. And while he wasn't a spectacular student, Al Gore likes nothing better than immersing himself in a complex subject like arms control or global warming. You can just see his neurons branching. Another intangible trait of Al Gore's that troubles voters was expressed in a recent New York Times/CNN poll. ''Al Gore acts as if he's not sure what he's thinking, as if he doesn't have a mind of his own,'' said Vera Jeane, a nurse from Bay City, Tex. Indeed, he never rebelled when he was young. ''I always said Al wanted to find out what you wanted to do and do it,'' said Pauline Gore, his mother. Doing what is wanted has made Al Gore a dream vice president. When he found out what Bill Clinton wanted him to do to get them re-elected, he shook the tambourine from the White House to a Buddhist temple. It took him months to find the words to separate himself from his boss's personal dishonor. And when he finally did strike a position starkly different from Bill Clinton's, on Elian Gonzalez, he read the country's wishes wrong. The more advisers and polls he consults, the less able Al Gore is to listen to his own convictions. Whether he is scared of losing and failing to live up to his father's dream, or scared of winning because the dream is not his own, Al Gore does not convey confidence or passion as a candidate. Won't somebody tell him he doesn't have to be Ozymandias? Americans don't want a king, but they might like an authentic Al Gore.
 New Hampshire Gov Jeanne Shaheen, seeking third term, says she will not renew her pledge to block any new broadbased taxes; several women are seeking statewide office in North Carolina, including lieutenant governor nominees Betsy L Cochrane, a Republican, and Beverly M Perdue, a Democrat; International Brotherhood of Teamsters president James P Hoffa says teamsters may not endorse a presidential candidate this year; Reuters/Zogby poll shows Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush locked in a dead heat in presidential race; Reform Party will not appear on Texas ballot in November because Patrick J Buchanan, party's likely presidential nominee, failed to surmount ballot qualification hurdles and has been forced to run in state as an independent (Campaign Briefing) (M)
 A Reprieve in Texas  Gov. George W. Bush agreed to a 30-day reprieve for a man convicted of raping and killing his stepdaughter, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence had not been performed. Earlier, a federal appeals court and the United States Supreme Court rejected appeals from the inmate's lawyers. Bush's Environment Plan  Gov. George W. Bush proposed using federal resources and incentives to coax state governments and private citizens into greater conservation efforts, rather than what he said was the Clinton-Gore administration's more forceful approach. Gore Pledge on Fighting Cancer  Vice President Al Gore said he would double federal spending on cancer research and make new cancer treatments and tests available to all Americans who needed them.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush criticizes Clinton-Gore administration for approach to land conservation he says involves too much federal muscle and too little local flexibility; proposes using federal resources and incentives to coax state governments and private citizens into greater conservation efforts, and spending of additional $2.3 billion on conservation efforts over next five years; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush criticized the Clinton-Gore administration today for an approach to land conservation that he said involved too much federal muscle and too little local flexibility. Instead, he proposed using federal resources and incentives to coax state governments and private citizens into greater conservation efforts. Gov. George W. Bush criticized the Clinton-Gore administration today for an approach to land conservation that he said involved too much federal muscle and too little local flexibility. Instead, he proposed using federal resources and incentives to coax state governments and private citizens into greater conservation efforts. Mr. Bush proposed spending a modest amount of money, calling for an additional $2.3 billion in federal spending on conservation efforts over the next five years. But he emphasized that much of that money would be channeled to local governments or used for programs that would encourage private landowners and private groups to take a more aggressive stewardship of the land and water around them. ''We have a national consensus about the importance of conservation, but critical problems arise when leaders reject partnership, when they rely solely on the power of Washington and the regulations and penalties and dictation from afar,'' Mr. Bush told scores of local residents who gathered here. Mr. Bush said the proposal he made today would help remedy that. It called for an increase in the annual allocation of money for the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund to $900 million from its current level of $500 million. That represented an additional investment of $2 billion over five years. The plan would set aside half of that money for state and local conservation efforts. Mr. Bush also proposed tax incentives for private landowners to sell their property to conservation groups and estimated that the lost federal revenue from the measure would be about $300 million over five years. Today's speech followed, by only two days, a major address on conservation by Vice President Al Gore, in which Mr. Gore promised to prohibit logging and road building on 43 million acres of undeveloped national forests. It was a pledge that went beyond the currently stated intentions of the Clinton administration. Mr. Bush did not mention or criticize that proposal specifically, but his remarks suggested that he would be much more reluctant than Mr. Gore to use federal power to declare wilderness areas off limits without the support and cooperation of the people who used and lived near them. Mr. Bush's speech today was his second this year on environmental issues, which the Gore campaign sees as one of the governor's prime vulnerabilities. By several important measures of environmental health, Texas ranks near or at the bottom of the 50 states, although Mr. Bush's aides say the situation has been improving steadily over the five years that he has been governor. Based on Mr. Bush's remarks today, several environmental advocates expressed concern that his approach would be too permissive and hands-off and that the results would be the endangering of pristine land and water. ''The American people want a clean and safe environment, and it sounds like George Bush said today he would not use the tools available to give it to them,'' said Dan Weiss, the political director of the Sierra Club, an environmental advocacy group in Washington. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, rejected Mr. Bush's implicit portrayal of the vice president as someone without concern for local sentiments when it came to protecting land and water, and said Mr. Gore believed strongly in working with local residents on conservation efforts. With his proposal today, Mr. Bush was doing more than simply asserting concern about conservation. He was again casting the November presidential election as a contest between the view that Washington has the best solutions and the belief that people outside of Washington do. ''Somehow,'' Mr. Bush said, ''the mentality of Washington is: 'We know better. We know better than the citizens of this great state. Let us think on behalf of the citizens,' goes the thinking. It's time to have new thinking in Washington, D.C.'' As an illustration of that thinking, Mr. Bush said he wanted to devote $50 million annually from the land conservation fund to provide matching funds for states that develop programs to give private landowners assistance for conservation efforts.
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore, in speech at Emory University Medical School, promises to double federal spending on cancer research if elected and to make 'flood' of new cancer treatments and tests available to all Americans who need them; describes nation as standing on brink of medical breakthrough fueled by genetic research, and calls on federal government to use resources to turn discoveries into preventing and curing most fatal cancers; photo (M) Invoking World War II and the race to the moon, Vice President Al Gore promised today to double federal spending on cancer research and to make ''a flood'' of new cancer treatments and tests available to all Americans who need them. In a speech brimming with soaring oratory and buoyant optimism, Mr. Gore described the nation as standing on the brink of medical breakthroughs fueled by genetic research, and called on the federal government to use its resources to turn those discoveries into preventing and curing the most fatal cancers. Invoking World War II and the race to the moon, Vice President Al Gore promised today to double federal spending on cancer research and to make ''a flood'' of new cancer treatments and tests available to all Americans who need them. In a speech brimming with soaring oratory and buoyant optimism, Mr. Gore described the nation as standing on the brink of medical breakthroughs fueled by genetic research, and called on the federal government to use its resources to turn those discoveries into preventing and curing the most fatal cancers. ''If I am entrusted with the presidency, I will work with you to put the same energy and priority into fighting cancer that we would put into preventing a war that could take 500,000 American lives every year,'' Mr. Gore, the likely Democratic nominee, told more than 600 people at Emory University Medical School. ''The stakes are that great. We can win this war.'' The speech offered a vivid example of the recent tactical shift by Mr. Gore away from attacking his likely Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and toward outlining his own vision in upbeat terms. All this week, Mr. Gore, who has been criticized by some Democrats as appearing overly harsh on the campaign trail, has brought a softer, more personal, even intimate touch to his events. On Monday, Mr. Gore and an Army friend described their experiences in Vietnam. On Tuesday, he and his wife, Tipper, who has been treated for depression, appeared together at a mental health forum. Today, Mr. Gore referred to the death of his sister, Nancy, from lung cancer and brought along her husband, Frank Hunger, to talk to reporters. And he has not criticized Mr. Bush all week. At Emory today, Mr. Gore outlined a multipoint plan for battling cancer, portions of which he had discussed before. He called for doubling, to $9 billion, the amount the federal government would spend over the next five years on cancer research. He advocated legislation to make clinical trials available to more adults and to require Medicare to pay for more cancer-screening tests. And he vowed to make changes to the Food and Drug Administration that would speed the approval of new cancer drugs. The address was short on policy details but long on sweeping phrases and historical analogies meant to inspire his audience. For example, Mr. Gore cited President John F. Kennedy's vow to put a man on the moon 40 years ago as a precedent for his own ambitious goal: to end all deaths from colon, breast and prostate cancer by the year 2010. ''Some say it is impossible to find the answer to many forms of cancer,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I don't agree. One hundred years ago they said the same thing about smallpox. And 60 years ago they said the same thing about polio. They were wrong then. The pioneers and activists such as all of you convince me that the naysayers are wrong again now.'' ''We are on the verge of cracking another enemy secret code,'' Mr. Gore said. ''This enemy kills more Americans every single year than all the Americans who died throughout the entirety of World War II. When we intercept the messages that cancer sends secretly coded from cell to cell, we are going to turn the tide. We will gain the ability to decisively win the war against cancer.'' In the 1996 Democratic National Convention, Mr. Gore gave a now-famous speech in which he described with searing detail the death of his sister from lung cancer in 1984. The address, meant to highlight the Clinton administration's war on smoking, brought tears to the eyes of some conventiongoers. But it also prompted critics to suggest that Mr. Gore had exploited a painful family chapter for political gain. Today, Mr. Gore obliquely referred to his sister's death without mentioning her. But he tried to show that her illness had changed him, giving him an emotional bond with cancer victims and infusing him with a passion to see the disease cured. The event today also started on a tearful note as the man who introduced Mr. Gore, Patrick Kardian, repeatedly choked up as he described his own battle with Hodgkin's disease. At one point, Mr. Gore wrapped an arm around Mr. Kardian and whispered in his ear, ''You're doing great.'' Dr. Michael M. E. Johns, director of the university's health sciences center, said of Mr. Gore: ''He's showing a lot more passion than I've ever seen. I saw that human side of him today.'' Among the proposals outlined by Mr. Gore were speeding up the process for having Medicare, the government health care program for the elderly and disabled, pay for new diagnostic tests for cancer. Under Mr. Gore's plan, a panel of medical experts would make recommendations on new tests worthy of Medicare coverage. If Congress did not act on a recommendation within 60 days, Medicare would automatically begin paying for it. Mr. Gore also proposed increasing by fivefold the number of patients participating in cancer clinical trials sponsored by the National Cancer Institute. He asserted that survival rates for children with cancer had risen sharply because most of those children participated in clinical tests. But less than 3 percent of adults with cancer participate in such tests, he said.
 TEAMSTERS STILL WAVER -- James P. Hoffa, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, said yesterday that the 1.5-million-member union, the largest in the A.F.L.-C.I.O., might not endorse a presidential candidate this year. ''We're just not in a position to make that announcement now,'' Mr. Hoffa told reporters in Washington after a speech at the National Press Club. Last fall the Teamsters, along with the United Auto Workers, abstained when the labor federation announced its early endorsement of Vice President Al Gore. Since then the vice president has badly disappointed the Teamsters by supporting the trade deal with China. Mr. Hoffa said the next step in deciding whether to endorse a presidential candidate would be meetings with Gov. George W. Bush and with Ralph Nader of the Green Party. TOO CLOSE TO CALL -- Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are locked in a dead heat five months before the presidential election, according to a Reuters/Zogby poll released yesterday. The poll found Mr. Bush barely ahead of Mr. Gore, 42 percent to 41 percent, with 17 percent undecided. Adding Mr. Buchanan, Ralph Nader of the Green Party and Harry Browne of the Libertarian Party to the race resulted in Mr. Bush's stretching his lead to only 42 percent to 39 percent. The poll surveyed 1,002 likely voters from Monday through Wednesday and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points, making Mr. Bush's lead statistically insignificant. In most recent polls, Mr. Bush has led Mr. Gore by five points or more. The director of the latest poll, John Zogby, said Mr. Gore had improved his standing with independents, women, blacks and Hispanics. When poll respondents were asked which party they would support in their own Congressional districts, 44 percent said Democratic while 36 percent said Republican -- a gap probably wide enough, should it hold, to allow Democrats to regain control of the House of Representatives.
 CANADA: ENVOY BACKS GORE -- Canada's ambassador to the United States has effectively endorsed Al Gore over George W. Bush in the presidential race. ''We know Vice President Gore, he knows us; he's a friend of Canada,'' Raymond Chretien said in a speech to Canadian officials. The ambassador, a nephew of Prime Minister Jean Chretien, said, ''Governor Bush, on the other hand, doesn't know us as much,'' adding, ''When he thinks of borders, he thinks of Mexico, not of Canada.''
 Leroy Hendrix, a plaintiff who is on Vice President Al Gore's security detail, said he was denied a promotion after complaining that a superior told him of a racial quota system. Later, Mr. Hendrix was transferred to what the lawyers said was a less desirable job.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush, in step never taken over course of 131 executions in his five years as governor, agrees to 30-day reprieve for death-row inmate Ricky Nolen McGinn, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence in case had not been performed; his vigorous enforcement of death penalty has come under more rigorous scrutiny as presumptive Republican nominee; backers of Vice Pres Al Gore, who also supports death penalty, would like to use issue to cast doubt on Bush's claim to be 'compassionate conservative;' Texas leads nation in executions (M) In a step he had never taken over the course of 131 executions in five years, Gov. George W. Bush agreed tonight to a 30-day reprieve for a death-row inmate in Texas, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence in the case had not been performed. Mr. Bush made his decision, which he had telegraphed well in advance, after both the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, and the United States Supreme Court late today rejected final-hour pleas by lawyers for the inmate, Ricky Nolen McGinn, who had been scheduled for execution by lethal injection at 6 p.m., Central Daylight Time. In a step he had never taken over the course of 131 executions in five years, Gov. George W. Bush agreed tonight to a 30-day reprieve for a death-row inmate in Texas, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence in the case had not been performed. Mr. Bush made his decision, which he had telegraphed well in advance, after both the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, and the United States Supreme Court late today rejected final-hour pleas by lawyers for the inmate, Ricky Nolen McGinn, who had been scheduled for execution by lethal injection at 6 p.m., Central Daylight Time. Mr. McGinn was convicted of raping and killing his 12-year-old stepdaughter in 1993, but Mr. Bush acknowledged over recent days that new DNA tests might be able to determine more definitively Mr. McGinn's guilt on the rape charge. It was the rape, layered on top of the murder, that qualified Mr. McGinn for a death sentence. Mr. Bush, who had just arrived at the California Capitol here for a conference of governors, announced the stay only about 15 minutes before the originally scheduled time for the execution. He noted that the actual reprieve would be granted by State Senator Rodney Ellis of Texas, a Houston Democrat who was acting as governor while Mr. Bush and the lieutenant governor were both out of the state. ''I have recommended and Senator Ellis has accepted my recommendation to grant a 30-day reprieve in the case of Mr. McGinn,'' Mr. Bush told reporters in a corridor of the Capitol. ''Any time DNA evidence can be used in its context and be relevant as to the guilt or innocence of a person on death row, we need to use it,'' Mr. Bush continued. ''We're doing so in the case of Texas. I expect for the courts and all relevant parties to act expeditiously to review the evidence and to finally determine his innocence or guilt as to the charge of rape in the case of Ricky McGinn.'' Because Mr. Bush is now the presumptive Republican nominee for president, his actions as governor are under more intense scrutiny -- none more so than his vigorous enforcement of the death penalty. Texas leads the nation in executions. Although his probable Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, also supports capital punishment, some of Mr. Gore's allies would like to use the issue to cast doubt on Mr. Bush's efforts to portray himself as a ''compassionate conservative.'' In addition, Mr. Bush's unusual action in the case of Mr. McGinn underscored the way in which modern DNA testing and technology have begun to affect the debate over capital punishment by casting doubt on convictions once considered just. Mr. Bush's aides said that his action today was not even remotely influenced by politics and that he had made many tough and unpopular decisions about the death penalty in the past. As governor, Mr. Bush's only independent authority is to grant a 30-day reprieve of an execution. He cannot pardon someone or commute a death sentence without the prior recommendation of the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles. Under those circumstances, he has commuted only one death sentence in his five years in office, sparing the life of Henry Lee Lucas, a confessed serial killer. But this was the first time that Mr. Bush agreed to a reprieve for a death-row inmate, and he did it against the wishes of the pardons board, which had voted, 11 to 7, not to stay Mr. McGinn's execution. For the moment, that action merely delays Mr. McGinn's execution, although his lawyers hope that they can now perform new DNA tests that will shed new doubt on his guilt. What Mr. Bush did today, and the way in which he presaged it with a series of remarks on Wednesday, suggested that he was at least somewhat sensitive to his image as a fervent advocate of capital punishment and pleased to happen upon a case that allowed him to temper it. In the past, Mr. Bush had almost always waited for courts to complete their reviews of death-row inmates' appeals before he signaled his own intentions or thinking on the matter. But Mr. Bush broke from that pattern this time around, telling reporters on Wednesday that he was likely to grant Mr. McGinn a 30-day reprieve. At the time, the Fifth Circuit had yet to rule on the appeal, and Mr. McGinn's lawyers had not turned to the Supreme Court. Several Republican political strategists around the country said they doubted that Mr. Bush was simply trying to soften his image by showing a capacity for clemency. Karen P. Hughes, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said this afternoon that Mr. McGinn's case was the first one Mr. Bush had faced as governor in which the possibility of further DNA testing was so central to the question of innocence or guilt.
 The decision was written by Judge J. L. Edmondson, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan, and was joined by Judge Joel F. Dubina, an appointee of President George Bush, and Judge Charles R. Wilson, an appointee of President Clinton. And in Atlanta, Vice President Al Gore said he continued to believe that a family court should decide Elian's case. George W. Bush, campaigning in Nevada, said Mr. Gore should urge Mr. Clinton to allow such a family court hearing.
 Conservatives condemn and liberals applaud decision by federal appeals court denying six-year-old Cuban refugee Elian Gonzalez asylum hearing; neither Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore nor Republican rival Gov George W Bush comment on whether decision is good or bad (M) Conservatives condemned and liberals applauded the court decision today denying Elian Gonzalez an asylum hearing, while the two politicians most prominently seeking support in the political center -- Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- temporized. Conservatives condemned and liberals applauded the court decision today denying Elian Gonzalez an asylum hearing, while the two politicians most prominently seeking support in the political center -- Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- temporized. But neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Gore would say whether they thought the decision was good or bad. Mr. Gore said that it should be ''respected,'' but that he had always believed a Florida family court should have dealt with the case. Mr. Bush said that he agreed, and that Mr. Gore should now persuade Attorney General Janet Reno to send the case there. Ms. Reno made it clear that she had no such plans, saying, ''I think justice has been done.'' And Mr. Gore's split with the administration was widely condemned in his own party as pandering to Cuban-American voters in Florida.
 Bush Backs Execution Delay  For the first time in his five years in office, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas agreed to a 30-day reprieve for a death-row inmate, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence had not been performed. Bush Backs Execution Delay  For the first time in his five years in office, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas agreed to a 30-day reprieve for a death-row inmate, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence had not been performed.
 Here in New York, Rudy Giuliani mutated into a variation on Barney the Dinosaur, a fluffy critter who prefers dinner with his new squeeze to a press conference announcing a big police bust. We've been a little edgy around him ever since, wondering if he's actually the same person. ''Invasion of the Body Snatchers''  pods may be at work here, or one of those ''X-Files'' aliens who looks like your best friend, but spouts green acid when he's poked. The city is disoriented. New York has had fighting mayors and crooked mayors, and the one before this one was extremely polite. But Love Mayor sounds so 90's, so -- Al Gore.
 On Stage and Off column; Lily Tomlin to return to Broadway with ten-week revival of The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe; photo; Gore Vidal comments on planned revival of his 1960 satire The Best Man; Stella Adler Conservatory faces eviction from home on Lafayette Street; Tom Oppenheim, director and Adler's grandson, explains search for new space; Tony Torn, son of Rip Torn and Geraldine Page, to appear in new translation of Ionesco's Picture, produced by elder Torn; Dana Delany to take over role in Dinner With Friends (M) It's been more than two months since producers began to talk about a revival of ''The Best Man,'' Gore Vidal's 1960 satire set in the hothouse environs of a presidential campaign. But now the project appears to be moving ahead with a surprising cast.
