 He thinks the proposal by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to partly privatize Social Security by allowing people to invest a portion of their contributions in the stock market is fine in concept. But he worries that ''the devil is in the details.'' Governor Bush's proposal ''is not a radical plan,'' he said. ''It's bold, because for the first time you would change Social Security. '' HE said his proudest accomplishment in the Senate came in 1983, when he and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat, helped lead bipartisan efforts to rescue Social Security. Mr. Dole suggested that he and Senator Moynihan could chair a commission Governor Bush plans to appoint to work on his Social Security proposal if he is elected president.
 At the moment he is seriously serious about running for president -- so serious that he is pulling close to 5 percent of the vote in many national polls, much of it at the expense of Vice President Al Gore. There is serious talk that he could cost the Democrats the White House.
 That line, from an essay called ''Goodbye to All That,'' which originally appeared in 1967 in The Saturday Evening Post, came back to me the other afternoon as I sat in my kitchen near the Hudson previewing the new episode of the HBO series ''Sex and the City,'' which begins its third season tonight. It stars the perky Sarah Jessica Parker and is based on columns Candace Bushnell wrote in the mid-1990's for The New York Observer. Ms. Bushnell isn't a great writer. She doesn't have Ms. Didion's range or Fran Lebowitz's wit, and the world she described -- often, admittedly, against deadline -- would be unrecognizable to anyone who had never spent evenings at Elaine's or in junior lofts wondering why men didn't realize just how wonderful the eligible women of New York are. But Ms. Bushnell was in the right place at the right time. She picked up early on the strange gulf that existed between men and women who were perhaps too smart or selective for their own good, but who, in any case, couldn't see themselves sleeping with someone who didn't have money or beauty, or at least some incredible ability in the sack to make it worthwhile. Of course, this picture of Manhattan singles warily advancing toward one another with no thought of building nice stable relationships -- who cares about that? -- was both sad and funny. But by the end of the 90's, with films like Neil LaBute's ''In the Company of Men'' taking an even colder view of modern romance, Ms. Bushnell's ''downtown babes'' and Gucci-clad ''modelizers'' had begun to seem almost quaint.
 The new leader is Miguel Cairo of Tampa Bay. He had hit no home runs in 177 at-bats. He was followed by Homer Bush of Toronto at 150 and Mickey Morandini of Philadelphia at 146.
 But what if it turns out that we've all been too optimistic about the expected return of stocks? Then asset allocation models would have to be recalculated to cut their equity weightings. Indeed, huge swaths of capital would need to be shifted into nonequity asset classes. And certainly investing the Social Security Trust Fund in stocks, as George W. Bush and many others have proposed, would suddenly make a lot less sense.
 Republican presidential candidate George W Bush has been pushing well-worn conservative agenda cloaked in more sympathetic rhetoric and symbolism; his new approach has given Republicans the kinder, gentler face they have longed for in place of steely intellectualism of former House Speaker and conservative firebrand Newt Gingrich; but substance of Bush's platform does little to challenge basic conservative tenets that have guided party at least since Ronald Reagan (M) AS Gov. George W. Bush rolls out policy address after policy address, Congressional Republicans are watching him do what Newt Gingrich, Trent Lott and the self-effacing J. Dennis Hastert could not: win a fresh hearing for ideas cherished by conservatives. AS Gov. George W. Bush rolls out policy address after policy address, Congressional Republicans are watching him do what Newt Gingrich, Trent Lott and the self-effacing J. Dennis Hastert could not: win a fresh hearing for ideas cherished by conservatives. For all the recent talk of how Mr. Bush has moved to the center, the thrust of his campaign has been to employ more sympathetic rhetoric and symbolism to refashion a Republican policy wish list long familiar on Capitol Hill and in conservative think tanks. Mr. Bush does not speak in strident, angry tones of big government. Rather, he focuses on how conservative ideas can help the working poor, describing, for example, how tax incentives could help expand home ownership. Sometimes the picture alone sends a message, with Mr. Bush standing next to minority children or campaigning in the inner city. It's this sort of thing that has helped Mr. Bush give the Republicans the kinder, gentler face they have longed for in place of Mr. Gingrich's steely intellectualism. In substance, though, Mr. Bush has done little to challenge the basic conservative tenets that have defined his party at least since Ronald Reagan's presidency. Yes, he has chastised House Republicans on the budget, and told Senate Republicans not to tie the president's hands on foreign policy. But only on education has he broken fundamentally with his conservative allies by calling for the federal government to play a more forceful role in America's schools. Some of Mr. Bush's proposals, like diverting some Social Security payroll taxes to individual investment accounts, have drawn rave reviews from the conservative intellectuals. As the writer Ramesh Ponnuru noted in a recent National Review story, Social Security is ''symbolically what's left of the New Deal,'' and Mr. Bush is not holding it sacrosanct. Many of Mr. Bush's ideas have been incubating in Republican policy circles for years. For example: When Mr. Bush spoke on Social Security, he was picking up a ball dropped by the House Ways and Means Committee, when Republican leaders, afraid of the political risk, scuttled plans to create an individual investment plan. Similarly, Mr. Bush's support of a missile defense system with global reach has a GOP heritage stretching back to President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. In advocating a $1.3 trillion tax reduction over 10 years, Mr. Bush is aligning himself with House and Senate Republicans, who pushed in 1999 for a $792 billion tax reduction, then retreated in disarray after President Clinton vetoed it. So, too, Mr. Bush's proposal for a  tax credit of up to $2,000 a family to help working people with low or moderate incomes buy health insurance is very close to proposals pushed by Representative Dick Armey, the House Majority Leader from Texas, and Senator Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee. No wonder that Mr. Bush's advisers occasionally become impatient with comparisons of their candidate's ''compassionate conservatism'' to Mr. Clinton's ''New Democrat'' break with his own party's orthodoxy. Mr. Bush's policy agenda, one of his aides said, ''is within Republican orthodoxy but takes it to the next step.'' FOR Congressional Republicans, who long regarded themselves as belonging to the party of ideas, this is vindication. This time, they feel, they have the right messenger and, as a presidential contender, he has a megaphone almost as big as the president's. Praising Mr. Bush's Social Security proposal, Mr. Armey said, ''A Republican in the House brings it up and before he can get it before the American people it gets reframed as the secret Republican plan to destroy Social Security. When Governor Bush brings it up, people first say, 'What is he talking about?' And when he brings it up it has a standing with the American people.'' Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman who attended many House Republican hand-wringing sessions, noted that a lawmaker with an idea got little attention, but ''when Governor Bush gave his speech on Social Security it was carried live on CNN and Fox TV and made the front page of all the national newspapers the next day.'' DEMOCRATS argue that, despite his amiability, Mr. Bush's positions are to the right of those of the great American middle. So Mr. Gore and his allies have been trying to portray Mr. Bush as out of the mainstream by branding each of his proposals a ''risky scheme.'' But this has proven harder for the Democrats than four years ago -- and not just because of Mr. Bush's manner. The federal surplus has changed the political dynamics. In 1995, when Republicans wanted to balance the budget as well as grant a large tax cut, it meant they had to make unpopular reductions in other programs. By contrast, Mr. Bush has been able to propose both a large tax cut and new social spending. And Democrats, in trying to co-opt or defuse some Republican ideas, have made them harder to demonize. Similarly, Mr. Clinton's call for the government itself to invest some Social Security taxes in the stock market, coupled with his proposal to give lower income taxpayers up to $300 a year for a new type of retirement account, makes it harder for Democrats to argue against Mr. Bush's innovations. Public attitudes also change over time and over generations. The Bush campaign is betting that with nearly half of American households now owning stock, fewer Americans will so fear the market that they will insist that Social Security remain as it is. ''There's nothing more powerful than an idea whose time has come,'' Mr. Armey said. The Democrats are hoping mightily that Mr. Bush's timing is off.
 More money on the table would give George W. Bush an opportunity to argue that the nation can afford both his big tax cut plan and his proposal to create private investment accounts within Social Security. Vice President Al Gore would get a chance to call both for accelerated reduction of the national debt and for additional spending on Democratic priorities like adding prescription drug coverage to Medicare.
 George W. Bush embraced this view in a speech recently calling for a robust missile defense of the United States. And President Clinton is in Moscow this weekend to discuss the new thinking, and his own less expansive missile defense plans, with Russian President Vladimir Putin, who holds a treaty barring the United States (or Russia) from deploying a National Missile Defense (N.M.D.).
 In November of last year the Connecticut Impressionist Art Trail was designated a Millennium Legacy Trail by the White House Millennium Council. One of 50 trails in 47 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, the Connecticut trail is the only one dedicated to a movement in art history. Ten venues that exhibit American Impressionist art make up the Connecticut trail and could  form the basis for an art lover's automobile tour. They are the Bruce Museum in Greenwich and the Bush-Holley Historic Site in the Cos Cob section of Greenwich; the Weir Farm National Historic Site in Wilton, once the home of the painter J. Alden Weir; the Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven, the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme, the Lyman Allyn Art Museum at Connecticut College in New London, the Wadsworth Atheneum and the art collection of the Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company, both in Hartford; the Hill-Stead Museum in Farmington; and the New Britain Museum of American Art in New Britain.
 On the deck that overlooks the sarcophagus, where Vice President Al Gore stood briefly during his visit to Chernobyl in 1997, the radiation  goes from 4 times to 10 times the  naturally occurring level, still not necessarily dangerous but not recommended for extended exposure.
 Frances FitzGerald Op-Ed article finds Vice Pres Gore proposes limited missile defense system using technology that has not been proven and may never work reliably, while Republican presidential rival George W Bush proposes a much more robust missile defense based on technologies he has not yet named; notes lack of progress on missile defense in 15 years since Ronald Reagan's launched Strategic Defense Initiative (M) On the one hand, President Clinton and Vice President Gore have been promoting a limited defense system to protect the nation against attacks by rogue nations, though the system has not been proven and may never work reliably. They have also been asking Russia to agree to amending the Antiballistic Missile Treaty to permit such a system, though the Russians have always adamantly opposed such an amendment and by all accounts will continue to do so at the summit meeting today in Moscow. On the one hand, President Clinton and Vice President Gore have been promoting a limited defense system to protect the nation against attacks by rogue nations, though the system has not been proven and may never work reliably. They have also been asking Russia to agree to amending the Antiballistic Missile Treaty to permit such a system, though the Russians have always adamantly opposed such an amendment and by all accounts will continue to do so at the summit meeting today in Moscow. On the other hand, Gov. George W. Bush, backed by such cold war heavyweights as Henry Kissinger, George Shultz and Brent Scowcroft, has promised a much more robust national missile defense, though based on technologies he has not yet named. In addition, he has promised deep reductions in the American and Russian strategic arsenals. The Russians, however, have already told us that they see a larger defense effort as a threat to their nuclear deterrent. The idea that they would make deep reductions in the face of such effort defies logic. In the midst of these technological and diplomatic embarrassments for the administration, Governor Bush revived the political issue by calling for the entire Reagan program: Star Wars, radical nuclear-arms reductions, the de-alerting of nuclear forces and the sharing of antimissile technology with our allies and possibly the Russians as well.
 Fred Baron, wealthy Texas lawyer and big fund-raiser for Al Gore, could become liability for Democratic candidate in his new role as president of Assn of Trial Lawyers of America; Republican Gov George W Bush has made curbing civil litigation centerpiece of his campiagn, and Baron could be ready target in efforts to link Gore to image of greedy trial lawyers; photo (M) So when he agreed last year to work as a big fund-raiser for Vice President Al Gore, he had all the right tools. So when he agreed last year to work as a big fund-raiser for Vice President Al Gore, he had all the right tools. In a few weeks, Mr. Baron, 52, will be the new president of the powerful Association of Trial Lawyers of America, which has vowed to do everything it can to defeat Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who has long made curbing civil litigation and limiting jury awards and lawyers' fees a centerpiece of his campaign. But while Mr. Baron has given Mr. Gore a great fund-raising boost, he has also given the Republicans a ready target in their campaign to link Mr. Gore to the image of greedy trial lawyers. Mr. Bush has long cited tort reform -- laws that restrict civil litigation and limit jury awards -- as one of his greatest accomplishments as governor of Texas, and has said that if elected president he would take it to the federal level. As a result, Mr. Baron has declared himself and his firm exonerated. Still, even as he takes over a group that is a cornerstone of Mr. Gore's support, he remains haunted by the document and its implications of witness coaching. Walter Olsen, an adviser to Mr. Bush on tort reform, said he was surprised that the trial lawyers' group elected Mr. Baron president, given the document's controversy. By the late 1990's, Mr. Baron said, he decided it was crucial for him to get involved in the trial lawyers' lobbying group as its battles with advocates of tort reform intensified. One possible inspiration: Mr. Bush signed the sweeping tort reform bill in Texas in 1997, ending a legal mechanism that Mr. Baron had helped engineer. Correction:  June 7, 2000, Wednesday  An article on Sunday about Fred Baron, the incoming president of the Association of Trial Lawyers and a fund-raiser for Vice President Al Gore, misspelled the surname of Gov. George W. Bush's adviser on tort reform, who has criticized Mr. Baron. He is Walter Olson, not Olsen. An article on Sunday about Fred Baron, the incoming president of the Association of Trial Lawyers and a fund-raiser for Vice President Al Gore, misspelled the surname of Gov. George W. Bush's adviser on tort reform, who has criticized Mr. Baron. He is Walter Olson, not Olsen.
 Spotting an opportunity, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have  begun speaking out about protecting the dissemination of private information. ''Today, there is greater protection for your video rental receipts than for your most intimate medical information,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech at New York University two weeks ago. ''I've seen cases where people's prescription drug histories are sold freely to direct mail companies without their permission; where hundreds of employees at an H.M.O. have access to patients' records.'' Even Mr. Bush offered a nod, telling Business Week recently, ''I'm a privacy-rights person. The marketplace can function without sacrificing the privacy of individuals.'' Indeed, a Gallup poll in March asked who would better handle protecting ordinary Americans against invasions of privacy. Mr. Gore drew 41 percent; Mr. Bush, 47 percent.
 Political Memo on George W Bush's odd campaign pitch as Yale graduate who flaunts his ignorance of details onissues and disdain for Ivy League intellectualism; Republicans candidate is at same time defensive about intimations that he does not know all that much (M) Selling Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to the voters at a rally in Albuquerque this week, Gov. Gary E. Johnson of New Mexico recounted a conversation that he and Mr. Bush once had about the speakers at a conference of state leaders. Selling Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to the voters at a rally in Albuquerque this week, Gov. Gary E. Johnson of New Mexico recounted a conversation that he and Mr. Bush once had about the speakers at a conference of state leaders. It was a populist tribute to Mr. Bush as the antithesis of an egghead, or at least it was supposed to be. But the way it came across raised a serious strategic question: are Mr. Bush and his allies overplaying his disdain for intellectualism, to the point where they are sometimes making him out to be a self-satisfied boob? In February, Representative J. C. Watts Jr., Republican of Oklahoma, talked Mr. Bush up to voters in South Carolina by reassuring them that a president does not have to be clever. In the nearly four months since then, Mr. Bush has frequently curled his lip at the mention of Ivy League types who tote mental suitcases jammed with facts and figures, readily conceded his limited appetite for long policy briefings or memos, and deflected questions about gaps in his experience with a sunny pledge to assemble and rely on the keenest, most scrupulous advisers he can find. He did it again on Friday, when he addressed the participants at a celebration of the 20th anniversary of CNN. In response to a question from a Saudi Arabian journalist about international affairs, Mr. Bush did not claim to be well read on the subject or well along the road to erudition (although, in fact, he has slogged through thick tomes on Russia and the Balkans in recent months). Instead, Mr. Bush suggested that raw knowledge was overrated. That perspective may not be revolutionary or reckless. But Mr. Bush's sustained promotion of it -- along with his tendency to throw stones at ivory towers and challenge any suggestion that book learning could trump horse sense -- is unusually aggressive, a kind of thumbing of his nose at comedians' jokes about him and political analysts' assessments of one of his greatest weaknesses as a candidate. ''But they do want a president with some intellectual ability,'' Mr. Wayne said. ''What Bush has to watch is that he doesn't reinforce stereotypes that there is not much there.'' Mr. Bush's aides are attuned to that. Aboard his campaign plane on Friday afternoon, one of them appeared vaguely panic-stricken and did a quick survey, presumably looking for cameras, when the Texas governor appeared among a few members of the press corps cradling a book titled ''Spanish for Dummies.'' It was not Mr. Bush's, and he was merely using it to tease a reporter. But the alarmed aide seemed to understand that a photograph of the moment would not convey such distinctions and would yield to less flattering interpretations. It would also, ultimately, bother Mr. Bush, whose frequently sharp wit suggests that he is plenty bright and who really wants to have it all ways. ''I have just ordered several,'' Mr. Bush scribbled across the page. ''What do you think? Do I have a chance?'' Bantering with Chris Matthews, the host of the television news program ''Hardball,'' during a commercial break in a taping of the show, Mr. Bush remembered that he had once publicly told Mr. Matthews that his favorite author was Winston Churchill. And Mr. Bush said that a pundit subsequently deemed the comment to be a scripted effort to please Mr. Matthews, a known Churchill devotee. ''Do you think I'd take time out of my life to research what the hell you like?'' Mr. Bush asked Mr. Matthews. He said that he had read ''a lot more books than you give me credit for.'' That is undoubtedly so, but it is sometimes Mr. Bush and his allies who are denying the Texas governor the credit. After all, it was not Mr. Bush's thoughtfulness or eagerness to be informed that Mr. Johnson saw fit to praise during his remarks on Wednesday. To the contrary, Mr. Johnson saluted Mr. Bush as the rare ''somebody who will rather admit -- or rather talk about -- the things they don't know and make that really evident.''
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has the distinction of presiding over more executions (131) than any governor in the country. So, on Thursday, when he granted his first 30-day reprieve to a death-row inmate, the political world took note: was it an instance of a man running as a compassionate conservative trying to advertise his charitable nature? Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has the distinction of presiding over more executions (131) than any governor in the country. So, on Thursday, when he granted his first 30-day reprieve to a death-row inmate, the political world took note: was it an instance of a man running as a compassionate conservative trying to advertise his charitable nature? Mr. Bush's aides insisted there was nothing political about their candidate's decision, which paved the way for DNA tests to be administered to try to clarify the condemned man's guilt or innocence in a case of rape and murder. ''There's an opportunity to get more information now from that test,'' said Karen P. Hughes, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''So he feels it's the right thing to do.'' With the candidates' daily rollout of positions on all sorts of pressing issues -- last week Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore offered their takes on, among other things, mental health care, cancer treatment and land conservation -- voters can be forgiven for forgetting that the politicians still hold important day jobs that can change lives. Sometimes, the ceremonial aspects of their offices meld with the oratorical requirements of their campaigns, as they did for Mr. Gore on Monday, when he addressed a Memorial Day commemoration in Pennsylvania. Noting his own military service, which included a five-month stint in Vietnam as an Army reporter, Mr. Gore said, ''I know that my service doesn't in any way match that of the heroes we honor on this day.'' One of the more unusual aspects of the speech, delivered in a week in which polls showed the presidential contest to be neck-and-neck: not a single mention of Mr. Bush.
 Political analysts say Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush will probably not spend much time on Long Island, given that New York is considered a relatively safe state for Mr. Gore. But President Clinton already helped raise $500,000 for Mr. Forbes at a Manhattan fundraiser in April and Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, made an appearance at the Suffolk County Democratic Party's annual spring dinner.
 A New York Times editorial opined, ''Mr. Bush would withdraw loans and credits to Russia over its crackdown in Chechnya and abrogate the Antiballistic Missile Treaty.'' Though both steps would be ''dangerously confrontational'' in the newspaper's view, its use of withdraw regarding loans and abrogate about the treaty suggests that it would find the latter step more troubling. At the current Moscow summit, the word abrogate is used by the Clinton briefers only to say what they would not do and what the Republicans might do. The G.O.P. candidate, Governor Bush, last year used the harsh word to indicate what he might be prepared to do, but this year he has sidestepped the semantic trap, preferring withdraw.
 Gore Ally as Target  The new president of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America has given Al Gore a fund-raising advantage and given the Republicans a ready campaign target. Gore Ally as Target  The new president of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America has given Al Gore a fund-raising advantage and given the Republicans a ready campaign target.
 I was born and raised in the Getty Square area and while no one can argue that serious deterioration has occurred over the years, one can also argue that things are starting to change for the better. The Downtown Yonkers Management Association recently sponsored a sidewalk sale in the square that drew hundreds of people. DYMA also sponsored a martial arts demonstration by Papa San and the Burning Bush Dozo. Local restaurants brought wonderful outdoor grilled foods to lots of hungry patrons, and other merchants brought out specially priced merchandise.
 By the 1980's, Kenyan entrepreneurs had perfected the high-end safari. They were helped along by ''Out of Africa,'' which transformed the upper-crust safari into a booming business that, at its height in the late 80's and early 90's, brought in about a third of Kenya's hard-currency earnings. The ''product,'' as tourist operators call Kenya's natural offerings, had become an expensive fantasy that was part Happy Valley, part Hollywood and part Ralph Lauren: balloon rides at dawn over the wildebeest migration, followed by a Champagne breakfast, followed by a nap in a tent with a hot shower and flush toilet. Bush boutiques selling crisp cotton outfits of the sort that Meryl Streep/Karen Blixen wore when she had a farm in Africa. Nouvelle cuisine dinners served in candlelit mess tents by Masai waiters with impossibly high cheekbones. The smell of wood smoke, the perfume of frangipani and somewhere in the near distance -- the chance of white mischief.
 DISTRICT 4: Bushwick; third Wednesday of the month; next meeting June 21, 6 p.m., 195 Linden Street, near Wilson Avenue; Board chairwoman: Anna Gonzalez; District manager: Nadine Whitted LeBron; (718) 628-8400.
 Hotline Internet poll reports George W Bush leadingin 26 states, Al Gore in 13 (S) Gov. George W. Bush led in 26 states, worth 282 electoral votes. Vice President Al Gore led in 13 states, worth 178 electoral votes.
 FICTIONAL transsexual educators aren't what they used to be. Three decades ago, Gore Vidal's Myra Breckinridge was digging her high heels into Hollywood's solar plexus, using her teaching job at the Academy of Drama and Modeling to stamp out ''the last vestigial traces of traditional manhood.'' By contrast, Dana Stevens, the protagonist of Chris Bohjalian's ''Trans-Sister Radio,'' is a gentle film-and-lit professor in Vermont, a stand-up kind of guy and pure catnip to a divorced schoolteacher named Allison Banks.
