 Democratic National Committee television ad detailing Vice Pres Al Gore's views on prescription drug costs assessed; photo (M) In the first national commercial of the general election campaign, the Democratic National Committee is to begin running this 30-second spot in 15 states today, detailing Vice President Al Gore's views on the cost of prescription drugs. In the first national commercial of the general election campaign, the Democratic National Committee is to begin running this 30-second spot in 15 states today, detailing Vice President Al Gore's views on the cost of prescription drugs. ON THE SCREEN -- Shots of a 74-year-old Medicare recipient, Bob Darthez, followed by shots of Mr. Gore. Interspersed are graphics highlighting Mr. Gore's position on prescription drug benefits. Announcer: Every week, Bob Darthez has to afford his groceries and his prescription drugs. He's worked a lifetime, but now he's at the mercy of the big drug companies. They're using money and lobbyists to stop progress in Washington. Al Gore is taking them on. Fighting for a Medicare prescription drug benefit for seniors like Bob Darthez. Mr. Gore: People can't afford these ridiculously high prices for prescription medicines. When their doctor prescribes medicine for their health and well-being, they ought to be able to take it.
 ''We were able to do many more things on the shows than we expected to, which is what put them over budget,'' Ms. Nelson said. She added that  ''Trackers'' had been able to book musical guests like Marc Anthony and that ''Pure Oxygen'' had been able to interview guests like Vice President Al Gore.
 Democratic Party opens general election's first large-scale television advertising drive, paid for partly with unrestricted soft-money donations, with low-key commercial in which Vice Pres Al Gore expresses concern about high cost of prescription drugs; some Democratic leaders say ad is starting point of effort to give Gore needed boost before nominating convention; Republicans again score Gore for going back on what they call his pledge not to have party pay for its commercials with soft money (M) With a low-key commercial in which Vice President Al Gore expresses his concern about the cost of prescription drugs, the Democratic Party embarked today on the general election's first large-scale television advertising campaign, paid for partly with unrestricted soft-money donations. The spot, which is to begin running on Thursday in 52 media markets in 15 states, predominantly in the Midwest, South and Pacific West, was described by some Democratic leaders as the starting point of an effort to provide Mr. Gore with a needed boost before the nominating conventions this summer. With a low-key commercial in which Vice President Al Gore expresses his concern about the cost of prescription drugs, the Democratic Party embarked today on the general election's first large-scale television advertising campaign, paid for partly with unrestricted soft-money donations. The spot, which is to begin running on Thursday in 52 media markets in 15 states, predominantly in the Midwest, South and Pacific West, was described by some Democratic leaders as the starting point of an effort to provide Mr. Gore with a needed boost before the nominating conventions this summer. Republican officials used the release to renew their criticism of Mr. Gore for going back on what they called his promise not to have the Democratic Party pay for its commercials with soft money, the donations that corporations and unions can make to parties in unlimited amounts. And aides to Gov. George W. Bush suggested that the Democratic commercials would not go unanswered on the air for long. ''It's an opportunity for the R.N.C. to begin their campaign,'' a Bush adviser who demanded anonymity said of the Republican National Committee. ''I'm sure they will be engaging in short order.'' Edward G. Rendell, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said the effort would have the goals of reintroducing Mr. Gore to voters, highlighting Mr. Gore's contributions to the Clinton administration and taking a critical look at Mr. Bush's time in office in Texas. Mr. Rendell added that he and other Democrats thought it was necessary to try to counter what they viewed as a large volume of positive news coverage accorded in recent weeks to Mr. Bush, who has introduced a series of policy initiatives over the past two months, and is leading in some polls. The first commercial diverges little from the kinds of spots Mr. Gore's campaign ran during the primaries. It not only looks like earlier Gore spots, but the vice president's own image-making team, led by Robert Shrum and Carter Eskew, also produced the party's new commercial, officials said. ''They're using money and lobbyists to stop progress in Washington,'' the announcer says, adding, ''Al Gore is taking them on, fighting for a Medicare prescription drug benefit for seniors like Bob Darthez.'' The spot then cuts to an extended shot of Mr. Gore, speaking about his frustration with the high cost of medication. Republican officials reacted less to the content of the commercial than to the chance to criticize Mr. Gore anew for how it was financed. Under Federal Election Commission rules, the national parties pay for issue advertisements with 65 percent hard, or federal, money and 35 percent soft money. In a March 14 e-mail to Mr. Bush, the vice president had proposed that both campaigns renounce the use of soft money to pay for issue advertisements. After Mr. Bush rebuffed the proposal, Mr. Gore argued that he could not be bound by the challenge. Today, two Republican proponents of campaign finance reform, Senator Fred Thompson of Tennessee and Representative Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, met with reporters to add their criticisms of Mr. Gore. At a news conference here, a tape was played of a March 15 CNN interview in which Mr. Gore said he would not spend soft money on issue advertisements ''unless and until the Republican Party does.''
 Meanwhile, Vice President Al Gore, who has called New Jersey a must-win state for his presidential campaign, is expected to visit Trenton on Monday for a town hall meeting-type television show. And an official in Mr. Gore's New Jersey campaign said today that Mr. Gore also hoped to meet during his trip with Mr. Florio, Mr. Corzine and other Democratic leaders in an effort to  halt the divisive infighting between Mr. Florio's followers in South Jersey and Mr. Corzine's backers in the north.
 Letter from Lawrence J Fox (American Bar Association's Death Penalty Representation Project) applauds Gov George W Bush's decision to grant a condemned man a reprieve (June 2 article), but deplores fact that present jurisprudence in capital cases increasingly forecloses review of meritorious claims that the defendant should not be subjected to the ultimately punishment Re ''Bush Delays an Execution for the 1st Time in 5 Years'' (news article, June 2): Gov. George W. Bush granted a condemned man a reprieve. The man, Ricky McGinn, will now have a chance to prove his innocence. Re ''Bush Delays an Execution for the 1st Time in 5 Years'' (news article, June 2): Gov. George W. Bush granted a condemned man a reprieve. The man, Ricky McGinn, will now have a chance to prove his innocence.
 G.O.P. to Soften Tone At Philadelphia Convention  Advisers to Gov. George W. Bush say they are fashioning a Republican national convention that will emphasize policy over partisan vitriol and perhaps abandon the frequent practice of devoting one night to an attack on the opposition. Gore in California  Vice President Al Gore began a three-day West Coast campaign swing, making a fund-raising stop at a lunch with Native Americans.
 As for the future, Mr. Florio still has his law practice and a consulting business. He could always go back to teaching public policy, which is what he did at Rutgers University before he decided to run for the Senate. There is even talk he could be part of a Gore administration, if there is one.
 Gov George W Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, presumptive presidential nominees, decline comment on decision by federal Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson to break up Microsoft for violating antitrust laws; Congressional Republicans condemn ruling (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, the presumptive presidential nominees, declined to comment today on the court order to break Microsoft into two companies, but Congressional Republicans condemned the ruling. Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, who in February had expressed concerns that a breakup would threaten economic growth, said tonight that ''Governor Bush has said all along that it would not be appropriate for him to discuss the specifics of the case while it is still before the courts and Microsoft has indicated that they intend to appeal.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, the presumptive presidential nominees, declined to comment today on the court order to break Microsoft into two companies, but Congressional Republicans condemned the ruling. Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, who in February had expressed concerns that a breakup would threaten economic growth, said tonight that ''Governor Bush has said all along that it would not be appropriate for him to discuss the specifics of the case while it is still before the courts and Microsoft has indicated that they intend to appeal.'' Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said that ''since it's an ongoing legal matter, it would be inappropriate to comment.'' Mr. Hattaway declined to explain why silence was indicated in this case when Mr. Gore freely commented last month on the case involving political asylum for Elian Gonzalez, as has Mr. Bush. Their reluctance to comment reflected a sense among political professionals that the decision was unlikely to have much impact on the presidential election, except perhaps in Microsoft's home state, Washington, where it could hurt Mr. Gore. Still, many Microsoft officials are known to hope that if Mr. Bush is elected, his administration might be willing to settle the case on terms more generous to the company than the Clinton administration. Mr. Bush's spokesman, Mr. McClellan, avoided that issue, saying, ''As president, Governor Bush will fully enforce our antitrust laws to foster competition and innovation and protect consumers,'' but he declined to say whether that meant Mr. Bush would have supported government action against Microsoft.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, opening three-day West Coast campaign swing, raises nearly $1 million at three events, including $400,000 from group of American Indians at luncheon, Palm Springs, Calif; Edward G Rendell, Democratic National chairman, says fund-raisers are first events held exclusively with Indians; attendees comment; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore, ever on the prowl for money, has found a new source: American Indians. Beginning a three-day West Coast campaign swing, Mr. Gore raised nearly $1 million at three events today, including $400,000 from a group of Indians at a luncheon in Palm Springs at the Hilton Hotel. Vice President Al Gore, ever on the prowl for money, has found a new source: American Indians. Beginning a three-day West Coast campaign swing, Mr. Gore raised nearly $1 million at three events today, including $400,000 from a group of Indians at a luncheon in Palm Springs at the Hilton Hotel. Edward G. Rendell, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, which organized the events, said that although many Indians had attended fund-raisers for the party in the past, these were the first events held exclusively with Indians. Representatives of 16 tribes from the region -- there are more than 400 tribes across the country -- were in Palm Springs attending a tribal council meeting, and about 40 of them ate lunch with Mr. Gore. ''Al Gore has made a commitment to who we are as a people,'' Mary Ann Martin Andreas, chairwoman of the Morongo Band of Mission Indians from Banning, Calif., said in introducing the vice president. Barbara Gonzales Lyons of the Agua Caliente Band of Cahulla Indians, and vice chairwoman of the council, said, ''Vice President Al Gore has taken the time to meet and speak with us and candidate Bush has not,'' referring to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival. Other officials said that Indians  looked more favorably on Mr. Gore than on Mr. Bush because Mr. Bush had suggested that states be allowed to determine whether gambling could occur on Indian reservations. Without directly endorsing gambling, Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said of the Indians, ''We support their right to do what they want to do on their land.'' In a brief and solemn speech, Mr. Gore said that he recognized that the tribes' agenda -- including better health care and more economic opportunities -- had received too little attention. ''I don't wear rose-colored glasses,'' he said, ''but I think that it's important to take stock of the fact that we have made success in the direction of progress.'' ''I know -- I say that I know, but I don't know in the same way that you know -- the burden of history on Indian people,'' Mr. Gore said. He said he understood how ''travails as well as opportunities can cascade down through the generations, parents to children to grandchildren and on and on, to the seventh generation and then beyond.'' Indians traditionally refer to the seventh generation as a symbol of the future. But, he said, ''we have the ability to interrupt the cycle.'' Although Mr. Gore was collecting money from this group, he lamented doing so. ''I accept that there's a great irony in this process,'' he said, adding that he was determined to overhaul the campaign finance system. ''We need sweeping reforms to end the money chase,'' he said. Mr. Gore then flew here to a fund-raising reception at the home of Brad Krevoy, chief executive officer of the Motion Picture Corporation of America, where 100 people gave $1,000 each to the Democratic Party.
 GORE PLANS 'PROSPERITY TOUR'  Vice President Al Gore plans a ''progress and prosperity tour'' next week in which he will propose protecting Medicare by taking it off-budget, meaning he would remove it from annual budget fights. ''It's the next logical step to ensuring our long-term security,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. ''What Al Gore is going to be doing next week is talking about the choices that we face in terms of continuing economic strength.'' In contrast to President Clinton's ''poverty tour'' last year, the vice president's tour is intended to highlight the economic successes of the last eight years -- and by extension associate Mr. Gore with that success. The vice president said tonight at a fund-raiser in Los Angeles, ''progress and prosperity ought to be expected in this country.'' Mr. Gore's fly-around will include several of the crucial battleground states across the Rust Belt, including Ohio and Pennsylvania. Advisers said the tour was part of a long-planned strategy to emphasize the positive and optimistic aspects of Mr. Gore's candidacy. It is to coincide with the release of a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign this week to continue to redefine Mr. Gore's image. GORE PLANS 'PROSPERITY TOUR'  Vice President Al Gore plans a ''progress and prosperity tour'' next week in which he will propose protecting Medicare by taking it off-budget, meaning he would remove it from annual budget fights. ''It's the next logical step to ensuring our long-term security,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. ''What Al Gore is going to be doing next week is talking about the choices that we face in terms of continuing economic strength.'' In contrast to President Clinton's ''poverty tour'' last year, the vice president's tour is intended to highlight the economic successes of the last eight years -- and by extension associate Mr. Gore with that success. The vice president said tonight at a fund-raiser in Los Angeles, ''progress and prosperity ought to be expected in this country.'' Mr. Gore's fly-around will include several of the crucial battleground states across the Rust Belt, including Ohio and Pennsylvania. Advisers said the tour was part of a long-planned strategy to emphasize the positive and optimistic aspects of Mr. Gore's candidacy. It is to coincide with the release of a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign this week to continue to redefine Mr. Gore's image. FORD OFFERS BUSH ADVICE  Former President Gerald R. Ford says Gov. George W. Bush should consider picking an abortion-rights advocate as his running mate. Such a choice, he contends,  could be the difference between winning and losing a close race. ''We need a team that reflects the broadest possible spectrum of the Republican philosophy, which means somebody who is pro-choice, for example, or at least is more so than some Republicans would like,'' Mr. Ford said Monday in a speech at the National Press Club in Washington. ''To me, freedom means nothing if not the freedom to choose,'' he said. ''As Republicans, as conservatives, we regard life as very, very sacred. That's why we believe the individual conscience and the right to choose is a major, major factor in how we should live and how our country should survive.''
 Karen P Hughes and other aides to Gov George W Bush, hoping to preserve upbeat tone that has served them well, say they plan Republican convention that will stress policy over partisan vitriol, interviews; want mostly postive, sustained focus on exalting Bush and his policies and oppose devoting one night to attacking Vice Pres Al Gore; favor giving Gen Colin L Powell and Sen John McCain prominent speaking roles on different nights to maximize television coverage; Bush and aides will discuss plan at retreat set for Kennebunkport, Me (M) Hoping to preserve and perpetuate an upbeat tone that has served them well over the last several months, advisers to Gov. George W. Bush say they are fashioning a party convention that will emphasize policy over partisan vitriol and perhaps abandon the frequent practice of devoting one night to an attack on the opposition. They say they want the second of the four nights, which has often been reserved for such sniping, to adhere to a mostly positive, sustained focus on exalting Governor Bush rather than eviscerating Vice President Al Gore. They want every night to underline a different set or area of Mr. Bush's substantive proposals. Hoping to preserve and perpetuate an upbeat tone that has served them well over the last several months, advisers to Gov. George W. Bush say they are fashioning a party convention that will emphasize policy over partisan vitriol and perhaps abandon the frequent practice of devoting one night to an attack on the opposition. They say they want the second of the four nights, which has often been reserved for such sniping, to adhere to a mostly positive, sustained focus on exalting Governor Bush rather than eviscerating Vice President Al Gore. They want every night to underline a different set or area of Mr. Bush's substantive proposals. These sorts of issues will be a primary focus at a retreat Mr. Bush and his aides are taking starting this weekend at his parents' compound in Kennebunkport, Me., as the campaign increasingly turns its attention to the convention, which begins in Philadelphia at the end of July. And what is most striking about their plans, at least as they were described in interviews with several of Mr. Bush's advisers over the last few days, is the campaign's stated desire to avoid harsh attacks and to try to make the intrinsically partisan proceedings seem less so. ''We expect it to be a somewhat different convention,'' Karen P. Hughes, the Bush campaigns director of communications, said in an interview here today. ''There will not be the traditional Tuesday night attack night at this convention. Each night will have a positive discussion of Governor Bush's proposals.'' Of course, tone is relative, and often in the ear of the beholder, and Ms. Hughes and other advisers were careful to say that the convention would still have a place for critical evaluations of Mr. Gore's record and proposals. Another adviser said the convention shared the same goal that the campaign had pursued ever since Mr. Bush effectively sealed the Republican nomination in mid-March: namely, to convince voters that the Texas governor was ''a different kind of Republican.'' Ed Gillespie, an adviser to the Bush campaign who is helping organize the convention, said that this time around, ''We're going to continue to emphasize what Governor Bush is for, and I don't know that there's time left over for the kinds of bitter attacks that we've seen from both parties' conventions in the past.'' ''But there are differences between the two candidates,'' Mr. Gillespie said, referring to Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. ''And you can't necessarily point out what they are without talking about the vice president.'' The convention, in other words, will walk a fine oratorical line, several advisers said. It will take equal care, they said, in the way it presents former President George Bush, whose position as the last Republican to reside in the White House makes him a compelling figure but whose presence could also remind voters of the advantages that helped get his son to this point. Along the lines of making the event seem less explicitly partisan, one adviser said, the convention may include some featured speakers who are not politicians but rather people who are grappling, in their professional or personal lives, with the very issues that Mr. Bush has discussed. The Bush campaign is making its plans for this year's event with the belief that both parties' conventions may matter more than in previous years, for the simple if seemingly unrelated fact that the Summer Olympics will occur so much later than usual. As a result, the television networks may pay little heed to politics for much of September, and the impressions that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore create at their respective conventions may linger longer, unchallenged by new information, in voters' minds. Various officials with the Bush campaign have been plotting convention strategy for months, but Ms. Hughes said that the gathering of senior advisers in Kennebunkport, where Mr. Bush will head late Friday so that he can visit his parents and join his relatives in celebrating the 75th birthday of his mother, Barbara Bush, will mark the first time the campaign's senior decision makers have paid such close, vigorous attention to the coming event. Those present, in addition to Ms. Hughes and Mr. Bush, will include Karl Rove, the campaign's chief strategist, Josh Bolten, the campaign's policy director, and Michael Gerson, the chief speechwriter. Mr. Bush will see the first full draft of a proposed convention speech that Mr. Gerson has spent much of the last month preparing. Mr. Bush's advisers said that they were trying to plan the convention less as a four-day event than as a 12- or 16-day one, with a preceding schedule of appearances and announcements for Mr. Bush that would build to the actual proceedings in Philadelphia. They said that they had not yet decided when they would announce Mr. Bush's vice presidential selection, and that he was not close to making a final selection yet. One aide said that each night of the convention might come under a different ''umbrella theme,'' like education or Social Security or America's role and stature in the world, that would allow for a summary of various proposals Mr. Bush has made.
