 Correction of June 4 article about Fred Baron, incoming president of Association of Trial Lawyers and fund-raiser for Vice Pres Al Gore An article on Sunday about Fred Baron, the incoming president of the Association of Trial Lawyers and a fund-raiser for Vice President Al Gore, misspelled the surname of Gov. George W. Bush's adviser on tort reform, who has criticized Mr. Baron. He is Walter Olson, not Olsen. An article on Sunday about Fred Baron, the incoming president of the Association of Trial Lawyers and a fund-raiser for Vice President Al Gore, misspelled the surname of Gov. George W. Bush's adviser on tort reform, who has criticized Mr. Baron. He is Walter Olson, not Olsen.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, wife Tipper Gore and television personality Rosie O'Donnell visit Children's All Day School in Manhattan, where Gore announces new proposals on day care, including tax cuts and grants to help make child care better and more affordable; center's tuition for children up to three years old is $15,200 annually; photo (S) Still, Ms. O'Donnell says she had a crummy childhood, and she vowed to herself that if she was ever to ''get famous, like Barbra Streisand,'' she would dedicate herself to child advocacy, which is what she did yesterday with Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper. Only about 10 percent of the 85 children at this center receive scholarship assistance. And Ms. O'Donnell is hardly typical of most parents. But Mr. Gore used both today to promote his ''family agenda,'' proposing tax cuts and grants to help make child care better and more affordable. Day care has become one of the most pressing issues -- and serious expenses -- for young families. One hundred years ago, Mr. Gore said, only 2 of 10 mothers worked outside the home; today nearly 8 in 10 do, and nearly 13 million American children spend at least part of their days being cared for by someone other than their parents. Scrunched into the corner of a playroom, Mr. Gore, flanked by Ms. O'Donnell and Mrs. Gore, announced  steps he would take as president, a $38 billion package over 10 years. Mr. Gore also said he would provide $500 in tax relief for parents who stay at home with infants. He would allow such parents with children under the age of 1 to claim $500 in expenses. He also said he would expand the Family and Medical Leave Act to businesses with fewer than 25 employees. He said he would make the existing child care tax credit refundable. Now, a family of four with an income of less than $25,000 cannot claim tax credit for child care costs because they pay no tax. Mr. Gore said that by making the child care tax credit refundable, such families could receive up to $2,400. He also said he would increase the amount of child care expenses that families could write off. Now, families can claim 30 percent of the costs. Mr. Gore said he would raise that to half of a family's total costs for child care. This would affect about 4.4 million families. Mr. Gore promoted his proposal all day, both at the child care center and in a half-dozen satellite interviews with television stations.  ''Working parents have a hard time balancing work and family,'' he told WTXL-TV, the ABC affiliate in Tallahassee, Fla.
 The new policy, recommended by the National Academy of Sciences and strongly advocated by Vice President Al Gore, applies to treatments for all diseases and disabilities, not just cancer, as in some legislation pending in Congress. In an interview this evening, Mr.  Gore said: ''Exciting new discoveries are occurring almost weekly. We can't afford that kind of time lag for clinical trials. Speeding up enrollment can accelerate the discovery and use of cost-saving, life-saving new therapies.''
 The last time we communed in this particular space, I was holed up in Woodstock, legs crossed, caressing my whiskers, feigning interest in the New Jersey job. Sorry, but Lewis Katz should have known that Phil Jackson does not do Bennigan's, and when my old friend, Gumby, somehow survived over at the Garden, my career path came down to the Lakers or bringing Big Chief's triangle to Bill Bradley's inner circle and screening Al Gore out of the Democratic nomination. The last time we communed in this particular space, I was holed up in Woodstock, legs crossed, caressing my whiskers, feigning interest in the New Jersey job. Sorry, but Lewis Katz should have known that Phil Jackson does not do Bennigan's, and when my old friend, Gumby, somehow survived over at the Garden, my career path came down to the Lakers or bringing Big Chief's triangle to Bill Bradley's inner circle and screening Al Gore out of the Democratic nomination.
 Democrat Ad Effort for Gore  The Democratic Party said it was undertaking a $25 million television campaign to ''redefine'' Vice President Al Gore. Breaking with Mr. Gore's own proposal to ban the use of unrestricted contributions to pay for advertising, officials said soft money would cover part of the costs. Mr. Gore proposed $38 billion in incentives and tax breaks to improve child care nationwide.
 Editorial comments on decision by Texas Gov George W Bush to postpone execution of convicted killer Ricky Nolen McGinn and on emergence of capital punishment as potential issue in 2000 presidential race (M) The advent of modern DNA technology that can often prove with certainty the guilt or innocence of people convicted of serious crimes has heightened public concern about the fallibility of the criminal justice system, causing a dramatic shift in the nation's debate over capital punishment. Eight years ago Bill Clinton, then the governor of Arkansas, flew home in the midst of his presidential campaign to approve the execution of a man so brain-damaged that he saved the dessert from his final meal to eat later. It was considered good politics at that time to impose the maximum penalty on criminals. Last week, reflecting the new dynamic, Gov. George W. Bush postponed the execution of a convicted killer in Texas named Ricky Nolen McGinn to allow DNA testing the death-row inmate contends will establish his innocence. The advent of modern DNA technology that can often prove with certainty the guilt or innocence of people convicted of serious crimes has heightened public concern about the fallibility of the criminal justice system, causing a dramatic shift in the nation's debate over capital punishment. Eight years ago Bill Clinton, then the governor of Arkansas, flew home in the midst of his presidential campaign to approve the execution of a man so brain-damaged that he saved the dessert from his final meal to eat later. It was considered good politics at that time to impose the maximum penalty on criminals. Last week, reflecting the new dynamic, Gov. George W. Bush postponed the execution of a convicted killer in Texas named Ricky Nolen McGinn to allow DNA testing the death-row inmate contends will establish his innocence. In the McGinn case, the Bush campaign said the governor's rare decision to slow down, if only temporarily, the fast-paced grinding of Texas' conveyor-belt death penalty system was made in the interest of justice, not politics. But in granting the reprieve -- his first in five years -- Mr. Bush was plainly hoping to appeal to moderate voters for whom Texas' troubling pattern of questionable convictions and executions could pose an issue in the fall. He was also hoping to shift attention away from his casual assertion last month that every person put to death in Texas under his watch was guilty and had full access to the courts, a confidence that even many Bush supporters do not share. As governor, Mr. Bush has presided over 131 executions -- far more than any other state -- creating the need for a speedy makeover that better fits the presidential image of a ''compassionate conservative'' that he wants to convey. But if Mr. Bush is sincere about wanting to ensure justice, he  should follow Mr. Ryan's lead in declaring a moratorium on executions.
 But the White House has been divided over what to do about the Lome accord and Mr. Sankoh. Now Mr. Gregg -- a leading supporter of the presidential campaign of George W. Bush -- has tipped the balance toward a clearer rejection of the rebels and their role in Sierra Leone, some administration officials said.
 Ads Seek to Redefine Gore  The Democrats are launching a 10-week, $25 million television advertising campaign to redefine Vice President Al Gore.
 Mr. Thompson's message this week was not unexpected, in part because Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, has repeatedly said that he wants no changes in the platform language on abortion. That plank calls for the outlawing of abortion, without exceptions, and the appointment of judges ''who respect traditional family values and the sanctity of innocent human life.'' Ari Fleischer, a campaign spokesman, said Mr. Bush ''views the platform as a grass-roots document reflecting the views of the party as a whole, and he does not seek to make any changes to the abortion language.'' Still, Mr. Bush has himself declined to embrace a litmus test for appointments to the court and has indicated he is considering supporters of abortion rights as potential running mates. And the governor's view on abortion, Mr. Fleischer said,  ''is pro-life, with the exception of rape, incest or if the life of the mother is at stake.''
 But in one memorandum by Louis J. Freeh, the F.B.I. director, he cautioned Ms. Reno that the Justice Department had been blind to ''reliable evidence'' uncovered by investigators that Mr. Freeh said contradicted Vice President Al Gore's statements about fund-raising. Mr. Freeh's Nov. 24, 1997, memorandum, written by staff members at his request, urged Ms. Reno to refer the finance matter related to Mr. Gore to an independent counsel. In his memorandum, Mr. Freeh said the F.B.I. agents on the case had wanted to investigate a ''core group'' of senior administration officials, including Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore. That strategy, Mr. Freeh said, was based ''on a theory that most of the alleged campaign abuses flowed, directly or indirectly, from the all-out effort by the White House and the D.N.C. to raise money.''
 Democratic Party, in first major advertising offensive of general election, will begin 10-week, $25 million television campaign that will 'redefine' Vice Pres Al Gore and emphasize credit he deserves for nation's successes of past seven years; will break with Gore's proposal to ban use of soft money on advertising by using such contributions to help cover costs; Edward G Rendell, general chairman of Democratic National Committee, says Gore's proposal was moot because Republican candidate Gov George W Bush had rejected it (M) In the first major advertising offensive of the general election, the Democratic Party said it would begin a 10-week, $25 million television campaign this week that would ''redefine'' Vice President Al Gore and emphasize the credit he deserved for the nation's successes in the past seven years. In announcing plans to use the soft-money contributions to help cover the cost of the commercials, Democratic officials are breaking with Mr. Gore's own proposal to ban the use of unrestricted soft money on advertising. In the first major advertising offensive of the general election, the Democratic Party said it would begin a 10-week, $25 million television campaign this week that would ''redefine'' Vice President Al Gore and emphasize the credit he deserved for the nation's successes in the past seven years. In announcing plans to use the soft-money contributions to help cover the cost of the commercials, Democratic officials are breaking with Mr. Gore's own proposal to ban the use of unrestricted soft money on advertising. Edward G. Rendell, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said Mr. Gore's proposal to ban soft money in issue advertising, made to Gov. George W. Bush in an e-mail message on March 14, was moot because Mr. Bush had rejected the idea. The commercials come at a time when Mr. Bush has been running ahead of Mr. Gore in some polls. In recent weeks some Democrats have become concerned about how deftly Mr. Bush has been able to dictate the agenda and tone of the campaign through a series of policy initiatives on everything from literacy to missile defense. The advertising blitz also occurs amid a furious back-and-forth between Republicans and Democrats over whether Mr. Gore is reneging on his proposal to ban commercials paid for with soft money. The term applies to the unrestricted contributions made to the parties by unions, corporations and individuals that have come under attack from Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and other supporters of campaign finance reform. Democrats insisted the decision to run the commercials was not the result of panic over Mr. Bush's strong showing in the polls, but rather part of a long-term strategy. The action, said an official who demanded anonymity, ''reflects how much money you have and how many states you need to buy.'' Under Federal Election Commission guidelines, the national parties can finance issue advertisements with 65 percent hard, or federal, money and 35 percent soft money. What makes these particular commercials significant is Mr. Gore's challenge to Mr. Bush. ''I challenge you to accept my proposal that we both reject the use of soft money to run issue ads,'' Mr. Gore wrote. ''I will take the first step by requesting the Democratic National Committee not to run any issue ads paid for by soft money unless and until the Republican Party uses money for advertising. By opting to be the first to use the commercials, Mr. Gore is running the risk of looking as if he was never serious about campaign finance reform. And Mr. Bush and other Republicans tried to reinforce that impression yesterday. ''You think he was serious about saying that they are not going to spend soft money?'' Mr. Bush asked at a news conference in Augusta, Ga. ''Of course they are; this is a guy that said he's for campaign funding reform in the hopes that we forget that he went to a Buddhist temple to raise money.'' The Bush campaign has tried to portray Mr. Gore's offer as a promise. ''If Al Gore breaks his word by airing these ads, it's another reminder that the vice president does not hold any convictions that can't easily be changed,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. But Mr. Rendell and other Democrats have taken pains to emphasize that the offer was a challenge, not a promise. They added that the Republicans violated the spirit of the overture almost immediately, with commercials by obscure special interest groups in California and the District of Columbia that attacked Mr. Gore. One group, Shape the Debate, formed by associates of Pete Wilson, the former governor and a Republican, ran a $1.5 million campaign in California in which Mr. Gore was mocked in a pseudo game show called Hypocrisy. ''If there is anyone at the R.N.C. who believes that Governor Wilson would have done this without checking with the Bush campaign,'' Mr. Rendell and Joe Andrew, the national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, wrote in a letter yesterday to the Republican National Committee, ''please give me their names; we have a bridge in Brooklyn we want to sell them.'' ''Gore doesn't seem to be getting the credit he deserves,'' Mr. Rendell said. ''We're going to try to remind people of the contrast between then and now, and that it's not an accident, it's the result of deliberate action.'' Later commercials will concentrate on Mr. Bush's record.
 A PLEDGE FOR VETERANS -- Gov. George W. Bush used a D-Day celebration yesterday to make a promise to the nation's veterans, especially those of World War II. If he is elected president, he said, he will revamp the ''bureaucratic'' Department of Veterans Affairs and push through improvements in Social Security to preserve benefits for ''our greatest generation.'' ''A grateful nation keeps faith with the old soldier,'' Mr. Bush said in Augusta, Ga., on the 56th anniversary of the Normandy landing. ''Too often in Washington those who served in the military are remembered only on Veterans Day.'' He  said that this week, he would recommend changes in how Veterans Affairs operates. He also called Social Security a solemn commitment to the World War II generation and accused Vice President Al Gore of using ''scare tactics'' in criticizing his plans. With the retirement of the baby boom generation threatening the solvency of Social Security, Mr. Bush has called for part of the payroll tax of younger workers to be diverted to individual accounts that could be invested in the market. Yesterday in Washington, opponents of such a plan released a study saying that creating such accounts would require deep cuts in the guaranteed Social Security benefit. A PLEDGE FOR VETERANS -- Gov. George W. Bush used a D-Day celebration yesterday to make a promise to the nation's veterans, especially those of World War II. If he is elected president, he said, he will revamp the ''bureaucratic'' Department of Veterans Affairs and push through improvements in Social Security to preserve benefits for ''our greatest generation.'' ''A grateful nation keeps faith with the old soldier,'' Mr. Bush said in Augusta, Ga., on the 56th anniversary of the Normandy landing. ''Too often in Washington those who served in the military are remembered only on Veterans Day.'' He  said that this week, he would recommend changes in how Veterans Affairs operates. He also called Social Security a solemn commitment to the World War II generation and accused Vice President Al Gore of using ''scare tactics'' in criticizing his plans. With the retirement of the baby boom generation threatening the solvency of Social Security, Mr. Bush has called for part of the payroll tax of younger workers to be diverted to individual accounts that could be invested in the market. Yesterday in Washington, opponents of such a plan released a study saying that creating such accounts would require deep cuts in the guaranteed Social Security benefit. WHAT OPPONENT? -- Al Gore might be understandably obsessed with George W. Bush, given that the two men are battling for the big prize. But these days, the vice president is not even mentioning the Texas governor's name. In fact, the name ''Bush'' has not passed Mr. Gore's lips since May 26, at least in public. Yesterday, during an interview with WSEE-TV, the CBS affiliate in Erie, Pa., Mr. Gore was asked what he thought of Tom Ridge, the Pennsylvania governor and much-rumored running mate for Mr. Bush. ''I'm certainly not going to get involved in speculating on what the other side might do,'' he said. Later, in an interview with WIFR-TV, the CBS affiliate in Rockford, Ill., he was asked about debating Mr. Bush at the site of one of the Lincoln-Douglas debates. Mr. Gore accepted and added: ''I hope you can convince the other fellow.'' Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary, says that Mr. Bush's name will no doubt recur in the future, but for now, he says, Mr. Gore will appear to be in this race all by himself, ''to guarantee that the focus stays where it should be -- on Al Gore and his agenda.'' A VOTE FOR GORE -- Former Senator Bill Bradley, who largely dropped out of sight after ending his quest for the Democratic presidential nomination on March 9, resurfaced yesterday at his polling place in Montclair, N.J., to cast a primary ballot for his old rival, Al Gore. When he left the race, Mr. Bradley said he would support Mr. Gore, but when reporters pressed him about whether that was an endorsement, he replied, somewhat enigmatically, ''It's your call.'' That response prompted the Republican National Committee to keep a running count of the number of days ''since Bill Bradley refused to endorse Gore.'' Yesterday, Mr. Bradley faced the endorsement question again. ''I said I'd give him my full support, and that's what I will do,'' he told The Associated Press, adding that he intended to campaign in coming months for Democratic candidates. Including Mr. Gore? ''Uh, that's . . . sure, yeah, by all means,'' he replied. Might there be a need for another statement of his support for Mr. Gore? ''I don't think so,'' Mr. Bradley replied.
 Letter from Thom Kleiner, town supervisor of Orangetown, NY, deplores Gov George W Bush's evident disdain for knowledge and intellectualism (June 4 article) George W. Bush's evident disdain for knowledge and intellectualism (''Bush's Odd Pitch: Ignorance Is Bliss,'' Political Memo, June 4) is troubling. No one wants a president who speaks so loftily that he loses our attention. But the president has an obligation to promote knowledge and learning unambiguously. George W. Bush's evident disdain for knowledge and intellectualism (''Bush's Odd Pitch: Ignorance Is Bliss,'' Political Memo, June 4) is troubling. No one wants a president who speaks so loftily that he loses our attention. But the president has an obligation to promote knowledge and learning unambiguously.
 THE business plan has not changed much in the nearly 30 years since Wright Gore Jr. began working for his family's shrimp supply company, Western Seafood. Shrimpers working the Gulf of Mexico sell their catch to Western, which processes and packages it. A broker for Western then solicits customers, mostly wholesalers from the Eastern seaboard, who, in turn, sell to restaurants, hotels and other retailers. Eventually, Mr. Gore's shrimp wind up as appetizers in Manhattan and Chicago. THE business plan has not changed much in the nearly 30 years since Wright Gore Jr. began working for his family's shrimp supply company, Western Seafood. Shrimpers working the Gulf of Mexico sell their catch to Western, which processes and packages it. A broker for Western then solicits customers, mostly wholesalers from the Eastern seaboard, who, in turn, sell to restaurants, hotels and other retailers. Eventually, Mr. Gore's shrimp wind up as appetizers in Manhattan and Chicago. But about 18 months ago, representatives from an Internet company, Gofish.com, sat on the couch in Mr. Gore's office here on the Gulf Coast and promised a revolution in the fish business. ''They walked in here and told us that was going to be the thing of the future,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The future hasn't come quite as quickly as they anticipated. But they are enthusiastic.'' Inside his office, Mr. Gore can peruse seafood prices on the Internet and look through his window and see the rusted shrimp trawlers docked near the mouth of the Brazos River not far from the Gulf. Mr. Gore acknowledges he is uncertain how effective online exchanges will be. His company supplies about five million pounds of shrimp a year, and he considers his company's reputation an important attribute. By contrast, Mr. Gore joked gently, ''The broker made quite a few sales this week, though.'' Still, Mr. Gore also understands that the worst mistake he can make is failing to anticipate the future. So, like more and more seafood company executives, he is cautiously entering cyberspace. ''I don't want to leave any rock unturned,'' he said. ''I don't intend for this or anything else to run off and leave me if I can help it.''
