 Political Memo: Republicans are trying to paint Vice Pres Al Gore as hypopcrite, arguing that Democrats' hint that they may begin television advertising campaign on his behalf violates Gore's alleged promise not to use 'issue ads' paid for with soft money donations; photos (M) Two and a half months ago, flush with victory in the primaries and eager to be seen as taking the high road, Vice President Al Gore sent an e-mail message to Gov. George W. Bush, proposing a ban on ''issue ads'' paid for with unregulated soft money. Mr. Bush, who had raised a staggering $70 million in his primary campaign, dismissed the challenge as a ploy. But now, with Democrats dropping hints that they may soon begin a television advertising campaign on behalf of Mr. Gore, Republicans are eager to hoist the vice president on his own petard. Two and a half months ago, flush with victory in the primaries and eager to be seen as taking the high road, Vice President Al Gore sent an e-mail message to Gov. George W. Bush, proposing a ban on ''issue ads'' paid for with unregulated soft money. Mr. Bush, who had raised a staggering $70 million in his primary campaign, dismissed the challenge as a ploy. But now, with Democrats dropping hints that they may soon begin a television advertising campaign on behalf of Mr. Gore, Republicans are eager to hoist the vice president on his own petard. Asserting that Mr. Gore's message amounted to a promise not to use soft money, the Republicans are trying to paint Mr. Gore as a hypocrite even before the Democrats' first commercial hits the airwaves. In a June 1 letter to Ed Rendell, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Jim Nicholson, the Republican national chairman, suggested that Democrats were poised to renege on the promise because Mr. Bush has been running ahead of Mr. Gore in some polls. ''I'd ask you to tell the truth: Al Gore meant to keep his pledge only so long as it was beneficial to him politically,'' Mr. Nicholson wrote. ''That's why he's changed his mind now that he's fallen in the polls. That's why the D.N.C. is looking for any excuse, any loophole, any fine print to serve as justification for his clear intention to violate another pledge.'' In fact, Democratic officials point out, obscure groups with ties to the Republican Party are already running commercials in California and Washington, D.C., that are intended to tar Mr. Gore. ''The bottom line here is that both the Bush campaign and the Gore campaign are planning to spend tens of millions of dollars on these illicit soft money ads in this election,'' said Fred Wertheimer, president of Democracy 21, a Washington group that advocates campaign finance reform. ''I don't know that voters should care about this game of 'got you,' but they should deeply care about the huge amounts of six-figure campaign contributions that in the end are going to be spent.'' It was Mr. Gore, though, who set the game in motion with his e-mail message to Mr. Bush on March 14. ''I challenge you to accept my proposal that we both reject the use of soft money to run issue ads,'' Mr. Gore wrote. ''I will take the first step by requesting the Democratic National Committee not to run any issue ads paid for by soft money unless and until the Republican Party uses money for advertising.'' ''In a period when Dole was low on cash,'' said Nelson Warfield, a Republican consultant who served as press secretary for the Dole campaign, ''the Clinton-Gore team was able to define him as an extremist, when in fact Dole was a mainstream Republican.'' This year, the large-scale use of party-sponsored commercials has yet to occur. But Republican officials are trying to hold Mr. Gore accountable for his offer, saying that in the e-mail message and in some slightly stronger statements on TV news programs, Mr. Gore has made a pledge not to use soft money. But aides to Mr. Gore said that just as in the case of a challenge to former Senator Bill Bradley to forgo commercials during the primaries, Mr. Gore's proposal was contingent on an agreement with his opponent. ''Anyone who saw Bush's response to the Gore challenge knows the Bush campaign has not taken it seriously from Day 1,'' said Chris Lehane, press secretary for the Gore campaign. ''I think for Jim Nicholson to suddenly be trying to get on the moral high ground is laughable.'' Republicans clearly want Mr. Gore to pay a political price should the Democratic National Committee begin a blitz of issue advertising. ''From Gore's standpoint,'' Mr. Wertheimer said, ''this is not a pledge he should have made, and obviously, it was made to score points. Now Bush is trying to use it to score points of his own.'' Democrats contend that Mr. Bush and his allies long ago violated the spirit of Mr. Gore's overture. They say that over the last several weeks, the Republicans have made clear that their general-election television strategy will be to have the Bush campaign run upbeat commercials while leaving the attack advertising in the hands of little-known interest groups. (More established organizations, like the Sierra Club and the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, are running spots attacking Mr. Bush.) Democrats point, for example, to a recent $1.5 million anti-Gore campaign on television in California by Shape the Debate, a group formed by associates of Pete Wilson, the former governor and a Republican, and to a more recent series of commercials being run on cable television in Washington. Sponsored by an organization called the Coalition to Protect Americans Now, the latest 30-second commercial, unveiled this week, criticizes the administration's handling of America's nuclear weapons. ''Truman stood up to the Kremlin and saved Berlin,'' an announcer says. ''J.F.K. stared down Soviet missiles in Cuba. Reagan toppled a Soviet wall and empire. But Clinton and Gore would give the Kremlin veto power over American missile defenses.'' Jennifer Backus, a Democratic National Committee spokeswoman, said the commercials were part of a ''stealth campaign'' by Republicans to attack Mr. Gore without having to reveal the source of the money used to pay for the advertisements. ''The organization is in no way connected to the Bush campaign,'' Mr. Gaffney said. ''People that I am very close to and have worked with are advising Bush. But that is in no way translated into any kind of coordination.''
 Now here comes the strange part. Putin must know the substantial difference in approach between candidates Al Gore and George W. Bush. Gore goes along with Clinton and presumably will embrace his ABM-Start III linkage. Bush wants a free hand with a limited anti-missile system and would set our offensive missiles at a level to suit our deterrent needs, inviting the Russians to reciprocate. Huge policy difference. Did he mean to ad-lib that? Was he misinterpreted? Having won his linkage with Clinton-Gore, is the inexperienced Putin willing to toss that advantage aside with Bush? Is a puzzlement.
 Turning Ad Issue Back on Gore  Democrats are hinting that they may soon begin an advertising campaign on behalf of Vice President Al Gore -- just two and a half months after Mr. Gore proposed a ban on such ''issue ads'' paid for with unregulated soft money. And the Republicans are trying to paint Mr. Gore as a hypocrite even before the first commercial hits the airwaves. Gore Agrees to Rental Repairs  Tenants of a house owned by Vice President Al Gore say their repeated complaints about overflowing toilets and backed up sinks finally a drew a response when Mr. Gore called on Saturday to promise repairs. His response came after the tenants contacted a local television station.
 Though Mr. Clinton has only eight more months in office, that in itself does not necessarily preclude  progress on arms control or United States-Russian relations. President Reagan spent a large part of 1988, his last year in office, pressing for improvements in Washington's relations with Moscow and pushing arms control agreements. And just two weeks before Mr. Clinton's inauguration, President Bush signed the Start II treaty, calling for the most significant rollback yet in the formidable nuclear arsenal of the cold war.
 SIMON-William E. The National Council For Adoption, its board members, member agencies, member attorneys, and volunteers, extend deepest sympathy to the family of William E. Simon. With his late wife, Carol Girard Simon, he was an early and steadfast supporter of our mission, a fact recognized when he and Carol were inducted into the Adoption Hall of Fame, on our Tenth Aniversary in 1980, by then-Honorary Chair, Barbara Pierce Bush. He was a founding member and served until his passing on our National Honorary Board. With his wife, Carol, he set an example of enlightened, involved philanthropy and public policy advocacy for his family, friends, and associates. J. Peter Simon, with his wife, Janet, are active supporters and were also inducted into the Adoption Hall of Fame. Peter served with distinction for many years as Treasurer and Chairman of the Finance and Development Committee of our Board. Mary Simon Streep, with her husband Dana, were also inducted into the Adoption Hall of Fame. The entire family are supporters of our National Adoption Week tri-state event, Kids At Heart. William E. Simon, Jr. assisted in the California launch of our AIDS Orphan Adoption Project. Leigh Simon Porges and her sisters Aimee Simon Bloom, Julie Ann Simon Munro and Johanna Katrina Simon are likewise faithful supporters. In his later years, William Simon's personal expressions of his religious faith, his forthright defense of our causes in his related policy and philanthropic activities and his personal friendship were much appreciated. His greatest legacy are his and Carol's family-centered, philanthropically-sensitive children and grandchildren, who carry on William and Carol's traditions. Louis P. Stern, Board Chair William Pierce Founding President and CEO Washington, D.C. SIMON-William E. The National Council For Adoption, its board members, member agencies, member attorneys, and volunteers, extend deepest sympathy to the family of William E. Simon. With his late wife, Carol Girard Simon, he was an early and steadfast supporter of our mission, a fact recognized when he and Carol were inducted into the Adoption Hall of Fame, on our Tenth Aniversary in 1980, by then-Honorary Chair, Barbara Pierce Bush. He was a founding member and served until his passing on our National Honorary Board. With his wife, Carol, he set an example of enlightened, involved philanthropy and public policy advocacy for his family, friends, and associates. J. Peter Simon, with his wife, Janet, are active supporters and were also inducted into the Adoption Hall of Fame. Peter served with distinction for many years as Treasurer and Chairman of the Finance and Development Committee of our Board. Mary Simon Streep, with her husband Dana, were also inducted into the Adoption Hall of Fame. The entire family are supporters of our National Adoption Week tri-state event, Kids At Heart. William E. Simon, Jr. assisted in the California launch of our AIDS Orphan Adoption Project. Leigh Simon Porges and her sisters Aimee Simon Bloom, Julie Ann Simon Munro and Johanna Katrina Simon are likewise faithful supporters. In his later years, William Simon's personal expressions of his religious faith, his forthright defense of our causes in his related policy and philanthropic activities and his personal friendship were much appreciated. His greatest legacy are his and Carol's family-centered, philanthropically-sensitive children and grandchildren, who carry on William and Carol's traditions. Louis P. Stern, Board Chair William Pierce Founding President and CEO Washington, D.C.
 This spring, Florida Republicans proposed measures that would have given Gov. Jeb Bush and his conservative allies increased control over the State Supreme Court and over selection panels that review candidates for appointment to intermediate appeals courts.
 There are several reasons the Clinton administration approached the summit meeting with a sense of urgency. Unlike the Reagan or Bush administrations, the Clinton administration has yet to negotiate a landmark accord on strategic arms, and it is eager to add to its legacy. Another reason why a breakthrough does not seem near is that Russian officials know missile defense is a campaign issue. Even if they agree to Mr. Clinton's proposal, they may end up negotiating again with George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican candidate, who is promoting a far grander plan.
 Op-Ed article by Peter Neufeld and Barry Scheck, commenting on decision by Texas Gov George W Bush to grant death row inmate Ricky McGin temporary reprieve pending results of DNA tests, says this and other recent cases throw tiny wedge of light onto criminal justice system that needs to take unflinching look at growing evidence of error; says only criminal justice system exempts itself from accountability for its mistakes (M) When Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who had always denied pleas for reprieves from execution, finally granted one last week, he made the right call, acknowledging the importance of DNA evidence and the right of a condemned man to ask for testing. Whether or not political considerations of Mr. Bush's presidential campaign were at work, the prisoner, Ricky McGinn, now has time for the tests that might clear him of murder. When Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who had always denied pleas for reprieves from execution, finally granted one last week, he made the right call, acknowledging the importance of DNA evidence and the right of a condemned man to ask for testing. Whether or not political considerations of Mr. Bush's presidential campaign were at work, the prisoner, Ricky McGinn, now has time for the tests that might clear him of murder. Two other cases last week were far more revealing. In Virginia, Gov. James S. Gilmore III gave permission for advanced DNA testing of Earl Washington, who had already been moved off death row because earlier tests suggested he was innocent of rape and murder. And in Texas, A.B. Butler received a pardon from Governor Bush after spending the last 7 of his 16 years in prison fighting to get the tests that cleared him of kidnapping and rape.
 ''Winnie never lost her perspective; the money never changed her,'' said Marty Walzer, who owns the Pine Barn Inn in Danville, Pa. ''She was as comfortable with Mamie Eisenhower and Barbara Bush as she was with my baker. She was so accommodating to everyone, so genuine. I don't think she had an enemy.''
 Opponents of gun control have blocked efforts to enlarge the background checks to include purchases at gun shows. With Vice President Al Gore casting the tie-breaking vote, the Senate voted in 1999 to include gun shows, but the House deleted the requirement.
