 INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW  Twenty-two Senate Democrats jumped into the debate over Social Security yesterday, writing to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for more details on his proposal to create individual investment accounts ''so that the American public, elected officials and other policy makers can evaluate your proposal.'' The letter, circulated by Senators Charles E. Schumer of New York and Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota, asked questions intended to show some of the hard choices that might be involved in reshaping the retirement system. Among them: Would the government do anything to limit investment choices to minimize risk? Would the proposal cut Social Security benefits? Would the cuts have a disproportionate impact on women? ''We feel strongly that as we debate any change to our Social Security system, the public needs the full details of any proposals,'' the Democrats wrote. Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said Mr. Bush welcomed bipartisan input and supported a proposal by a bipartisan group of senators to have a commission study changes to the retirement system. KNOWING NOTHING, TELLING ALL  Gov. George W. Bush often revels in not being a know-it-all, but when Gov. Gary E. Johnson of New Mexico tried to join in that celebration on Wednesday, he may well have taken it just a tad too far. ''I'll tell you a story,'' Mr. Johnson said to scores of people who had turned out to meet Mr. Bush in Albuquerque. ''At one of these governors' conferences, George turns to me and says, 'What are they talking about?' I said, 'I don't know.' He said, 'You don't know a thing, do you?' And I said, 'Not one thing.' He said, 'Neither do I.' And we kind of high-fived. And my point here is -- is that -- when it comes to politics, it's really hard to find somebody who will rather admit -- or rather talk about -- the things they don't know and make that really evident.'' Mr. Bush has certainly been known to do that. INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW  Twenty-two Senate Democrats jumped into the debate over Social Security yesterday, writing to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for more details on his proposal to create individual investment accounts ''so that the American public, elected officials and other policy makers can evaluate your proposal.'' The letter, circulated by Senators Charles E. Schumer of New York and Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota, asked questions intended to show some of the hard choices that might be involved in reshaping the retirement system. Among them: Would the government do anything to limit investment choices to minimize risk? Would the proposal cut Social Security benefits? Would the cuts have a disproportionate impact on women? ''We feel strongly that as we debate any change to our Social Security system, the public needs the full details of any proposals,'' the Democrats wrote. Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said Mr. Bush welcomed bipartisan input and supported a proposal by a bipartisan group of senators to have a commission study changes to the retirement system. KNOWING NOTHING, TELLING ALL  Gov. George W. Bush often revels in not being a know-it-all, but when Gov. Gary E. Johnson of New Mexico tried to join in that celebration on Wednesday, he may well have taken it just a tad too far. ''I'll tell you a story,'' Mr. Johnson said to scores of people who had turned out to meet Mr. Bush in Albuquerque. ''At one of these governors' conferences, George turns to me and says, 'What are they talking about?' I said, 'I don't know.' He said, 'You don't know a thing, do you?' And I said, 'Not one thing.' He said, 'Neither do I.' And we kind of high-fived. And my point here is -- is that -- when it comes to politics, it's really hard to find somebody who will rather admit -- or rather talk about -- the things they don't know and make that really evident.'' Mr. Bush has certainly been known to do that.
 Tipper Gore, who has kept low profile during husband's presidential campaign, emerges for forum on mental health policy, sharing stage with husband, Friendship Heights, Md; has taken increasingly public role as mental health care advocate; comments on own battle with depression, interview; photo (M) After having kept a low profile on the campaign trail in recent months, Tipper Gore, the wife of Vice President Al Gore, emerged today in the kind of setting where she clearly feels most comfortable: a forum on mental health policy. Mrs. Gore has never seemed to relish life on the campaign trail, trying to maintain her privacy beyond the glare of the public spotlight trained on her husband. ''I think the way for people to understand me the best is for you to understand that I'm not really of the political milieu,'' she told a reporter last year. After having kept a low profile on the campaign trail in recent months, Tipper Gore, the wife of Vice President Al Gore, emerged today in the kind of setting where she clearly feels most comfortable: a forum on mental health policy. Mrs. Gore has never seemed to relish life on the campaign trail, trying to maintain her privacy beyond the glare of the public spotlight trained on her husband. ''I think the way for people to understand me the best is for you to understand that I'm not really of the political milieu,'' she told a reporter last year. But Mrs. Gore has also taken an increasingly public role as an advocate for mental health care, serving as an adviser to President Clinton and helping to organize the first White House Conference on Mental Health last year. That was a reference to Mrs. Gore's own battle with depression, which she disclosed in a newspaper article a year ago. In the article, Mrs. Gore said she had been treated for depression after the couple's 6-year-old son was severely injured in an automobile accident in 1989. In an interview, Mrs. Gore, who received a master's degree in psychology from Vanderbilt University, described the disclosure of her depression as a liberating experience. ''The way I've been treated differently,'' Mrs. Gore said, ''is people approaching me, being happy, being joyful and open, saying, 'Thank you, thank you.' '' Mrs. Gore's appearance today fit neatly into efforts by her husband's campaign this week to cast the vice president, who has come under criticism from some Democrats as overly negative on the stump, in a more positive, family-oriented light. ''This event's been planned for months,'' Mr. Gore said. Throughout the event, and then during the joint interview, the Gores were a picture of mutual solicitousness, stepping out of each other's way in answering questions and praising each other's commitment to the issue. ''You should know that I agree with everything she says,'' Mr. Gore said in the interview. Without missing a beat, Mrs. Gore remarked, ''But he sets the policy.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore calls for bill to require health insurance companies to provide children with mental health benefits comparable to coverage for physical ailments; appears with wife, Tipper, before group of mental health professionals and advocates, Friendship Heights, Md; pledges to make mental health care priority; outlines package of mental health programs (M) Vice President Al Gore called today for legislation that would require health insurance companies to provide children with mental health benefits comparable to coverage for physical ailments. Appearing alongside his wife, Tipper, before a group of mental health professionals and advocates in suburban Washington, Mr. Gore pledged to make mental health care a priority in his administration. He described his proposal for children as a first step toward eliminating disparities in coverage for adults. Vice President Al Gore called today for legislation that would require health insurance companies to provide children with mental health benefits comparable to coverage for physical ailments. Appearing alongside his wife, Tipper, before a group of mental health professionals and advocates in suburban Washington, Mr. Gore pledged to make mental health care a priority in his administration. He described his proposal for children as a first step toward eliminating disparities in coverage for adults. ''People still have insurance plans that actively discriminate against mental health,'' Mr. Gore said. ''They still don't recognize it as a treatable illness, just like diabetes or high blood pressure or heart disease.'' In an interview today, Mr. Gore suggested that he would support a version of that legislation, but focused only on children. ''We want to close any loopholes that allow insurers to shirk their obligations under the law,'' he said, without offering specifics. Mr. Gore's Republican presidential opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, signed legislation in Texas in 1997 requiring health insurers to provide coverage for mental disorders comparable to that for physical diseases. But Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the Texas governor has not said whether he would support similar federal legislation. Mr. Bartlett added, ''Governor Bush understands the importance of mental health parity.'' Opponents of Mr. Gore's proposal, including many business groups, argue that it would significantly increase the cost of health insurance, potentially causing some employers, particularly small ones, to drop their policies. Mr. Gore estimated that his plan for children would increase premiums by less than 1 percent, but the opponents said the increases could be much greater. Mental health advocates heralded Mr. Gore's proposal as a crucial step toward eliminating discrimination against the mentally ill. Mr. Gore refrained from criticizing Mr. Bush, or even mentioning him, at this morning's event. In sharp contrast to his gloomy attacks on Mr. Bush in recent weeks, Mr. Gore was upbeat, describing the times as exciting, optimistic and hopeful for people with mental illnesses. Mr. Gore said the shootings at Columbine High School last year showed that the federal government needed to help schools train teachers to identify mentally ill students and to hire mental health counselors. ''As Columbine taught us, we can't wait until tragedy strikes to reach out effectively to troubled young people and give them help and hope,'' he said.
 As Gov. George W. Bush and others have noted, there is a new world out there: the nuclear equation has changed radically. The challenge has expanded beyond maintaining  stability between two nuclear-armed superpowers. Arsenals in Russia and the United States may be reduced, but others, notably in China, will increase. Nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile technology will almost inevitably continue to spread to rogue states.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush's campaigns and parties are deluging press with negative e-mails about rivals; e-mail has ushered in new error of epistolary ease, letting campaigns fire at each other at will, all day long; sampling of recent e-mail messages; photo (M) ''Gore Coverup Revealed!'' read the headline on the e-mail message from Washington. The five-paragraph missive, beamed into electronic mailboxes of reporters across the country last week, was another swipe at Vice President Al Gore by the Republican National Committee. But it was not a  suggestion of political corruption or obstruction of justice that had prompted the official Republican bulletin. It was a report that Mr. Gore wore makeup. ''Gore Coverup Revealed!'' read the headline on the e-mail message from Washington. The five-paragraph missive, beamed into electronic mailboxes of reporters across the country last week, was another swipe at Vice President Al Gore by the Republican National Committee. But it was not a  suggestion of political corruption or obstruction of justice that had prompted the official Republican bulletin. It was a report that Mr. Gore wore makeup. ''This can't be Naomi Wolf's idea of an alpha male!'' the message quoted Jim Nicholson, the Republican national chairman, as having joked about a recent article in People magazine that said Mr. Gore used spray-on cosmetics. Hour by hour, the e-mail arrives like digital daggers from the candidates and their parties. Catty, pithy, weighty, gossipy, the messages materialize via the open cyberfaucet of the 2000 campaign. ''Bush's Million Mom Manipulation,'' began a message from the Democrats. ''Democrat Fat Cat Discriminates Against Those Who Flee Castro's Clutches,'' read one from the Republicans. ''New York Honor Guard Spat On at Clinton Nomination,'' read another. Only by extension is the target of the computer missives the American voter. The more immediate audience is the American journalist. ''Day 52: Reporters Held Hostage!'' screamed the headline of e-mail from the Republican National Committee in April. One of a series of such messages from the committee, it was intended to remind the press that the vice president had not held a news conference in 52 days. Under an illustration of political writers from Newsweek and The Washington Post in the stocks, it implored, ''Mr. Gore, please let these reporters go!'' Mr. Nicholson's alpha-male crack, for instance, made it onto the Perspectives page of the current issue of Newsweek, and the ''reporters held hostage'' messages were noted by newspapers and television commentators in April. (Late that month, after the count had passed 60 days, Mr. Gore held a news conference.) ''Of course,'' he added, ''in the spirit of confession, I have to say that when I found that I wasn't on the latest version of the Gore campaign's e-mail list, I called them up and gave them a piece of my mind.'' ''The difference is, it's a phone call that's not in real time,'' he added. ''So I may e-mail to financial columnists that Al Gore says he owns no stocks whatsoever: 'Either he's not telling the truth or he's a financial dolt. Don't you think you should write about it?' '' ''It was funny,'' said Craig Crawford, editor in chief of the online political digest Hotline. ''My e-mail sound file is from '2001: A Space Odyssey,' and early one morning HAL goes, 'You have received a message.' It was Al Gore's people with a response to the Social Security plan that Bush put out.'' The oddity was that the message arrived before Gov. George W. Bush held the news conference where he formally unveiled his proposal to partly privatize Social Security. ''Before the sun was up, I had Bush's plan and Gore's response,'' Mr. Crawford said. Chris Lehane, press secretary for the Gore campaign, says the tactic,  which he calls ''pre-buttal,'' had the desired effect; the degree to which major newspapers reflected Mr. Gore's objections surprised even Mr. Lehane. Normally, he said, as much as 90 percent of the content might be devoted to the candidate making the proposal. With the rapid response, he said, ''my sense is you get 60-40 play.'' There is a rollicking tabloid gusto in the tone of campaign e-mail, whether the Bush campaign is reinforcing the idea that Mr. Gore stretches the truth (in its continuing series ''The Gore Detector'') or the Gore campaign is hammering away at Mr. Bush's record in Texas (''one of the dirtiest states in the nation''). In a message posted last Friday, the Democratic National Committee renewed its daily efforts to get under Mr. Bush's skin with the suggestion that his campaign was trying to conceal a deeply conservative agenda. ''Today marks eight days that George W. Bush has refused to release a tape copy or a transcript of remarks he made to a far-right conservative organization last October,'' the message said. It arrived minutes before a Bush campaign bulletin intimating that Mr. Gore was not telling voters the truth about his Social Security plans, that he would either raise taxes or cut retirement benefits. Earlier in the day, the Gore campaign went online to say Mr. Bush had spoken to the Catholic Press Association ''without mentioning his very public embrace of anti-Catholic Bob Jones University during the Republican primary.'' Which came on the heels of Bush e-mail that summed up the week's events as ''Bush Leads, Gore Flounders.'' It can also be just plain fun. Along with posting presidential candidate schedules (''The vice president remains overnight in Memphis'') and innocuous news tidbits (''Wisconsin Veterans Back Bush''), the campaigns engage in an endless cyberspace version of trash talk. The Democratic National Committee, in installments of a feature called ''Bush Lite,'' makes merciless sport of Mr. Bush's semantic gaffes and failures to communicate. ''Bush Confused Canadian Prime Minister With Canadian Cheese Curd Snack Treat,'' read an item that the Democrats posted on April 24. The Republican National Committee replies with a daily watch of Mr. Gore's lack of formal endorsement by former Senator Bill Bradley.  ''Missing,'' says the mock-up of a milk carton with the likeness of Mr. Bradley and the words ''Got endorsement?'' emblazoned on the side.
 Bush Weighs First Reprieve To Allow DNA Testing  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said he was considering a temporary grant of clemency for a man scheduled to be executed today so that DNA evidence could be tested. It would be the first such stay he issued. The inmate, Ricky McGinn, was convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter. Gore Mental Health Plan  Vice President Al Gore called for legislation requiring health insurers to provide children with mental health benefits comparable to coverage for physical ailments. Mr. Gore, whose wife, Tipper, battled depression after their son was injured in a car accident in 1989, also promised to make mental health care a priority in his administration.
 Donald C Goecks letter, replying to Paul Krugman's May 31 column, defends Gov George W Bush's plan for Social Security, saying current system is fundamentally flawed in that citizens own nothing What Paul Krugman says is true: the Social Security system is a pay-as-you-go system and therefore will never offer workers returns as good as they could get outside the system (column, May 31). And George W. Bush's proposal is short on many salient details. What Paul Krugman says is true: the Social Security system is a pay-as-you-go system and therefore will never offer workers returns as good as they could get outside the system (column, May 31). And George W. Bush's proposal is short on many salient details. But what Mr. Krugman misses is that the current system is fundamentally (and fatally) flawed in that citizens own nothing. Mr. Bush's plan is a politically palatable first step toward citizens' actually owning something and therefore controlling their own destinies, rather than an all-powerful government's controlling everything. It truly represents a shifting of power to the people.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said he was ''more than likely'' to delay the execution scheduled today of a convicted killer so that DNA evidence in the case can be tested. It would be the first such stay Mr. Bush has issued as governor. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said he was ''more than likely'' to delay the execution scheduled today of a convicted killer so that DNA evidence in the case can be tested. It would be the first such stay Mr. Bush has issued as governor. The case of Ricky Nolen McGinn, 43, who was convicted of raping and murdering his stepdaughter in 1993, has quietly been working its way through the legal system. But with Mr. Bush now the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, it has taken on political significance.  Article, Page A27.
 Texas Gov George W Bush says he expects to grant temporary stay of execution to Ricky Nolen McGinn, convicted of 1993 rape and murder of his 12-year-old stepdaughter, so that DNA evidence in case can be tested; stay would be first he has issued as governor; case has begun to take on political significance because of presidential campaign by Bush, death penalty advocate; state's highest court has rejected lower-court call for delay; photos (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that he was ''more than likely'' to grant a temporary reprieve for a man scheduled to be executed on Thursday so that DNA evidence in the case could be tested. It would be the first such stay Mr. Bush has issued as governor. The case of Ricky Nolen McGinn, 43, who was convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter in 1993, has slowly and quietly been working its way through the Texas legal system. But with Mr. Bush, a vigorous supporter of the death penalty, now the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, the case has begun to take on political significance. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that he was ''more than likely'' to grant a temporary reprieve for a man scheduled to be executed on Thursday so that DNA evidence in the case could be tested. It would be the first such stay Mr. Bush has issued as governor. The case of Ricky Nolen McGinn, 43, who was convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter in 1993, has slowly and quietly been working its way through the Texas legal system. But with Mr. Bush, a vigorous supporter of the death penalty, now the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, the case has begun to take on political significance. Mr. Bush made his statements about the case a day after the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, the state's highest criminal court, refused to accept the recommendation of a lower court that the execution be delayed so DNA tests could be conducted. The appeals court did not give details for its refusal. But Mr. Bush told reporters covering his campaign that he was inclined to grant a 30-day reprieve so that Mr. McGinn could ''have his full day in court.'' ''To the extent that DNA can help in innocence or guilt, particularly in death penalty cases, but in all cases, I think that's very valid, very important,'' Mr. Bush said at a news conference in Scottsdale, Ariz. Asked why he was telegraphing his intentions before making a final decision, he said: ''I believe this is a case where it's important for me to send a signal about what I may do because it's a case where we're dealing with a man's innocence or guilt.'' As Mr. Bush was talking about the case, the state's Board of Pardons and Paroles, whose members he appoints,  voted 11 to 7 against recommending a reprieve. But the governor is not bound by that recommendation. Since taking office, Mr. Bush has overseen 131 executions, including one today -- more than any other governor in the nation -- and has made speeding the pace of executions a priority. He has backed legislation in Texas curtailing what he has described as efforts by convicted murderers ''to endlessly delay justice by repeatedly filing court appeals.'' He maintains that every one of the prisoners executed during his tenure were guilty and had appropriate access to the courts. But speaking in a teleconference to a gathering of Roman Catholic journalists in Baltimore last week, Mr. Bush said he supported DNA testing to ''erase any doubts'' about a condemned prisoner's guilt. Aides to Mr. Bush also note that the governor has pardoned two convicted sex offenders, including an East Texas man pardoned today, after DNA tests proved their innocence. Under Texas law, the governor only has the independent ability to grant a one-time 30-day reprieve to a condemned prisoner; he can commute a death sentence, as Mr. Bush has done once, but only if the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles recommends that action. Since Mr. Bush is traveling out of the state, and Lt. Gov. Rick Perry is out of the country, the decision on whether to act in Mr. McGinn's case technically falls to the State Senate's president pro tem, Rodney Ellis, a liberal Democrat from Houston who in the past has clashed with Mr. Bush over criminal justice legislation. A spokesman for Mr. Ellis said today that he had not yet decided what to do in Mr. McGinn's case, but virtually no one expects him to allow the execution to take place under the circumstances. Mr. Bush told reporters this afternoon that he had contacted Mr. Ellis's office to say that he was leaning toward a reprieve. ''I'll make a decision tomorrow morning,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I have the authority to recommend to the chain of command'' what to do, he said. Mr. McGinn's lawyers have filed  motions with the United States Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, in New Orleans, and Mr. Bush said he would await that court's decision before acting. If the courts do not halt the execution, ''I'm more than likely to grant the 30-day reprieve,'' he said, adding that his staff is reviewing how to ensure that the DNA evidence gets retested. ''We're now researching the procedure to make sure the DNA gets evaluated.'' Bush aides said today that they did recognize that this case was one of the more attention-getting death penalty cases, but they insisted that such factors have no bearing on how Mr. Bush acts or on what he says. Yet the case also affords Mr. Bush a chance to speak in a moderate voice on the death penalty without seeming to pander, because Mr. McGinn's case involves some understandable questions of evidence that have drawn national attention. One aide noted that this case, like that of Henry Lee Lucas, involved a question of evidence, and the aide suggested that Mr. Bush found this sort of factor more relevant and compelling than emotional factors like those involved with the decision not to grant a reprieve to Karla Faye Tucker. In other words, this case, like that of Mr. Lucas, has questions that go directly to the matter of guilt, not of contrition. Ms. Tucker, a born-again Christian who said she had repented for her crimes and whose case drew pleas from religious leaders, was executed in 1998. Mr. Bush commuted Mr. Lucas's sentence to life in prison in 1998, following a recommendation by the state pardons board, after serious questions were raised about whether Mr. Lucas, a confessed serial killer, actually committed the murder for which he was convicted. Mr. Bush's embrace of DNA testing for death row inmates comes as some states have been rethinking  capital punishment amid concerns about the execution of innocent prisoners and polls that indicate support for the death penalty is at a 20-year low, although most Americans still favor it.
 Democrats backing Vice Pres Al Gore recall his rival's father, then-Vice Pres George Bush, trailed in polls in May 1988, only to prevail in Nov; they and some leading scholars hold vice presidents seeking election in own right do not take their place in public's mind as party leader until convention; veterans of 1988 campaign cite key differences between two elections; photo (M) The ghost of the 1988 election is a comforting spirit to many Democrats, who like to remember another sitting vice president, George Bush, who was trailing in the polls in May only to prevail, handily, in November. The ghost of the 1988 election is a comforting spirit to many Democrats, who like to remember another sitting vice president, George Bush, who was trailing in the polls in May only to prevail, handily, in November. If the '88 paradigm holds, Vice President Gore is stronger than he looks, and his present difficulties in the polls are much exaggerated -- particularly given the stronger economy of 2000. Citing both the extraordinary economy and President Clinton's approval ratings, Thomas E. Mann, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a research group, said, ''It will be a first in modern American history if an incumbent administration is deposed from office under these conditions.'' But veterans of the 1988 campaigns of Vice President Bush, the Republican, and Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, the Democrat, say there are also important differences between the two elections -- from the background of the challengers to the tenor of the times. Bob Teeter, a pollster and top strategist for Vice President Bush's 1988 campaign, argued: ''Even in a good economy, Gore is vice president of an administration that people don't like very well. They like its performance and its policies, but they don't like what's been dragged before them.'' The New York Times/CBS News poll ratings for May 1988 and May 2000 are eerily similar for the candidates. Vice President Bush, 12 years ago, was viewed favorably by 33 percent, unfavorably by 35 percent. Vice President Gore, earlier this month, was viewed favorably by 34 percent, unfavorably by 36 percent. Mr. Dukakis was -- at least by this measure -- in better shape than Gov. George W. Bush is today. Thirty-eight percent viewed him favorably, 14 percent unfavorably; earlier this month, 40 percent viewed Governor Bush favorably, 28 percent unfavorably. But the Dukakis support proved exceedingly soft. In May 1988, in a moment that lives on in campaign folklore, the Bush campaign team took some of the most controversial elements of the Dukakis record in Massachusetts and tested them with a focus group of voters in Paramus, N.J. They emerged with the makings of a devastating attack. A Gore adviser said of the Bush  strategists of 1988: ''One of the critical insights they had, when they dissected Dukakis in '88, was that it was no one single issue that proved decisive. When they did those focus groups in Paramus, N.J., it was the accumulation of negatives'' that ultimately swayed the voters. But veterans of that campaign say that Governor Bush will be harder to redefine, by virtue of his family name and history. 'I don't think you can make a Wasp governor from Texas as much of a stranger to the American public as a Greek-American liberal'' from Massachusetts,  said Jack Corrigan, director of operations for the Dukakis campaign. Moreover, some campaign veterans say, the younger Bush and his strategists have clearly learned lessons from 1988, and have quickly moved to advance Mr. Bush's biography, themes and policy proposals for the fall campaign; he will not be the tabula rasa Mr. Dukakis was. Mr. Dukakis ''didn't have a clue as to how wedge issues play out in a general election campaign,'' said Richard Bond, the national political director for the elder Bush's 1988 campaign. As a result, Mr. Bond added, Mr. Dukakis underestimated the power of issues like the Massachusetts prison program that gave furloughs to convicted murderers like Willie Horton, which was used against the Democrats to extraordinary effect. ''Who thinks that Gore will ever be able to do that to Bush Jr.?'' Mr. Bond asked. Others see it as less far-fetched. Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster, said, ''When Governor Bush has come under scrutiny in the primary period, he has not stood up very well.  And its clear that the Gore campaign will do its best to take a page out of Vice President Bush's treatment of Dukakis.'' In fact, the Gore campaign has been using a set of potential wedge issues against Mr. Bush, including his support for laws allowing licensed Texans to carry concealed weapons, even in church. Another line of attack in 1988 was Vice President Bush's success in presenting himself as the only credible commander in chief -- aided and abetted by Mr. Dukakis's uncomfortable outing in a tank, an image used repeatedly in Republican advertising. But during the cold war, voters were much more sensitive to a candidate's qualifications to be commander in chief, particularly governors with no foreign policy experience.  Today, such factors are much further down the voters' agenda, Mr. Teeter said -- and thus less of a hurdle for Governor Bush. ''Vice Presidents in the modern American political context have either won the election, like George Bush Sr., or they came amazingly close,'' like Richard M. Nixon in 1960,  , said George Sirgiovanni, professor of history at the College of St. Elizabeth in Morristown, N.J. Mr. Bush both benefited from Mr. Reagan's aura and, at the Republican convention, memorably asked  and answered the question of who should replace the president, saying,  ''I am that man.'' Mr. Dukakis, who watched his 10-point lead in May 1988 melt away, reflected: ''I think it takes a while for a vice president to come into his own. That certainly happened with Bush, and I think it's going to happen with Gore.''
 Although the end of the cold war enabled President George Bush to have the Zionism resolution rescinded by the assembly, a changing world atmosphere did little to help Israel generally in the United Nations until very recently, when the Barak government came to power and accelerated efforts to settle with its neighbors and the Palestinians.
