 Gore on Absent Fathers  Vice President Al Gore called for measures to encourage absent fathers, whom he called ''the No. 1 cause of child poverty in America,'' to pay child support. He also urged government policies that would ''lift up the institution of marriage.''
 The population shifts, driven by the South's quickening economy and the prosperity of a mobile middle class, do not necessarily presage a partisan realignment like the mass movement of white Southern Democrats to the Republican Party in the 1980's and 1990's. Nor are they necessarily good news for Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign. In North Carolina, the explosion of new residents in the 1990's has actually produced a new breed of Republican in a state dominated for decades by Democrats and religious conservatives. They seem to be precisely the kind of voters singled out by the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Bobby Kahn, the governor's chief of staff and principal political strategist, said the population shifts in Georgia had been of significant benefit to the Democrats, and could make a difference in Mr. Gore's favor this November, although the state is considered a tossup. ''The outer ring of suburbs are still very Republican,'' Mr. Kahn said, ''but some of the counties on the inner ring that had gone Republican are clearly trending back to the Democrats. I think Gore could do better in the suburbs than people expect, particularly with women. In a close state, you make an impact at the margin, and the suburbs are the margin now.''
 At the local level, that is not always true, but at the national level it remains the case eight years later. No Democrat with pretensions to national leadership can afford not to be strictly in favor of abortion rights. Quite a few, including Vice President Al Gore, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, have jettisoned their previous reservations about abortion. When something becomes undiscussable, it is pretty much irreversible. That successor, Gov. Tom Ridge, is facing a similar interdict on the other side of the abortion issue. A Republican who favors abortion rights and, like Mr. Casey, an extremely popular leader in a crucial state for the presidential race, Governor Ridge has been promoted as a possible running mate for Gov. George W. Bush -- to cries of betrayal and threats of abandonment from anti-abortion Republicans.
 Mr. Clinton says he will make a final decision on whether to develop such a defense based on a coming test, and new assessments of the threat and of the effect of a missile system on arms control. But there is tremendous political momentum behind the program, and Vice President Al Gore, the presumed Democratic nominee to succeed Mr. Clinton, has already endorsed such a limited defense.
 It might seem an unusual role for a man who -- like almost every influential Texas politician -- supports the death penalty. But Mr. Ellis's deep reservations about the system, and his occasional clashes with Gov. George W. Bush, earned him the spotlight this week. With Mr. Bush campaigning in California and Lt. Gov. Rick Perry, a Republican, in Europe, Mr. Ellis, as the Senate president pro tem, became the acting governor and was left to decide whether to grant a reprieve for convicted murderer Ricky McGinn. Mr. Bush announced on Thursday in Sacramento that he had recommended a 30-day reprieve, which Mr. Ellis had accepted. The case kept him awake until 3 a.m. Monday night, Mr. Ellis said, thinking, ''What if I disagree with Governor Bush? How would we resolve that?'' His wife told him to call Mr. Bush's aides first thing on Tuesday, which he did, so Mr. Bush would have the chance to return to Texas to make sure the execution was carried out. But to his surprise, Mr. Ellis said, Mr. Bush's aides said they were already seriously considering a reprieve. That last proposal was vetoed by Mr. Bush because, Mr. Ellis said, judges worried that it took away a piece of their patronage. Mr. Bush said that power should be left to judges because they were better qualified to select lawyers for defendants who needed them. Mr. Bush, for his part, maintains that all 131 inmates executed while he has been governor were unquestionably guilty of murder and had had appropriate access to the courts. And few legislators share Mr. Ellis's view. ''People commit crimes because of bad values, not because of their race or status,'' said State Senator David Sibley, a Waco Republican and  Bush ally. With Mr. Bush and Mr. Perry both expected to travel out of state at times later this year, the final approval for executions could fall to Mr. Ellis again. One inmate scheduled to die soon, Gary Graham, has drawn a lot support from those who insist he is innocent. What would Mr. Ellis do if that case were left up to him? Not sure yet, he said, ''but if I were a guessing man, I would guess the governor or lieutenant governor will be in town.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore calls for measures to encourage absent fathers to pay child support and to lift up the institution of marriage; says absent fathers are the No. 1 cause of child poverty in America; photo (M) Describing absent fathers as ''the No. 1 cause of child poverty in America,'' Vice President Al Gore called today for measures to encourage them to pay child support. ''As president, I will launch a second generation of welfare reform to require all fathers who owe child support to pay up or be required to go to work to support their children,'' Mr. Gore said at a conference on fatherhood. ''We've been requiring that of the mothers; let's require it of the fathers.'' Describing absent fathers as ''the No. 1 cause of child poverty in America,'' Vice President Al Gore called today for measures to encourage them to pay child support. ''As president, I will launch a second generation of welfare reform to require all fathers who owe child support to pay up or be required to go to work to support their children,'' Mr. Gore said at a conference on fatherhood. ''We've been requiring that of the mothers; let's require it of the fathers.'' Citing statistics showing that children in single-parent families are more likely to be poor, to drop out of school, to go to jail or to commit suicide, Mr. Gore also called for government policies that would ''lift up the institution of marriage.'' As part of his plan, Mr. Gore proposed ''parental responsibility accounts'' for families on welfare. Most child support intended for families on welfare goes instead to state governments, which use the money to defer the cost of benefits. Under Mr. Gore's proposal, some of those payments would go into accounts that would become available to families when they went off welfare. Mr. Gore said that more parents would pay child support if they knew it would go to their families instead of the government. He said it would cost the federal government $2.3 billion over 10 years. To help two-parent families stay together, Mr. Gore called for changing the tax code so that working couples would not pay higher taxes than if they filed as individuals. Under his plan, he would eliminate that so-called marriage penalty only for families that used the standard deduction. Republicans criticized Mr. Gore's tax plan, saying it would reduce taxes for 9 million of the 28 million couples who filed tax returns. A Republican plan supported by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the likely Republican presidential nominee, would eliminate the penalty for all the couples. ''Put George Bush in the White House and the marriage penalty will be gone,'' said Chris Paulitz, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee. ''Al Gore will not fight for this. He will give Americans lip service, but not fight.'' Mr. Gore ran into some trouble with his audience. When the vice president said that only one in four parents who owe child support actually pay it, a man in the audience shouted, ''That's a lie.'' ''Is he on the speaking program today?'' Mr. Gore shot back with a sly smile to the rest of the mostly friendly crowd. In keeping with the upbeat tone of all his events this week, Mr. Gore added confessional touches to his remarks today, part of his effort to underscore his biography and soften his image. Mostly, those touches were about his late father, Albert, a Democratic senator from Tennessee. ''I remember watching my father bait a hook on the banks of the Caney Fork River and sit quietly for an hour,'' Mr. Gore said. ''From such moments sons learn more from their dads about patience, joy, duty and love than they do from all of the lectures and sermons that you can add up.''
 As one of the nation's most prolific campaign donors, he has had dinner at the White House, private discussions over pizza with President Clinton, a ride on Air Force One and personal references from President George Bush. He also has a history of prior campaign violations, including illegal contributions in 1992 to a California representative, Jay Kim, who later pleaded guilty to accepting $133,000 in donations from Korean corporations.
