 Op-Ed article by television commentator Jeff Greenfield on tenor and dynamics of 2000 presidential campaign between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush (M) Al Gore. George Bush. Two candidates. Four syllables. That's the choice. Coincidence? Uh-uh. Those four syllables speak volumes. Not about them. About us. About what's happened. What's happened to our politics. What's happened to our attention span. Al Gore. George Bush. Two candidates. Four syllables. That's the choice. Coincidence? Uh-uh. Those four syllables speak volumes. Not about them. About us. About what's happened. What's happened to our politics. What's happened to our attention span. Once Michael Dukakis crashed and burned in '88 -- ''I don't even know how to say his name!'' one of George Bush's country-western singer supporters had declared that year -- the die was cast. In 1992, Bill Clinton, Bob Dole and Ross Perot combined had a shorter syllable count than Adlai and Ike. In 1996, with Mr. Perot shunted to the sidelines, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Dole produced a grand total of five. By contrast, what have we been offered in recent tickets? In 1992, Clinton-Gore defeated Bush-Quayle. Four years ago, Clinton-Gore beat Dole-Kemp. And this year, some of the likeliest possibilities sound more like a series of Cro-Magnon grunts than a ticket: Bush-Ridge; Gore-Graham; Bush-Dole. (Memo to Pataki and Lieberman: Don't hold your breath).
 The change in judges follows by several weeks the government's unexpected announcement that it was replacing the lead prosecutor in the case. Bob Gorence, an assistant United States attorney in Albuquerque, had been in charge, but he was replaced, without explanation, with George A. Stamboulidis, an experienced organized-crime prosecutor from Long Island.
 Without articulating a new progressivism, the Democrats will either become indistinguishable from Republicans, especially under George W. Bush, or, if the unions have their way, the Democrats will become just kinder, gentler Buchananites.
 Valuable, Bush Aide Says  By The New York Times  WASHINGTON, June 5 Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush, said that the Clinton-Putin meeting had been valuable in advancing relations between the United States and Russia. Mr. Bush welcomed agreements on disposal of nuclear materials and establishment of a joint center to monitor missile launchings, he said.
 To win a place on the Reform presidential primary ballot, a candidate has to demonstrate through signature petitions that he has sufficient support across the country to be a viable challenger to the major party nominees, who this year are likely to be Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.
 Stellar cast of Democrats, including Vice Pres Al Gore and first Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, raises $3,7 million for Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee at Manhattan fund-raiser tied to 70th birthday party for Repr Charles B Rangel; photo (M) High above Midtown Manhattan, Vice President Al Gore said last night that Representative Charles B. Rangel was ''in the catbird seat.'' And the Harlem Democrat, grinning through his mustache, looked as if he was indeed in a position of power. High above Midtown Manhattan, Vice President Al Gore said last night that Representative Charles B. Rangel was ''in the catbird seat.'' And the Harlem Democrat, grinning through his mustache, looked as if he was indeed in a position of power. But tonight drew an all-star cast of Democrats, including Mr. Gore, Hillary Rodham Clinton, former Mayor David N. Dinkins, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, Representative Patrick J. Kennedy, chairman of fund-raising for the House Democrats, assorted members of Congress from New York and Andrew M. Cuomo, the housing secretary. Mr. Gore stood on a folding metal chair at the dinner and lavished praise on Mr. Rangel. ''Charlie Rangel is the heart and the soul of the Democratic caucus,'' Mr. Gore said. ''He is the lion of Lenox Avenue. He is the man with the constant growl. He is the man responsible for the Rangel renaissance. He is part of all the budget policy, the health policy, Social Security, Medicare, education -- the Ways and Means Committee has it all. Let's make Charlie Rangel the next chairman!'' Mr. Gore, in his new mode of refraining from attacks on his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, made mention of only one Republican, Newt Gingrich, but otherwise only broadly referred to ''the other side,'' which, he warned, would lead the nation into ruin. Mr. Cuomo said later that Mr. Gore's previous ''negative message'' had been an effective and persuasive critique of the Republicans. ''But he's more appealing when he's on the positive,'' Mr. Cuomo said. Mrs. Clinton, like Mr. Gore, gave a nod to Mr. Kennedy and to his uncle, Robert F. Kennedy, who, both noted, was assassinated 32 years ago. Mrs. Clinton said she was honored to be seeking the same Senate seat that he once held, one that her supporters often invoke as having been won by a non-New Yorker. She also lauded Mr. Gore and her husband, the president, saying that the nation elected them in 1992 on faith but now had the ''evidence and results'' of a thriving economy and that that was a big reason to elect Mr. Gore president. At the dinner at the union headquarters, Mr. Gore spoke of the soaring economy but also cautioned, ''There are a lot of people who are not yet being carried along.'' Numerous activities are now possible on line, like applying for student loans, making reservations at the national parks and paying taxes. Mr. Gore would expand those services, so that, for example, people could pay their taxes directly over the Internet without having to go through a software intermediary. Mr. Gore's plan, which aides said would cost $100 million but would quickly pay for itself by cutting paperwork and saving time, would be accomplished by 2003.
 Gore at New York Fund-Raiser  Vice President Al Gore helped raise $3.7 million for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee at a Manhattan event. Earlier, he proposed putting nearly all federal government services online.
 PRIMARIES IN 5 STATES -- Five states hold the last of the presidential primaries today, their role about as useful to politics as the appendix is to people, thanks to the big rush this year by many states to hold early primaries. The five states are Alabama, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and South Dakota. While some of today's contests, notably the Senate primaries in New Jersey, are expected to draw voters, there is not likely to be a lot of enthusiasm for casting a Bush or Gore vote at this late juncture. That was the case two weeks ago in the Kentucky primary, where the turnout was just 14 percent of enrolled Democrats and 11 percent of Republicans. GORE BYPASSES TEXAS -- Last week, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas decided to skip his state's Republican convention because he is so far ahead in presidential preference polls there. Now Vice President Al Gore most likely will bypass the Texas Democratic Party's state convention for, well, the same reason. Texas is going to be ''difficult'' for Mr. Gore in the fall, so he probably will not show for the June 9-10 gathering, the state's Democratic leader, Molly Beth Malcolm, told The Dallas Morning News recently. ''It makes more sense,'' she said, ''that he would go to one of those states where possibly he has a real shot at winning.'' HITTING GORE WHERE HE LIVES -- Republicans and officials with the Bush campaign have an insatiable appetite for making fun of Vice President Al Gore's retoolings, restylings and resolves to make sure that voters get to know him better, and today they bit into some fresh meat. A Bush campaign official, speaking to reporters in Austin, Tex., said one of the states in which the Democratic National Committee had investigated the cost and availability of air time for biographical television commercials about Mr. Gore was Tennessee. There's a certain poetry to this, the official said. They're going to put a bio ad on in Tennessee to reintroduce him to all of those hometown people who have grown distant to him over the years. PRIMARIES IN 5 STATES -- Five states hold the last of the presidential primaries today, their role about as useful to politics as the appendix is to people, thanks to the big rush this year by many states to hold early primaries. The five states are Alabama, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and South Dakota. While some of today's contests, notably the Senate primaries in New Jersey, are expected to draw voters, there is not likely to be a lot of enthusiasm for casting a Bush or Gore vote at this late juncture. That was the case two weeks ago in the Kentucky primary, where the turnout was just 14 percent of enrolled Democrats and 11 percent of Republicans. GORE BYPASSES TEXAS -- Last week, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas decided to skip his state's Republican convention because he is so far ahead in presidential preference polls there. Now Vice President Al Gore most likely will bypass the Texas Democratic Party's state convention for, well, the same reason. Texas is going to be ''difficult'' for Mr. Gore in the fall, so he probably will not show for the June 9-10 gathering, the state's Democratic leader, Molly Beth Malcolm, told The Dallas Morning News recently. ''It makes more sense,'' she said, ''that he would go to one of those states where possibly he has a real shot at winning.'' HITTING GORE WHERE HE LIVES -- Republicans and officials with the Bush campaign have an insatiable appetite for making fun of Vice President Al Gore's retoolings, restylings and resolves to make sure that voters get to know him better, and today they bit into some fresh meat. A Bush campaign official, speaking to reporters in Austin, Tex., said one of the states in which the Democratic National Committee had investigated the cost and availability of air time for biographical television commercials about Mr. Gore was Tennessee. There's a certain poetry to this, the official said. They're going to put a bio ad on in Tennessee to reintroduce him to all of those hometown people who have grown distant to him over the years.
 Brent Muirhead letter on Al Gore suggests that Americans have natural concern about someone who is not comfortable admitting personal mistakes (S) Gail Sheehy's psychological analysis of Al Gore highlights how his character struggles are magnified in the public arena (''Flawless, but Never Quite Loved,'' Op-Ed, June 2). Perhaps Americans have a natural concern about someone who is not comfortable admitting personal mistakes. Mr. Gore's speeches and casual dress indicate that he wants to humanize his presidential campaign. Ultimately, he must be willing to take some risks and live by deeper personal convictions on vital social issues. If he makes some campaign mistakes, he needs to show a greater willingness to be open and honest about his shortcomings. Gail Sheehy's psychological analysis of Al Gore highlights how his character struggles are magnified in the public arena (''Flawless, but Never Quite Loved,'' Op-Ed, June 2). Perhaps Americans have a natural concern about someone who is not comfortable admitting personal mistakes. Mr. Gore's speeches and casual dress indicate that he wants to humanize his presidential campaign. Ultimately, he must be willing to take some risks and live by deeper personal convictions on vital social issues. If he makes some campaign mistakes, he needs to show a greater willingness to be open and honest about his shortcomings. Can Mr. Gore become more transparent in today's tough media environment, which carefully inspects his speeches and lifestyle? It is a difficult question that only he can answer.
 The initiative is a program to show off this city of heavy industries, power blackouts and high unemployment to American investors. This is being done as compensation for Ukraine's decision to give up multimillion-dollar contracts to help Russia build a nuclear power plant in Iran, which is proceeding anyway on Persian Gulf coast of Iran at Bushehr without Ukraine's participation. But these days construction at the Bushehr power plant is well under way, and Russia's deputy minister for atomic energy, Bulat I. Nigmatulin, says it will be completed in 2002. Russia is expected to earn about $1 billion from the project. Ever since Russia signed a contract with Iran in 1995 to complete the Bushehr power station, abandoned by German constructors in 1979 with the onset of the Iranian revolution, the Clinton administration has opposed it and Congress has threatened sanctions against Russia. And for the last two years, Congress has reduced by half foreign aid payments to Russia's central government, specifically because of the refusal to abandon Bushehr. American officials do not regard the Bushehr project as a source of nuclear material that could be diverted to an illicit bomb-making program. But the administration has taken the view that the Bushehr project will train an entire generation of Iranian physicists and engineers in nuclear technologies, and thus enhance Iran's scientific base, including any program to develop nuclear weapons. Israel, whose leaders also see their security threatened by Iran's nuclear program, joined in the diplomatic offensive to kill the project, but to no avail. Russian and Iranian officials point out that Iran has placed the Bushehr plant under the rigid safeguards and inspection regime of the International Atomic Energy Agency. In the last five years, when Boris N. Yeltsin was president of Russia, Dr. Albright and Vice President Al Gore undertook a number of missions to try to persuade him to cancel the Bushehr contract. But Mr. Yeltsin would not relent, promising instead not to expand Russia's nuclear cooperation with Iran beyond Bushehr, where as many as four reactor and turbine units are planned. ''Bushehr is a very interesting and profitable contract for us,'' said Mr. Nigmatulin, the Russian atomic energy official. ''And at the same time it is helping us to restore our industrial capacity.'' Having failed to persuade Russia to pull out of Bushehr, Mr. Clinton's senior national security advisers in late 1997 began a campaign to force Ukraine out of the deal. Ukraine's  ambassador to Washington at the time, Yuri Shcherbak, was told that the administration would prevent Ukraine from purchasing fuel for its aging nuclear reactors from American companies unless Turboatom gave up the Iran project.
 Even though Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush scoffs at voter surveys showing him leading Vice Pres Al Gore for several months, his aides regard them as reliable predictor of victory; they say Bush lead is no fluke, but is instead compelling verdict on his sturdy appeal (M) You could buy a Texas ranch if you had a dollar for every time Gov. George W. Bush has dismissed polls by saying that the only meaningful one is on Election Day. But his aides seem plenty attuned to the growing number of voter surveys that telegraph that moment. Today, they invited reporters to the campaign's headquarters here and, with charts, a graph and a multicolored map of the electoral college, they made the case that Mr. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore in most polls over the past several months was no fluke. To the contrary, they said, it is a compelling verdict on the Texas governor's sturdy appeal. You could buy a Texas ranch if you had a dollar for every time Gov. George W. Bush has dismissed polls by saying that the only meaningful one is on Election Day. But his aides seem plenty attuned to the growing number of voter surveys that telegraph that moment. Today, they invited reporters to the campaign's headquarters here and, with charts, a graph and a multicolored map of the electoral college, they made the case that Mr. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore in most polls over the past several months was no fluke. To the contrary, they said, it is a compelling verdict on the Texas governor's sturdy appeal. What about the two national polls released over the last week that showed Mr. Gore only a point behind? Possible anomalies, they responded, crying out for context and statistical confirmation. Or the analogy of 1988, when the challenger, Michael S. Dukakis, saw a late spring and early summer advantage over the sitting vice president, George H. W. Bush, collapse and come to naught? A poor indicator, for any number of reasons. One senior adviser drew reporters' attention to a simple, overarching reality: Mr. Bush, from the time that polls began pitting him against Mr. Gore, has frequently hit or surpassed 50 percent of voters' support, while Mr. Gore has not. In the two recent polls in which the candidates were neck and neck, Mr. Gore's support was below 45 percent. Beyond its value as an engrossing reading and rearranging of political tea leaves, the briefing by Mr. Bush's advisers -- the second of its kind in less than two months -- suggested an investment in portraying Mr. Gore as a persistently unappealing loser whose retoolings have failed to reinvigorate his campaign. ''This explains why they're going through their latest reinvention,'' the adviser said, citing the Gore campaign's abandonment of attack mode. ''They fundamentally gave it their best shot, and it didn't work.'' Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said that he could not, off the top of his head, even confirm or dispute the Bush campaign's figures and interpretations, because the vice president ''does not waste his time and resources by analyzing polls.'' He nonetheless argued that polls now, as opposed to five or six months ago, made a case for Mr. Gore coming on strong and showed that Mr. Gore had eaten into Mr. Bush's once whopping lead by 15 or more percentage points. And another Gore adviser subsequently called and said that Mr. Dukakis was 12 points ahead at this point in 1988, while Mr. Bush was only 1 point up in the two recent polls. According to materials handed out today by the Bush campaign, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore in 46 of 52 national public polls since early March. The Bush campaign also used what officials said were the latest public polls in individual states to draw a map that showed Mr. Bush in a position to garner 266 electoral votes, Mr. Gore in line to get 136 and another 136 up for grabs. It takes 270 electoral votes to win. Mr. Bush's advisers repeatedly rejected the model of 1988. And just last week the candidate himself offered an alternative comparison: 1960, when the vice president, Richard M. Nixon, was defeated by the challenger, John F. Kennedy. It was a telling metaphor, implying that Mr. Bush sees himself as the charismatic, fresh alternative to a perpetually striving, charm-challenged pol. ''He followed a pretty successful administration,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Kennedy. ''His message was, 'Let's soar higher.' And that's what my message is going to be, too.''
 Mr. Lazio, who had said that Mr. Buchanan was divisive, insisted late last month that he would still accept the nomination while expressing clear support for George W. Bush, the Republican candidate for president.
 One of the comforting things about American election campaigns is the way the monetary playing field keeps leveling. You come into the game like George W. Bush with a big fat financial cushion and slurp, it vanishes. Nature may abhor a vacuum, but political campaigns can create one in a minute.
