 During occasional moments of consciousness, more than one passenger aboard the presidential aircraft blamed Vice President Al Gore for their out-of-whack body clocks. During occasional moments of consciousness, more than one passenger aboard the presidential aircraft blamed Vice President Al Gore for their out-of-whack body clocks. In other times, it might have been Air Force Two streaking back and forth across the Pacific like a commuter shuttle for the funeral of a fallen prime minister. Memorial services have long been part of the unwritten portfolio of the vice president, and this one, in the opinion of some White House aides, had Mr. Gore's name written all over it. Mr. Clinton's aides had not been unanimous about making the trip. There were suggestions to send Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright. Mr. Gore was out of contention because of his campaign schedule. But Mr. Clinton had overruled the naysayers. He had wanted to remember Mr. Obuchi, who had visited the White House in May 1999, in a personal way. Samuel R. Berger, the president's national security adviser, had backed him. Mr. Clinton broke no records today with his jet-lag diplomacy. Back in 1994, he had traveled to Budapest and back in 24 hours, spending just seven hours on the ground. Before him, President Bush had jetted to and from Cartagena, Colombia, in the same day. And President Carter had flown to and from Tokyo for a meeting that was shorter than Mr. Clinton's.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, at campaign stop in Whittier, Calif, proposes making it a federal crime to sell Social Security numbers; Democratic allies introduce bill in Congress to make it a civil and criminal offense for someone to sell or buy another person's Social Security number; theft of numbers accounts for much of increase in Internet crime and identity theft (S) GORE ADDRESSES PRIVACY -- Last year, 20-year-old Amy Boyer of New Hampshire was killed by a man who had bought her Social Security number for $45 from a Web site and then tracked her down. Vice President Al Gore, who early on took an interest in Internet and privacy issues, held several discussions with her parents about ''identity theft'' and yesterday, in a campaign stop in Whittier, Calif., he proposed making it a federal crime to sell Social Security numbers. ''Let's put security back in Social Security,'' Mr. Gore said, the family at his side. As he spoke, Democratic allies in Washington were introducing a bill in Congress to make it a civil and criminal offense for someone to sell or buy another person's Social Security number without that person's consent. The Social Security Administration logged 30,000 complaints of abuse of numbers in 1999, an increase of 175 percent over 1998, and the theft of numbers accounts for much of the increase in cyber crimes and identity theft. GORE ADDRESSES PRIVACY -- Last year, 20-year-old Amy Boyer of New Hampshire was killed by a man who had bought her Social Security number for $45 from a Web site and then tracked her down. Vice President Al Gore, who early on took an interest in Internet and privacy issues, held several discussions with her parents about ''identity theft'' and yesterday, in a campaign stop in Whittier, Calif., he proposed making it a federal crime to sell Social Security numbers. ''Let's put security back in Social Security,'' Mr. Gore said, the family at his side. As he spoke, Democratic allies in Washington were introducing a bill in Congress to make it a civil and criminal offense for someone to sell or buy another person's Social Security number without that person's consent. The Social Security Administration logged 30,000 complaints of abuse of numbers in 1999, an increase of 175 percent over 1998, and the theft of numbers accounts for much of the increase in cyber crimes and identity theft. A BOLD STAND ON BASKETBALL -- It was a free throw for Al Gore. Asked yesterday to pick the winner of the N.B.A. finals, the vice president blurted out: ''Lakers.'' Like other politicians, Mr. Gore does not normally like to pick sides in sporting events. But he was in Los Angeles. And California, with the biggest block of electoral votes, is crucial to his presidential bid. Besides, the Lakers' rivals, the Pacers, are from Indiana, a small state that almost always votes Republican. So what did he have to lose when a local television reporter asked him which team he was rooting for? In supporting the Lakers, Mr. Gore may also have been trying to repay a favor to Shaquille O'Neal, the Laker star, who endorsed him after Michael Jordan threw his support to Bill Bradley, Mr. Gore's erstwhile rival. Asked what he would say to Pacers' fans, the vice president said: ''I try to avoid the subject.''
 White House, under pressure to produce thousands of lost e-mail messages sought by Congress, says it cannot find any backup records for messages sent to or from Vice Pres Al Gore's office from March 1998 to April 1999 because of a computer system problem; Congressional investigators say it may never be known whether missing messages held information that could have served as evidence in battle to impeach Pres Clinton and investigation into possible fund-raising abuses by Clinton-Gore campaign (M) The White House, under pressure to produce thousands of lost e-mail messages sought by Congress, has informed a House committee that it cannot find any backup records for messages sent to or from Vice President Al Gore's office in 1998 and part of 1999. The White House, under pressure to produce thousands of lost e-mail messages sought by Congress, has informed a House committee that it cannot find any backup records for messages sent to or from Vice President Al Gore's office in 1998 and part of 1999. Today, Congressional investigators said it might never be known  whether the vice presidential messages held information that could have served as evidence at a time when the battle to impeach President Clinton was at its height and the Justice Department was investigating possible fund-raising abuses by the Clinton-Gore campaign.
 Three-time convicted murdered Bennie Demps, in his final words to witnesses before being executed by lethal injection, pleads with his lawyer to investigate how his Florida executioners 'butchered' him while he was strapped to a gurney for more than half an hour; spokesman for Gov Jeb Bush says Demps was strapped to gurney for so long because of paperwork delay and because technicians had trouble finding a vein; photo of Demps at news conference on day prior to execution, when he claimed to have been framed by state because he evaded death penalty in a 1971 case (M) A spokesman for Gov. Jeb Bush, a Republican, said Mr. Demps was strapped to the gurney for so long because the paperwork was delayed and because the state's technicians had trouble finding a vein for an alternate intravenous drip.
 Terry McAuliffe, Democratic Party's most prodigious fund-raiser, after personal appeal by Vice Pres Al Gore, agrees to serve as chairman of Democratic National Convention, which is struggling to overcome fund-raising difficulties and bickering among its organizers (M) After a personal appeal by Vice President Al Gore, Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic Party's most prodigious fund-raiser, has agreed to serve as chairman of the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, which has struggled to overcome fund-raising difficulties and bickering among its organizers. Several Democratic officials said Mr. Gore phoned Mr. McAuliffe on Wednesday morning to ask him to succeed Roy Romer, the former Colorado governor, who was appointed superintendent of the Los Angeles school system on Tuesday. Mr. McAuliffe instantly agreed to the request, the officials said. After a personal appeal by Vice President Al Gore, Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic Party's most prodigious fund-raiser, has agreed to serve as chairman of the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, which has struggled to overcome fund-raising difficulties and bickering among its organizers. Several Democratic officials said Mr. Gore phoned Mr. McAuliffe on Wednesday morning to ask him to succeed Roy Romer, the former Colorado governor, who was appointed superintendent of the Los Angeles school system on Tuesday. Mr. McAuliffe instantly agreed to the request, the officials said. For months, senior party officials have worried that this summer's convention could turn out to be a dud, now that Mr. Gore has the nomination wrapped up. Several party activists had quietly lobbied for Mr. McAuliffe's appointment, saying they needed his enthusiasm to help energize the four-day nominating convention scheduled to begin  Aug. 14 at the Staples Center in downtown Los Angeles. Mr. McAuliffe is the most prolific fund-raiser in the history of American politics. He is also one of President Clinton's closest friends. Most recently, Mr. McAuliffe was chairman of the Democratic National Committee's gala at the MCI Sports Center here on May 23. The event, a tribute to Mr. Clinton, attracted a sell-out crowd of 13,625 people and raised a record $26.5 million for the Democratic Party. Most of that money will benefit Mr. Gore's presidential campaign. Last month, Mr. McAuliffe estimated that he had personally raised at least $300 million for Mr. Clinton and Democratic causes, including the president's 1997 inaugural, the White House millennium celebration, the president's legal defense fund, Mr. Clinton's library in Little Rock, Ark., and the current campaigns of Mr. Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton. Last winter, senior party officials and Gore allies were concerned that the convention could turn into a disaster. Fund-raising was -- and still is -- behind schedule; $7 million still needs to be raised by the host committee. The billionaires who had helped lure the convention to Los Angeles have complained among themselves. Unions facing contract negotiations had warned of possible labor unrest.
 The illicit cockfighting business was uncovered, officials said, after nine armed agents of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals raided Jerry's Pet Store at 71 Central Avenue in Bushwick on Wednesday. The agents said the shop's cellar held rows of chicken coops and a small padded room in which the roosters were trained to fight or placed to demonstrate their ferocity in combat before potential buyers. The illicit cockfighting business was uncovered, officials said, after nine armed agents of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals raided Jerry's Pet Store at 71 Central Avenue in Bushwick on Wednesday. The agents said the shop's cellar held rows of chicken coops and a small padded room in which the roosters were trained to fight or placed to demonstrate their ferocity in combat before potential buyers.
 The proposed legislation mirrors laws in New York and Illinois and comes after Gov. George W. Bush granted a 30-day reprieve last week for Ricky Nolen McGinn shortly before his scheduled execution. The proposed legislation mirrors laws in New York and Illinois and comes after Gov. George W. Bush granted a 30-day reprieve last week for Ricky Nolen McGinn shortly before his scheduled execution. Mr. McGinn was convicted of raping and killing his 12-year-old stepdaughter in 1993, but on June 1 Mr. Bush, citing concerns that adequate tests on DNA evidence had not been performed, granted the reprieve to allow for new DNA tests. With Mr. Bush as the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, capital punishment in Texas is under heightened scrutiny. In his five years as governor, Mr. Bush has presided over 131 executions, easily the most of any governor, and he often has expressed his unflinching belief in the fairness of the Texas system. His 30-day reprieve for Mr. McGinn was the first he had granted. Mike Jones, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the governor would have to review the specifics of the DNA proposal, but added that he ''supports reviewing state law on the use of DNA evidence when the DNA results are likely to determine guilt or innocence.'' In three cases, including one last week, Mr. Bush has pardoned men convicted of rape after DNA tests confirmed their innocence. As for an innocence commission, Mr. Jones said Mr. Bush would need more information before taking a public stance. As president pro tem of the Texas State Senate, Mr. Ellis actually signed, at the governor's instructions, Mr. McGinn's reprieve because Mr. Bush and Lt. Gov. Rick Perry were out of state.
 George P Bush, 23-year-old son of Gov Jeb Bush, will be featured in new commercial produced in both Spanish and English to be run in New York City to coincide with Puerto Rican Day Parade; younger Mr Bush, who is fluent in both languages and a budding star of Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign, is also scheduled to participate in parade; photo (M) George Bush will be featured in a new commercial that is to run in New York on Sunday. No, not that George Bush, and not the other one, either. This is George P. Bush, the 23-year-old nephew of the presumptive Republican candidate and a budding star of the Bush campaign. The new spot, produced in Spanish and in English -- George P. is fluent in both, campaign advisers say -- is being released to coincide with the staging on Sunday of the Puerto Rican Day Parade in Manhattan, in which the younger Mr. Bush is also scheduled to participate. George Bush will be featured in a new commercial that is to run in New York on Sunday. No, not that George Bush, and not the other one, either. This is George P. Bush, the 23-year-old nephew of the presumptive Republican candidate and a budding star of the Bush campaign. The new spot, produced in Spanish and in English -- George P. is fluent in both, campaign advisers say -- is being released to coincide with the staging on Sunday of the Puerto Rican Day Parade in Manhattan, in which the younger Mr. Bush is also scheduled to participate. In the commercial, the young man, the son of the candidate's brother Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida and his Mexican-born wife, Columba, talks about how his uncle is reaching out to voters of diverse backgrounds, Bush strategists say. But they add that his good looks could also help draw in younger voters. ''He's able to deliver a message in a very natural way, and is, in fact, not only a handsome young man, but also totally Latino-looking and as proficient in Spanish as he is in English,'' said Lionel Sosa, a San Antonio advertising man and an architect of Gov. George W. Bush's marketing campaign directed at Hispanic voters. Republicans are making an aggressive pitch this year for the Hispanic vote, long seen as reliably Democratic, in part because Mr. Bush has been successful in winning Spanish-speaking voters in Texas. In Fresno, Calif., several weeks ago, the Republican National Committee spent about $150,000 on a test run of a commercial intended to attract voters of Latin American descent.
 Vice President Al Gore plans to kick off new stage of his campaign, making a 'progress and prosperity' tour devoted to relatively new questions of how best to guide nation in an era of budget surpluses; Gore says he will open discussion with speech about protecting Medicare funds; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore plans to kick off a new stage of his campaign next week, making a ''progress and prosperity'' tour devoted to the relatively new questions of how best to guide the nation in an era of budget surpluses. Mr. Gore said he would open the discussion on Tuesday in New York City with a speech about protecting Medicare from what he called ''political poaching'' and reserving it for the use of the 40 million Americans for whom it was collected. Vice President Al Gore plans to kick off a new stage of his campaign next week, making a ''progress and prosperity'' tour devoted to the relatively new questions of how best to guide the nation in an era of budget surpluses. Mr. Gore said he would open the discussion on Tuesday in New York City with a speech about protecting Medicare from what he called ''political poaching'' and reserving it for the use of the 40 million Americans for whom it was collected. ''We're at a turning point in our country's history,'' Mr. Gore, the putative Democratic presidential nominee, said in an interview here today. ''We've never had a debate about how to make decisions concerning a large, continuing surplus, and there are a number of big choices that we have to make.'' The vice president's new focus is less about Medicare than about the ongoing debate over how best to take advantage of the nation's newly found fiscal health. It is part of Mr. Gore's effort to sell voters on debt reduction as a smarter alternative to the big tax cuts advocated by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his expected Republican rival this fall. It is also part of the Gore campaign's effort to put a positive sheen on Mr. Gore's candidacy and to make explicit use of what his advisers say is perhaps his best argument for being elected: the unprecedented prosperity of the last several years. Mr. Gore has not received much direct credit for that prosperity, but the tour, to highlight the economic progress in states like Pennsylvania and Ohio that will be major electoral battlegrounds, should increase his association with it. ''The American people deserve the credit for the strength of the economy,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I think the policies of this administration, which I've helped shape, have indeed unlocked some of that potential and made it much more likely to occur.'' ''I consult with Bob Rubin all the time,'' Mr. Gore said today. ''But this particular proposal on the Medicare lock box I put forward and I hoped that he would react positively to it, and he did.'' Mr. Bush is relying on the non-Social Security surplus to pay for his tax cut plan, which is valued at $1.3 trillion over the rest of the decade. Mr. Gore's Medicare ''lock box'' proposal would reduce the amount of money available for tax cuts by $250 billion, making it easier for him to portray Mr. Bush's tax plan as fiscally irresponsible, especially when added to Republican proposals for additional spending on programs like national missile defense. The vice president has been determined to avoid negative references to Mr. Bush over the last few weeks. He said today that the intention of his Medicare proposal was not to make Mr. Bush's plan seem riskier, but he would not be unhappy if a voter drew that conclusion. Mr. Gore's plan would also restrict Democrats from using all of the non-Social Security surplus for additional spending. Jim Horney, an analyst at the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal-leaning research group, said of the Gore plan: ''This is obviously an attempt to reduce the likelihood of there being big tax increases or spending that would eat up the surplus. If it helps to avoid big tax cuts or spending increases before dealing with the long-term issues of Medicare and Social Security, that would be good.'' Mr. Gore's lock box plan would not do anything to shore up Medicare, which, without any changes, is expected to become insolvent around 2025. By earmarking the Medicare surplus for debt reduction, the main economic effect of Mr. Gore's plan would be to underscore his commitment to paying off the national debt by 2013 or sooner, a path that he says would help keep interest rates down and stimulate economic growth. But by setting up even an indirect tradeoff between Medicare and tax cuts, Mr. Gore is returning to a political strategy that Democrats have used successfully against Republicans for years: implying that Republican tax cuts for the rich would endanger health insurance for some of the nation's most vulnerable citizens.
 When Gov George W Bush seeks guidance in his presidential campaign, aide he turns to the most is Karl Rove; Vice Pres Al Gore bounces ideas off Carter Eskew (S) When he does seek guidance, the aide whom Gov. George W. Bush turns to the most is Karl Rove. Vice President Al Gore bounces ideas off Carter Eskew. Both aides have been known to be interrupted as many as a dozen times a day by calls from their bosses from the road. Their requests can be about anything. For instance, Mr. Gore was unsure whether it would look bad if he baby-sat for his grandson instead of joining his wife and daughter at the Million Mom March in Washington. When he does seek guidance, the aide whom Gov. George W. Bush turns to the most is Karl Rove. Vice President Al Gore bounces ideas off Carter Eskew. Both aides have been known to be interrupted as many as a dozen times a day by calls from their bosses from the road. Their requests can be about anything. For instance, Mr. Gore was unsure whether it would look bad if he baby-sat for his grandson instead of joining his wife and daughter at the Million Mom March in Washington. Mr. Bush's aides could not come up with a major example in which they had persuaded the governor to change his mind. After weeks, the Gore campaign offered only one: The vice president was adamant that he go to the Super Bowl last January to see the Tennessee Titans. The problem was that the game was on the Sunday before the New Hampshire primary. It took Mr. Eskew and Charles Burson, the chief of staff who is also a Titans fan, to tell Mr. Gore that ''it was not the best use of his time,'' said  Chris Lehane, a Gore spokesman
 The best-known recent case of a Section 527 group sponsoring political ads occurred in March, when an organization called Republicans for Clean Air ran attack ads against Senator McCain in New York and other states. It turned out, to no one's great surprise, that this group had been set up by a contributor to and crony of Gov. George W. Bush.  Some supporters of Mr. Bush have also formed a group called Shape the Debate and run ads attacking Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Gore used their ads as an excuse to authorize the Democratic Party to run its own soft-money ads, despite his earlier pledge to wait until the Republican Party started running its own soft-money ads.
 Gov George W Bush proposes wide-ranging overhaul of federal budget process in effort to avoid bitter annual standoffs between Congress and the president; Bush also calls for new effort to pass legislation giving president line-item veto power (M) Criticizing Washington for what he termed ''too much needless division,'' Gov. George W. Bush proposed a wide-ranging overhaul of the federal budget process today in an effort to avoid the bitter annual standoffs between Congress and the president over taxes and spending. Mr. Bush put at the center of his plan a call for the president and Congress to shift from an annual budget cycle to a biennial process like the one in his home state, Texas. ''If the discord in Washington never seems to end, this is partly because the budget process never seems to end,'' he said. Criticizing Washington for what he termed ''too much needless division,'' Gov. George W. Bush proposed a wide-ranging overhaul of the federal budget process today in an effort to avoid the bitter annual standoffs between Congress and the president over taxes and spending. Mr. Bush put at the center of his plan a call for the president and Congress to shift from an annual budget cycle to a biennial process like the one in his home state, Texas. ''If the discord in Washington never seems to end, this is partly because the budget process never seems to end,'' he said. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, also called for a new effort to pass legislation giving the president line-item veto power. And he asked for a change in budget procedures to require the president to sign the annual spring budget resolution, which currently is the work of Congress alone. ''I do not dismiss the serious disagreements that are part of the political process,'' Mr. Bush said, ''but the reality is that Americans look upon this spectacle in Washington and they don't like what they see.'' Mr. Bush's proposal for structural changes came against the backdrop of five and a half tumultuous years of partisan bickering between President Clinton and the Republican Congress that was elected in 1994. The years have brought the government shutdown of 1995, President Clinton's impeachment, stalled nominations and gridlock over policy. Mr. Bush said there was ''enough blame to go around.'' But appearing in the home state of Vice President Al Gore, his Democratic opponent, he leveled most of his criticism at the Clinton administration, particularly at Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush denounced the tone of Mr. Gore's responses to his policy proposals, particularly one to divert some Social Security payroll taxes into individual investment accounts. ''Ideas he doesn't share are never just the other side of the issue,'' Mr. Bush said. ''They're called reckless or radical. Proposals he disapproves of are never just arguable, they are always 'risky schemes.' This unnecessary rhetoric is characteristic of the tone in Washington, D.C. It's the war room mentality: the hostile stance, the harsh charges, the lashing out at enemies. We have had eight years of this, and eight years is enough.'' The Gore campaign, which has recently toned down much of its criticism of Mr. Bush, said the governor was trying to duck serious debate. ''This rhetoric is Governor Bush's way of avoiding real debate on issues such as his plan to privatize Social Security,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. With his appearance today, Mr. Bush continued the reliance on policy speeches that have marked his campaign this spring and that he and his advisers believe help him draw a contrast with Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush's speech allowed him to compete with Mr. Gore on one of the vice president's trademark issues -- ''reinventing government'' -- and it also borrowed from Mr. Bush's Republican primary opponent, Senator John McCain, who crusaded against pork barrel spending. Mr. Bush proposed the creation of a bipartisan legislative commission that would comb spending bills for pork barrel projects, combine them into one list and require Congress to vote on the entire package. Stephen Goldsmith, Mr. Bush's chief domestic policy adviser, said the campaign had consulted with Constitutional experts and believed line-item veto legislation could be rewritten to meet Constitutional muster. Both the Clinton administration and the Republican Congressional leadership also support biennial budgeting. Although Republicans like Representative Bill Archer, who heads the Ways and Means Committee, and Speaker J. Dennis Hastert support the idea, such a plan was defeated 217-201 in the House last month. The opponents, mostly Democrats, said it would reduce Congress to fiscal lame ducks, unable to exercise authority over federal agencies. A proposal like Mr. Bush's to have the president sign the Congressional budget resolution was also defeated in the House, 250-166. Mr. Bush argued that changing the budget process to a two-year cycle would allow Congress to be less consumed with budgeting and to focus on oversight and other business in the off years. Under his proposal, budgeting would take place in the years when lawmakers are not running for re-election. To head off the threat of a government shutdown, Mr. Bush proposed that if spending bills were not passed by the start of the fiscal year, spending would continue at whatever was lowest: the previous year's levels or levels proposed by the president's budget. Mr. Bush also urged the Senate to take no more than 60 days to act on presidential nominees. The delays have become so severe that during the Clinton administration 44 percent of nominations took more than six months to come before the Senate, and some have been stalled for years. Mr. Bush said Senate confirmation hearings had become too partisan. ''Often,'' he said, ''they are occasions for pushing a larger agenda having nothing to do with the merits of the nominee. At some memorable low points, hearings have become a gantlet of accusation, interest group warfare and public humiliation. And this has done too much harm to the process.''
 Special report on divergent presidential campaign styles of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; Gore prides himself on his ability to make informed decisions, is immersed in policy and logistical matters and has his fingerprints on every major campaign move and pronouncement; Bush, by contrast, is far more removed from specifics, preferring to rely on gut instinct and to surround himself with people he trusts to come up with proposals for him to sign off on; contrasts between how Bush and Gore make decisions, handle pressure and relate to their advisers offer revealing insights into how they might run their presidencies; photos (L) The vice president just was not satisfied. A team of graphic artists had labored to come up with a logo to emblazon on Al Gore's campaign buttons, bumper stickers and placards, but he felt they had failed to capture the right spirit. So he sketched an alternative, a swoosh and a star -- a simple, futuristic look with the words, ''Gore 2000.'' ''I took several of the suggested designs and kind of recombined them and added a different approach,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I sat down and drew that on the table with the people who had made suggestions.'' The vice president just was not satisfied. A team of graphic artists had labored to come up with a logo to emblazon on Al Gore's campaign buttons, bumper stickers and placards, but he felt they had failed to capture the right spirit. So he sketched an alternative, a swoosh and a star -- a simple, futuristic look with the words, ''Gore 2000.'' ''I took several of the suggested designs and kind of recombined them and added a different approach,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I sat down and drew that on the table with the people who had made suggestions.'' It never occurred to Gov. George W. Bush to do that. When his staff presented him with a proposal for a blocky, traditional logo featuring an American flag and the words, ''George W. Bush For President,'' his response was to the point. ''I just looked at it and said, 'It looks good,' '' Mr. Bush recalled. It may seem like a small thing, but Mr. Gore's keen interest in the signature of his campaign and Mr. Bush's admitted lack of interest perfectly capture the stark differences in how they are running for president. Mr. Gore's fingerprints are on every major move or pronouncement. He prides himself on making decisions based on his judgment, built on nearly 8 years in the White House and 16 years in Congress, and not on the views of his advisers. The vice president immerses himself in policy, and often even in logistical matters. Recently, when he was in a rush to travel from New York to Washington, Mr. Gore announced that he was scuttling Air Force Two because he would make better time on the US Airways shuttle. His stunned military and Secret Service aides knew not to try to talk him out of it. Mr. Bush, by contrast, is far more removed from specifics. He prefers to surround himself with people he trusts. Once he feels comfortable that they understand his philosophy, he leaves them to come up with proposals for him to sign off on. Notably, it was Mr. Bush's aides, not the candidate, who plotted a course of action when the campaign was in crisis after Mr. Bush lost the New Hampshire primary. The unmistakable contrasts in how Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore make decisions, handle pressure and relate to their advisers offer revealing insights into how they would run their presidencies. In extensive interviews, officials from both campaigns sought to play up anecdotes that showed that their candidate would operate most effectively in the Oval Office. Mr. Gore's supporters say his impressive knowledge base allows him to comfortably make informed decisions. Mr. Bush's backers argue that his lower level of engagement is a virtue because the governor is not burdened by needless detail. Mr. Gore bases his decisions on devouring information and reaching a reasoned conclusion; Mr. Bush operates more on gut instinct. Mr. Gore often lectures his advisers; Mr. Bush expects his to tell him what he needs to know. Mr. Gore happily debates policy minutiae; Mr. Bush prefers to speed through meetings to get to the heart of the matter. Mr. Gore is not bashful about sitting at a laptop and rewriting speeches; Mr. Bush prefers using a black Sharpie marker to delete sections or change a word here or there. The vice president's aides say he sometimes sees himself as the smartest person in the room, and often he is right. Mr. Bush's aides say he likes to joke to assembled advisers about holes in his knowledge, which is a healthy sign, they say, of confidence. Mr. Gore scours the newspapers and, often several times a day, will cut out an obscure detail or paragraph and hand it to an aide with instructions. He tries to read every word written about him. Mr. Bush's aides said the governor read about himself from time to time, but preferred to have his wife, Laura, or others sum up what was written about him. Neither Mr. Gore nor Mr. Bush is the stereotypical empty suit manipulated by handlers. If anything, both candidates tend to be stubborn, often not yielding to their advisers' suggestions. Not surprisingly, both are sensitive to caricatures: Mr. Gore as a control freak drowning in specifics who discounts others' opinions or Mr. Bush as a naive puppet. Insisting in an interview that his artistry on the logo was ''the exception rather than the rule,'' Mr. Gore said he tried ''to avoid getting bogged down in details.'' He made clear that his style was not like that of President Jimmy Carter, who obsessed over the schedule at the White House tennis courts, or President Calvin Coolidge, who scrutinized guest lists at White House parties. Even so, Mr. Gore asserted that his grasp of policy would be invaluable in the White House. ''I like the broad brush strokes,'' he said. ''But sometimes a significant detail is actually a broad brush stroke in disguise. Sometimes, a significant detail can be a fulcrum around which the rest of the issue turns.'' Mr. Bush made no excuses for his gaps in knowledge. ''I don't think anybody knows everything about every subject, and anyone who pretends they do is someone I don't want to be the president, because this is a complicated world,'' he said in an interview. ''The key to the presidency is to set divisions, to lay out the parameters by which decisions will be made and to encourage really good, competent people to serve the country for the right reasons and to build a team.'' If anything, that was an understatement. The reality is that Mr. Gore is the driving force behind virtually every big decision of his campaign, and many small ones. His propensity to run things himself has not scared off talented aides. But Mr. Gore often turns to them more as resources to press forward with his own decisions rather than as principal decision makers. At a meeting in late May of his closest advisers at his residence at the Naval Observatory here, Mr. Gore offhandedly told them he had settled on a new campaign strategy. He would halt the relentless attacks on Mr. Bush that some Democrats feared were doing Mr. Gore more harm than good. ''He said, 'That's what I'm going to do,' '' recalled Carter Eskew, one of Mr. Gore's top advisers. ''Then he laid out a series of things, like family issues, that became the basis of the next two weeks.'' Some advisers had felt it was important that Mr. Gore stay on the offensive. But no one dared to challenge him. ''When you work with somebody, you know when there's an opening -- and when there isn't,'' Mr. Eskew said. ''He was emphatic.'' Mr. Gore's aides also winced when he told them he would propose a sweeping reform of the campaign finance system. Many thought he would be ridiculed because of the questions surrounding his own fund-raising practices in 1996. Others worried that the issue was not a big vote-getter. Repeatedly, they tried to distract Mr. Gore by saying other matters needed attention first. ''We'd divert him into some other areas and he'd say, 'What about that speech?' '' said Tony Coelho, the Gore campaign chairman. Yet Mr. Gore persisted. ''It did not give me pause,'' the vice president said of the objections. Mr. Gore is similarly never hesitant about upending speeches or events. Early last month, when he was traveling on Air Force Two from Washington to Chicago, he abruptly discarded a health care speech after reading a clipping from a morning newspaper saying that the National Rifle Association was thrilled at the prospect of a Bush presidency. Mr. Gore, who was traveling to a conference of health care reporters, summoned aides to his cabin and announced that he would talk about gun violence. The hook: that easy access to handguns is a health care issue. His aides said they argued against it, but Mr. Gore did not budge. After Air Force Two  landed, Mr. Gore kept the motorcade waiting while he worked the phones. He called one aide in Washington about statistics he remembered that had been put out by the American Medical Association. ''I asked her to quickly find out whether or not I was right in remembering that the A.M.A. had done a big statement or publication on the handgun and the health care issue,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and find relevant statistics on it. She found the statistics that I said I needed.'' That was hardly an exception. After Mr. Gore's advisers drafted a statement for him last December that castigated his own administration's policy on gays in the military, the vice president thought it was too weak. So he wrote a harder-edged statement himself, over the objections of several advisers. ''We thought it would kill him in the South,'' one said. Then, when Mr. Bush announced his plan to cut taxes by $483 billion over five years, Mr. Gore told his aides, ''We need to respond quickly.'' Riding in a sport utility vehicle headed to Ida Grove, Iowa, from Sioux City, he began calling experts like Lawrence H. Summers, the treasury secretary, and Gene Sperling, President Clinton's national economic adviser. Mr. Sperling said Mr. Gore had quizzed him with questions like ''How does it compare with the House tax cut?'' and ''Will this consume all of the budget surplus?'' Mr. Gore attacked the tax plan at an open meeting and then again at a news conference, saying it would squander the surplus. Sometimes, Mr. Gore plays scheduler. On the morning after the Iowa caucuses, he and his aides were operating on virtually no sleep. Finally, his entourage made it to a hotel in Nashua, N.H., for a few hours' nap before the one scheduled event of the day. But just as two aides, Michael Feldman and Chris Lehane, were falling asleep in their shared hotel room, Mr. Gore came banging on the door. ''Go away,'' Mr. Lehane shouted, not realizing it was the vice president. Finally, the two aides, wearing boxer shorts, opened the door. Mr. Gore, clad in a bathrobe with his schedule in hand, demanded, ''This is all we're doing today?'' Because of his deep involvement in decisions, Mr. Gore cannot blame his advisers for ones that go awry, like how he distanced himself from President Clinton on Elian Gonzalez. Mr. Bush is not inclined to alter a speech sharply or a schedule on the fly. He behaves more like a corporate executive. His aides welcome the comparison to President Ronald Reagan, who did not dither with details and set out broad goals, despite being ridiculed as out of touch. Even at the most turbulent moment of Mr. Bush's campaign, after his humiliating loss to Senator John McCain in the New Hampshire primary, the governor stuck to his policy. First, Mr. Bush made clear to his aides that he was distressed with the state of the campaign, telling them that it had to be more aggressive and not watch idly as Mr. McCain persuaded voters that he was the only reformer in the race. Then, rather than dictate remedies, Mr. Bush dispatched his aides to come up with suggestions. ''He laid out the principles of what he thought went right and wrong in New Hampshire,'' said Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist. ''Then we came up with options that were presented to him formally and informally over a couple days. He accepted them and rejected a few.'' It was a far cry from what Mr. Gore did last September, when former Senator Bill Bradley began surging in polls. Without consulting his aides, Mr. Gore uprooted his listless operation in Washington and moved it to Nashville. ''I announced we were going to do it,'' he recalled, ''and that was it.'' Mr. Bush's aides could not cite a time when the governor, responding to Mr. Gore or a news development, had ripped up a speech and turned a day's schedule on its head. ''We try to control our own agenda,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director and one of his closest aides. ''That doesn't mean that he's inflexible. When Cardinal O'Connor passed away, the governor wanted to attend the funeral. That's an example of something that changed.'' But even the decision to attend the funeral of Cardinal John O'Connor came at the suggestion of an aide, not Mr. Bush. ''I don't think it initially came from him,'' Ms. Hughes said. It would be unfair, though, to portray Mr. Bush as passive. He does not hesitate to overrule his advisers, and when he does he is often guided more by instinct than policy. After reviewing a speech he was due to deliver on Social Security before a group of newspaper publishers in May, Ms. Hughes said, Mr. Bush was puzzled by the content because he was scheduled to deliver a Social Security address the next week. She recalled: ''He turned around and looked at me: 'Why are we talking about just Social Security? Why aren't we talking about the importance of reforming education and rebuilding the military?' '' The speech was retooled. Before the South Carolina primary, Mr. Bush's advertising team had produced a commercial that opened with black-and-white shots of lobbyists in cigars in a smoke-filled room. The intent was to portray Senator McCain as in the pocket of lobbyists. But Mr. Bush rejected the commercial as too harsh. Mark McKinnon, Mr. Bush's media consultant, said: ''He was very affirmative about it: 'This isn't going out under my name.' It was not a debatable point.'' And the night Mr. Bush defeated Mr. McCain in the Virginia primary, his aides had prepared a blistering victory speech. But in his heavy black marker, Mr. Bush deleted several pages of the most negative sections about Mr. McCain. For example, he kept the sentence, ''On the next step of welfare reform, he has no plan.'' But he crossed out the next sentence: ''His policy agenda is narrow and shallow, and it makes no place for the poor and the forgotten and the frail.'' ''The feeling was we needed to keep the pressure on Senator McCain,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''I told him there was a lot of frustration at headquarters.'' She said Mr. Bush telephoned several aides to explain that he did not want to undermine them, but felt that the speech was too strident. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore fume when staff members arrive late for meetings. They have little tolerance for aides who are not prepared. Yet their styles are quite different. Mr. Gore is more like a sometimes overbearing teacher, while Mr. Bush often plays the impatient student. Donald L. Evans, the campaign chairman and Mr. Bush's best friend, put it this way, ''His classic question is, 'Have you told me everything I need to know?' '' While Mr. Bush's biggest peeve at meetings is when aides leave their cell phones or pagers on, he is also known for not abiding long-winded presentations. Mr. Bush is not bashful about pleading ignorance, and will even joke about how he failed a reporter's pop quiz on foreign policy. Explaining Mr. Bush's aversion to too much detail about the campaign's finances, Mr. Evans said: ''We talk about the budget a fair amount. All he wants to know is, 'Are we under or over?' '' While Mr. Bush has no use for flip charts, aides said, Mr. Gore often draws charts on an easel. ''Some days I think he is a professor,'' said Donna Brazile, the campaign manager. Even Mr. Gore acknowledged that his grasp of issues, and his certainty about how to proceed, could be intimidating. ''I think sometimes a young staffer or a new staffer who hasn't gone through the process before may feel sometimes a little hesitant to speak up in disagreement,'' he said. ''But it doesn't last long because I try to encourage it.'' Still, some who know Mr. Gore worry that his vast knowledge can sometimes lead him to foreclose other points of view. ''Gore comes off to me as a guy who has absolute confidence in what should be done and really isn't all that interested in what you think substantively,'' said Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Delaware Democrat who supported Mr. Gore in the primaries. ''Al is interested in getting briefed, forming an opinion and then it's settled. That reflects a political certitude: a guy who will make decisions a la Harry Truman and go home and go to sleep. Except Truman operated on a gut assessment based on a historical context. Al operates on an intellectual assessment that doesn't accommodate much input.'' Mr. Gore also compared his style to Harry Truman's. But he said that was a positive attribute. The operating approaches of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush not only reflect their experiences but also their personalities and interests. Mr. Gore had a deep interest in his campaign's logo -- as well as in helping dream up a logo for the Democratic National Convention -- because he has dabbled himself in painting and thinks political branding is important. ''I've always felt that logos and other visual symbols that are seen over and over and over again actually are pretty important,'' Mr. Gore said. ''And if you get one that really hangs together well, it's much better than having one that's kind of mediocre.'' But Mr. Bush does not share that passion. In fact, asked about his logo, he replied, ''You mean what's on the bumper sticker and stuff?'' Saying that such artistic endeavors would waste his time, he added, ''There are people smarter than me on designing logos.''
 Gore to Focus on Medicare  Vice President Al Gore said he would deliver a speech in New York City next week on preserving Medicare, as his campaign began promoting a theme of guiding the nation during an era of budget surpluses. Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic fund-raiser, agreed to serve as chairman of the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, at the behest of Mr. Gore. No Copies of Missing E-Mail  The White House informed a House committee that it could not find back-up records for lost e-mail messages sent to or from Vice President Al Gore's office in 1998 and 1999. Bush Proposal on Budgets  Gov. George W. Bush proposed an overhaul of the federal budget process to force earlier negotiations and avoid the annual standoffs between Congress and the president over tax policy and spending.
