 The time was to be in addition to the horse-race style of political reporting that researchers said dominates television coverage. The panel, known as the Gore Commission because it reported to Vice President Al Gore, said that decisions on how to deliver the five minutes would be left to the stations and could come in several forms, such as debates, interviews with the candidates or issue statements. Leslie Moonves, the president of CBS Television and one of the chairmen of the Gore Commission, said, ''Simply offering free time when candidates and groups can continue to spend unlimited sums on television will do little to bring about the kind of reform the American public seeks or deserves.'' Paul La Camera, general manager of WCVB, a Hearst-Argyle Television station in Boston, said efforts to hold a series of debates before the New Hampshire primary faltered because only two of the four leading contenders in each party, Mr. Gore and Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, would agree to participate.
 Correction: report June 10 Campaign Briefing column support for Gov George W Bush in CNN-USA Today Gallup poll on presidential race; he is favored by 48 percent of likely voters, not 44 A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Saturday misstated support for Gov. George W. Bush in a CNN-USA Today Gallup poll on the presidential race. He was favored by 48 percent of likely voters, not 44. A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Saturday misstated support for Gov. George W. Bush in a CNN-USA Today Gallup poll on the presidential race. He was favored by 48 percent of likely voters, not 44.
 New York City police arrest Ramon Sanchez, man with history of mental illness, in connection with setting fire in Bushwick section of Brooklyn; he is also suspect in three other neighborhood fires that injured 15 firefighters and 5 residents (M) Worse yet, they were set in rapid succession -- four within just three hours early yesterday morning -- and that forced nearly 160 Brooklyn firefighters into a desperate scramble. With each panicked call to 911, fire companies raced from block to block in Bushwick, rescuing dozens of families from burning tenements. Worse yet, they were set in rapid succession -- four within just three hours early yesterday morning -- and that forced nearly 160 Brooklyn firefighters into a desperate scramble. With each panicked call to 911, fire companies raced from block to block in Bushwick, rescuing dozens of families from burning tenements.
 Lawrence C. Marshall, legal director for the Center on Wrongful Convictions, called on the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles and Gov. George W. Bush to stop the June 22 execution of the inmate, Gary Graham, and order a new trial. Noting that Mr. Graham had been convicted largely on the testimony of one witness, Mr. Marshall held a news conference with 11 people wrongly convicted because of erroneous witness testimony. All 11 are now free; 3 had been on death row, in Florida, Illinois and Maryland. Lawrence C. Marshall, legal director for the Center on Wrongful Convictions, called on the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles and Gov. George W. Bush to stop the June 22 execution of the inmate, Gary Graham, and order a new trial. Noting that Mr. Graham had been convicted largely on the testimony of one witness, Mr. Marshall held a news conference with 11 people wrongly convicted because of erroneous witness testimony. All 11 are now free; 3 had been on death row, in Florida, Illinois and Maryland.
 Vice Pres Al Gore campaigns in New Jersey, where Jon S Corzine overwhelmingly won Democratic nomination for campaign for US Senate; talk among analysts and supporters of both candidates centers on reverse-coattails notion--of how Corzine's organizational and financial strength can help Gore in state, which is among handful expected to be major battlegrounds; photo (M) It was not so long ago that Jon S. Corzine was barely known beyond Wall Street, and then only as an exceedingly wealthy investment banker with a place in his heart, and his checkbook, for Democratic candidates like Vice President Al Gore. It was not so long ago that Jon S. Corzine was barely known beyond Wall Street, and then only as an exceedingly wealthy investment banker with a place in his heart, and his checkbook, for Democratic candidates like Vice President Al Gore. And, oddly enough, Mr. Corzine is again in a position to help Mr. Gore. The vice president flew here this afternoon for a nighttime television appearance, and stopped at a south Trenton diner to put in a word for Mr. Corzine. But the talk among political analysts and supporters of both candidates centered on a reverse-coattails notion: how much Mr. Corzine's organizational and financial strength could help Mr. Gore in New Jersey, one of a handful of states expected to be major battlegrounds. Polls show Mr. Gore running neck and neck with his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. A Mason-Dixon poll released today found Mr. Gore with a lead of 42 percent to 40 percent in New Jersey. If Mr. Corzine ''spends a lot of money to get the vote out in November, that certainly has the potential to help Gore,'' said Clifford Zukin, the director of The Star-Ledger/Eagleton poll and a political science professor at Rutgers University. ''Usually, the top of the ticket leads,'' Professor Zukin said. ''But this is a unique candidate that we have here in Corzine, in terms of his ability to spend money. So it could produce unique circumstances this year.'' But Mr. Corzine's advisers, some of whom are also leading Gore supporters in New Jersey, go so far as to suggest that Mr. Corzine, the rookie politician, could actually show Mr. Gore, the seasoned professional, a thing or two about relating to people. Mr. Gore, who has been striving to make himself more appealing to voters, especially women, was scheduled to take part tonight in a town hall meeting with 150 women that was to be broadcast on the New Jersey Network and C-SPAN, as well as over Oxygen.com, a Web site for women. At Pat's Diner, a relic of Trenton's better days, Mr. Gore and Mr. Corzine made a brief appearance to pose for photographs together. They slid onto stools at the counter, ordered mozzarella sticks, a coffee and a Diet Pepsi, and spun around to face a group of schoolgirls. Mr. Gore seemed relaxed. But next to the loose-limbed Mr. Corzine, anyone could look wooden. ''You have very good posture,'' said Cyntay Matthews, 15, who offered Mr. Gore her rosary beads and told him he was much more handsome in person than on TV. But when Mr. Gore, and the cameras, turned to another youngster, Mr. Corzine kept talking to Cyntay and another young woman, asking  about their plans for college. Cyntay asked Mr. Corzine his name. He gave  her a business card. Answering just a few questions from reporters, Mr. Gore said he thought Mr. Corzine would ''make a great United States senator,'' and likened him to Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey, who is retiring and who also entered politics after making millions in business. ''I see Jon Corzine doing exactly the same thing,'' Mr. Gore said. ''He's got business experience, he knows how to make a budget work, he's progressive in his values. I'd be delighted to be on the same ticket with him.'' When the two candidates left, it was Mr. Gore who paid the $7 tab. He left behind a $20 bill.
 Today, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who spoke to the mayors by satellite from the family home in Maine, embraced many of their issues, though the overwhelmingly Democratic majority of mayors took issue with him afterward. ''What's changed is the re-urbanization of America,'' said Larry Bartley, Republican mayor of Titusville, Fla., and a supporter of Mr. Bush. ''More and more Americans are moving back to the cities because they like what's going on there.'' Governor Bush, repeating several ideas he has proposed on the campaign trail, called for allowing people who now get subsidized rent to use that money for down payments on their homes. He also advocated tax credits for builders who construct houses to sell below market cost in certain neighborhoods. Democrats criticized Mr. Bush for not offering more to the mayors in the form of direct housing subsidies, and for not going further on gun control. But on other, more general, issues, there was more consensus. Mr. Bush promised to fully finance a federal program that allocates up to $900 million a year to buy open space near cities, something many Republicans in Congress have been reluctant to do. He backed increased educational choices, including vouchers and charter schools, as a way to train future workers. And in a nod to the change in the urban pulse, Mr. Bush noted that cities like ''Pittsburgh and Cleveland have seen a renaissance.''
 Bigger Surplus, Bigger Plans  Projections of the federal budget surplus are likely to be revised upward by as much as $1 trillion, leading Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to prepare differing claims to the windfall.
 Rev Frank J Capelludo is arrested and charged with sodomizing 14-year-old boy in rectory of Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Bushwick, Brooklyn, and sexually abusing him repeatedly over course of more than a year (S) The priest, the Rev. Frank J. Capelludo, 52, of Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Bushwick, was charged with sodomy and ''numerous counts'' of sexual abuse, said Sgt. Elias Nikas, a police spokesman. The priest, the Rev. Frank J. Capelludo, 52, of Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Bushwick, was charged with sodomy and ''numerous counts'' of sexual abuse, said Sgt. Elias Nikas, a police spokesman.
 STARS, BARS AND BRUISES -- Gov. George W. Bush was criticized during the primary campaign for refusing to take sides in the emotional debate over the Confederate flag flying atop South Carolina's Capitol. But over the weekend in Texas, the governor played a role in the replacement of two State Supreme Court plaques featuring Confederate flags with new plaques devoid of any Confederate symbols. The replacement was the work of the state's General Services Commission, which acted in consultation with the governor's office and the Supreme Court. Bush aides say it was ''strictly a Texas issue,'' totally unrelated to either the presidential campaign or the South Carolina dispute. The Texas plaques had generated debate in recent months after the state chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People asked that they be taken down. N.A.A.C.P. officials praised Mr. Bush for ''putting principle above politics,'' but groups opposed to replacing the plaques, which were removed on Friday night, have vowed daily demonstrations and a court suit. ''This is a sad day when officials of the state come in the dead of night and rip our heritage off the walls of a public building,'' said Kirk Lyons, director of the North Carolina-based Southern Legal Resource Center. STARS, BARS AND BRUISES -- Gov. George W. Bush was criticized during the primary campaign for refusing to take sides in the emotional debate over the Confederate flag flying atop South Carolina's Capitol. But over the weekend in Texas, the governor played a role in the replacement of two State Supreme Court plaques featuring Confederate flags with new plaques devoid of any Confederate symbols. The replacement was the work of the state's General Services Commission, which acted in consultation with the governor's office and the Supreme Court. Bush aides say it was ''strictly a Texas issue,'' totally unrelated to either the presidential campaign or the South Carolina dispute. The Texas plaques had generated debate in recent months after the state chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People asked that they be taken down. N.A.A.C.P. officials praised Mr. Bush for ''putting principle above politics,'' but groups opposed to replacing the plaques, which were removed on Friday night, have vowed daily demonstrations and a court suit. ''This is a sad day when officials of the state come in the dead of night and rip our heritage off the walls of a public building,'' said Kirk Lyons, director of the North Carolina-based Southern Legal Resource Center. NOT ME, McCAIN REPEATS -- Senator John McCain said yesterday, again and again and again, that there was no basis to continuing speculation that he might consider serving as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate. But the speculation continued nonetheless, driven this time by a column in which Robert Novak wrote that during a private breakfast with Republican lawmakers on May 17, Mr. McCain said he might change his mind if his running would ensure a Bush victory. Asked by Reuters about that report, Mr. McCain said he had made it ''very clear'' to Mr. Bush that he did not want to be vice president. And ''I will not be,'' he added. But in an interview with CBS News, Mr. McCain had a slightly different take. ''I may have said it, but what I meant to say was that I asked Governor Bush not to consider me,'' he said. ''The scenario is just not there.'' Then, on the Don Imus show on MSNBC, he offered still another nuance. Asked whether he had told the lawmakers that he would run with Mr. Bush if it would help Republicans keep control of Congress, he replied: ''No. I don't want to be considered. I kept being pressed by several of the House people. I said, you know, something along the lines, you know, 'If it was just an incredible situation.' There is never a scenario that it is absolutely impossible under any circumstances. But there is no circumstance that I can foresee.'' NEW AIDE FOR BUSH -- The Bush campaign is picking up a new senior adviser from one of the governor's top Senate allies, an addition that will help shore up the sometimes tenuous ties between Mr. Bush and Capitol Hill Republicans. The new hire, Kyle Simmons, chief of staff to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate Republican re-election campaign chairman, will join Bush headquarters in Austin later this month with the title of deputy political director. In enlisting Mr. Simmons, the governor gains a skilled political operative who is also familiar with Kentucky, a battleground state this fall. Kentucky has a Democratic governor, but both senators are Republican and the House delegation is dominated, 5 to 1, by Republicans. Mr. Simmons ran Mr. McConnell's successful re-election campaign in 1996, as well as Jim Bunning's razor-thin Senate victory in 1998.
 Projections of federal budget surplus are likely to be revised upward by as much as $1 trillion, leading presidential contenders Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush to prepare differing claims to windfall; Gore aides say he will continue emphasizing debt reduction, and intends to make case that with surplus growing spending more on major programs is vital element of any plan to invest in nation's future; Bush aides say he will suggest using any additional surplus to help reduce national debt or help pay for system of personal investment accounts within Social Security (M) Projections of the federal budget surplus are likely to be revised upward by as much as $1 trillion in coming weeks, leading Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to prepare differing claims to the windfall. For Mr. Gore, more money means new initiatives to encourage savings and improve education, health care and environmental protection, as well as to speed his plan to reduce the national debt, his aides said. Projections of the federal budget surplus are likely to be revised upward by as much as $1 trillion in coming weeks, leading Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to prepare differing claims to the windfall. For Mr. Gore, more money means new initiatives to encourage savings and improve education, health care and environmental protection, as well as to speed his plan to reduce the national debt, his aides said. For Mr. Bush, it is a chance to assert that his plans for a big tax cut, the creation of private investment accounts within Social Security and a national missile defense program are not only affordable but would also leave plenty of money for additional debt reduction, his aides said. Mr. Gore will begin setting out his ideas in a speech in New York on Tuesday, the kickoff to a campaign swing in which he plans to emphasize that fiscal prudence has played a major role in bringing the economy to where it is today, his aides said. Mr. Gore will continue to emphasize debt reduction. But with the surplus growing, he intends to make a case that spending more on education, health care and the environment is a vital element of any plan to invest in the nation's future. And he will offer some modest tax cuts of his own, including a program, still under development, that would give tax breaks to people with low and moderate incomes to encourage higher rates of savings. ''This election is going to revolve around the fundamental question of how do we responsibly use our budget prosperity,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. Mr. Bush's aides said their calculations also suggested a big upward revision in the surplus, but they said they would not offer any new programs or tax cuts. Rather, they said, they would use any additional surplus to help reduce the national debt or to help pay for a transition to a system of personal investment accounts within Social Security. ''If voters have a choice between a Democrat and a Republican in Washington when the money comes in, they can be more confident that the money will go to debt reduction under Bush, because the history of the Democrats is that they will spend it,'' said Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman. Advisers to Mr. Bush said the new numbers would insulate them against Mr. Gore's persistent attacks on the Republican as fiscally irresponsible. They said that Mr. Bush's plans could be paid for even within the budget forecasts the campaign has been using for the last month, and that there was no question they would be affordable under the coming projections. ''This would alleviate any and all concern that the tax plan did not fit within the budget and did not leave substantial room for a comprehensive package that would include Social Security reform,'' said John F. Cogan, an economist at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University who advises Mr. Bush. While Mr. Gore has worked hard to position himself as the guardian of the strong economy and the candidate of fiscal responsibility, any shift he makes toward new spending programs will leave him vulnerable to attacks by Mr. Bush as a traditional Democratic big spender. Yet Mr. Gore's aides are convinced that using the nation's moment of robust fiscal health to deal with problems other than the debt is justified on policy grounds and politically popular as well. If Mr. Bush tries to argue against steps to improve education, clean up the water and air, protect open spaces and improve access to health care, he will be right where Mr. Gore wants him, one adviser to the vice president said today. To the degree that the new numbers make his plans look affordable, Mr. Bush has much to gain. But the revisions could make it more difficult for him to argue that the federal government needs to shrink in size and influence, one of the ideological cornerstones of his campaign.
 Gasil Collins's Op-Ed column on preparations by Republican presidential candidate Gov Ggeorge W Bush for upcoming Republican National Convention in Philadelphia (M) George W. Bush is hunkered down with his advisers in Kennebunkport this week, putting together plans for a completely positive Republican Convention in Philadelphia, a gathering so free of rancor that nobody will even attack the Democrats, let alone fight with fellow party members. George W. Bush is hunkered down with his advisers in Kennebunkport this week, putting together plans for a completely positive Republican Convention in Philadelphia, a gathering so free of rancor that nobody will even attack the Democrats, let alone fight with fellow party members. Mr. McCain, of course, is famous for speaking the truth even when it's incredibly dull. Mr. Bush's campaign is more into denial. ''The governor wants the focus to be on the policies and plans he believes will help build a strong 21st century. What makes you assume that's not watchable and enjoyable?'' sniffed a spokesman. If people will tune in to ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire'' reruns, perhaps they really will be open to ''Bush, the Next Generation.'' (Like ''Dynasty,'' only everybody's really, really nice.) But I'll bet you those guys in Kennebunkport are working like crazy on packaging. Possible innovations include: * A running convention story along the championship wrestling line, in which a team of ''villains'' repeatedly attempts to ruin things by introducing negative themes and divisive motions. In a climactic moment during prime time, Mr. Bush restores positive thinking by body-slamming ''Pat Buchanan'' (Steve Forbes in a rubber mask) and Newt Gingrich (playing himself). The Democrats' convention plans are less evolved, but seem capable of making Mr. Bush's coronation look like sweeps week programming. ''We expect the convention will focus  on Vice President Gore's biography and on his agenda for continuing the country's prosperity and progress,'' said a spokesman.
