 The prospect of withdrawing from the treaty has already threatened to undermine relations with Russia, as well as with European allies who view the pact as a foundation of nuclear arms control. But a delay in construction of a missile defense could leave Mr. Clinton, and especially Vice President Al Gore, vulnerable to Republican criticism in the middle of the presidential campaign.
 GORE PROSPERS IN NEW YORK -- Vice President Al Gore is giving a double meaning to his current ''prosperity tour,'' collecting a cool million in New York last night. After opening his ''progress and prosperity tour'' in New York on Tuesday, Mr. Gore headed for Scranton, Pa., then swooped back into Manhattan last night for two dinners on the Upper East Side for the Democratic National Committee before resuming his tour today in Cincinnati. Unlike Pennsylvania and Ohio, however, New York is perceived as squarely in Mr. Gore's corner and is a reliable source of campaign cash. The vice president stopped first at the Park Avenue home of Alan J. Patricof, a financier, where 40 people paid $12,500 each for a total take of $500,000. At the next stop, the 90th Street home of Mitchell Blutt, a doctor and venture capitalist, 50 people paid $10,000 each, also yielding $500,000. At Mr. Patricof's apartment, Mr. Gore praised his listeners, many of whom had supported President Clinton's presidential campaign in 1992 and had been contributing to the Democratic Party ever since. The vice president thanked them for ''being a constant source of good common-sense advice on how to pursue progressive values in a way that would ensure economic strength, build the economy and lift up the people who most need the benefits of good policy.'' GORE PROSPERS IN NEW YORK -- Vice President Al Gore is giving a double meaning to his current ''prosperity tour,'' collecting a cool million in New York last night. After opening his ''progress and prosperity tour'' in New York on Tuesday, Mr. Gore headed for Scranton, Pa., then swooped back into Manhattan last night for two dinners on the Upper East Side for the Democratic National Committee before resuming his tour today in Cincinnati. Unlike Pennsylvania and Ohio, however, New York is perceived as squarely in Mr. Gore's corner and is a reliable source of campaign cash. The vice president stopped first at the Park Avenue home of Alan J. Patricof, a financier, where 40 people paid $12,500 each for a total take of $500,000. At the next stop, the 90th Street home of Mitchell Blutt, a doctor and venture capitalist, 50 people paid $10,000 each, also yielding $500,000. At Mr. Patricof's apartment, Mr. Gore praised his listeners, many of whom had supported President Clinton's presidential campaign in 1992 and had been contributing to the Democratic Party ever since. The vice president thanked them for ''being a constant source of good common-sense advice on how to pursue progressive values in a way that would ensure economic strength, build the economy and lift up the people who most need the benefits of good policy.'' NEW ROLE FOR GORE AIDE -- One of Vice President Al Gore's top consultants, Tad Devine, is shifting into a more central role in Nashville, where he will be spending several days a week. Mr. Devine, 45, a partner with Bob Shrum, Mr. Gore's media adviser, has periodically been deployed to Nashville from Washington as a trouble-shooter at crucial moments, such as early this year in the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary, and last fall when Mr. Gore was angling for the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Mr. Devine has a reputation for being a fierce campaigner, but he is also perceived as a mediator among some of the factions that have developed within the Gore campaign. Meanwhile, Tony Coelho, the Gore campaign chairman, was admitted Monday night to a hospital in Washington, where doctors found he had an inflamed colon. He was expected to be released soon. DEBATING FOR CHARITY -- The billionaire financier Theodore J. Forstmann announced yesterday that he would donate a total of $1 million to children's charities if Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas agreed to participate in a 90-minute televised debate on education. Mr. Forstmann, a critic of public education who co-founded the Children's Scholarship Fund, which sends children from poor families to private schools, said he sent invitation letters to each candidate on June 13, but had yet to hear from either one. ''If we are to see the day in which every single child in America has equal opportunity in education,'' Mr. Forstmann said at a news conference at the New York Press Club, ''then we must face up to the failure of our current model of education to provide it.'' Mr. Gore told reporters today that he would accept Mr. Forstmann's proposal, although he seemed a bit insulted that money was attached to it. ''Nobody has to give money to get me to debate,'' he said in response to a question from reporters as he campaigned today in Scranton, Pa. Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said, ''The governor looks forward to debating on education this fall since education is his top domestic priority, but as to this specific invitation, we have not had an opportunity to review it yet.''
 William Safire Op-Ed column reports on meeting of New York Times editors with Vice Pres Al Gore, during which Gore forcefully stood for privacy rights on Internet, saying that people should have right to expect that personal information will remain private unless they affirmatively consent to its release (M) Because Al Gore stands an even chance of becoming our next president, I thought it would be a good idea to nail down his position on a sleeper issue in this campaign: the abuse of computer technology to invade personal privacy. Because Al Gore stands an even chance of becoming our next president, I thought it would be a good idea to nail down his position on a sleeper issue in this campaign: the abuse of computer technology to invade personal privacy. Then Gore got serious: ''I don't think an unfair burden should be placed on the users of the Internet to affirmatively go out and protect their own privacy.'' He added: ''I think there should be procedures commonly accepted which protect them more or less automatically unless they [the Internet users] take affirmative steps to surrender their privacy.'' Gore warmed to the subject: ''I think that people ought to have a right to expect that will remain private unless they affirmatively give up that right for whatever reason. And I don't think the current law goes far enough in protecting them.  Does that answer your question?'' Gore's stand on the right to privacy is forceful. Next is for one of us to pin down George W. Bush.
 Excerpts from answers by former Pres George Bush to questions about Gov George Bush's campaign; in response to request for an interview, former Pres Bush agreed to answer several questions in writing; photo (M) In response to a request for an interview about his son's campaign, former President George Bush agreed to answer several questions in writing. Following are some of the questions and excerpts from Mr. Bush's answers: In response to a request for an interview about his son's campaign, former President George Bush agreed to answer several questions in writing. Following are some of the questions and excerpts from Mr. Bush's answers:
 Mr. Lieberman is such a strong favorite to keep his seat that the only question raised concerning his re-election so far this year has come not from any Republican challenger in Connecticut, but from persistent if unlikely rumors that he is being considered by Vice President Al Gore as a potential running mate.
 GEORGE BUSH, on his son, Gov. George W. Bush. [A24] GEORGE BUSH, on his son, Gov. George W. Bush. [A24]
 It won't do to enumerate dozens of exemplary performances, but the result of such bounty on the stage was that the players began to organize themselves naturally into different kinds of excellence. There was the fluid (Russell Malone on barely amplified but easily heard guitar, Christian McBride on bass, Benny Green playing Art Tatum-like piano), the funky (Art Baron on trombone, Byron Stripling singing ''Minnie the Moocher''), the subtle and deep (Jimmy Heath's harmonically modern tenor saxophone solo on ''Jumpin' at the Woodside,'' Frank Wess in several turns on saxophone and flute), the open and good natured (Joe Bushkin on piano, Warren Vache on cornet) and the near-classical (Ron Carter on bass, Jay Leonhart on bass and singing).
 Vice Pres Al Gore brings his 'prosperity and progress tour' to northeastern Pennsylvania, promoting his plan to protect Medicare; but Gore also becomes ensnared in abortion politics as he is forced at last minute to move his event from a Roman Catholic hospital to a nondenominational health care center after church officials register concern about his support for abortion rights; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore brought his ''prosperity and progress tour'' to northeastern Pennsylvania today, promoting his plan to protect Medicare and saying he would provide additional money for health care providers that serve Medicare patients. But in the process, Mr. Gore also became ensnared in abortion politics as he was forced at the last minute to move his event from a Roman Catholic hospital to a nondenominational health care center after church officials registered concern about Mr. Gore's support for abortion rights. Vice President Al Gore brought his ''prosperity and progress tour'' to northeastern Pennsylvania today, promoting his plan to protect Medicare and saying he would provide additional money for health care providers that serve Medicare patients. But in the process, Mr. Gore also became ensnared in abortion politics as he was forced at the last minute to move his event from a Roman Catholic hospital to a nondenominational health care center after church officials registered concern about Mr. Gore's support for abortion rights. Pennsylvania is a crucial battleground between Mr. Gore and his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. It is also home to one of the largest concentrations of elderly people in the country, and Mr. Gore addressed his message today to them. With the pending retirement of the baby boom, the number of Americans on Medicare is expected to double to 80 million from 40 million by 2035. Mr. Gore has proposed removing Medicare from the normal budget process so that the money collected from the payroll tax for it is dedicated to the health care program, and is not raided by Congress. Mr. Gore also spoke of his commitment to increasing money for biomedical research. And in his zeal to spread a positive, can-do message, he told his audience here at the Allied Services health care center about a conversation he had earlier today with a woman outside a pharmacy. Mr. Gore said that the woman, in her late 20's or early 30's, told him that her 32-year-old husband had died last month of Lou Gehrig's disease. ''She said, 'I'd like to say something to you. I want you to do everything you can to help our country find a cure for that disease,' '' Mr. Gore said. ''Well, there's good news,'' Mr. Gore went on. ''Within weeks, an event will take place that is comparable in importance to the landing of the first person on the moon.'' He was referring to the completion of the first phase of the human genome project, which is expected to aid in the treatment of various diseases. Mr. Gore also said that too many health care providers had been hurt by excessive budget cuts under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and that he would provide extra money for nursing homes, hospitals, home-health agencies and teaching hospitals. Mr. Gore's staff had scheduled today's health care forum at Mercy Hospital, run by nuns, in Scranton. But at the last minute the local bishop, James C. Timlin, a hospital board member who had been notified by the Scranton chapter of Pennsylvanians for Human Life, said he did not want Mr. Gore, a supporter of abortion rights, using the hospital as a political platform. As a result, the Gore campaign switched the event to Allied Services. Still, anti-abortion protesters held a candlelight vigil outside Mr. Gore's hotel on Tuesday night and demonstrated today at his speech. August Perrotti, 49, a state food inspector who identified himself as a Democrat, was one of those holding signs. Like many voters in this Democratic stronghold in Northeastern Pennsylvania, Mr. Perrotti opposes abortion rights and said he would vote for Mr. Bush because of Mr. Gore's stance. He said he was disappointed that Mr. Gore had abandoned his earlier anti-abortion views and was pleased that ''our bishop stood up for us on this issue.'' Meanwhile, Republicans today challenged the whole premise of Mr. Gore's ''prosperity and progress tour,'' mocking Mr. Gore by calling it the ''I invented prosperity tour.'' Gov. Tom Ridge, the Pennsylvania Republican who is under consideration as Mr. Bush's vice-presidential running mate, said in a statement released by the Bush campaign, ''As he travels along on his 'I invented prosperity tour,' I ask him to remember that the credit for our healthy economy belongs to the hard-working men and women of Pennsylvania, not Pennsylvania Avenue.''
 Former Pres George Bush has outwardly maintained a cautious distance from Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign, seldom making joint appearances with his son and rarely commenting on election, but behind the scenes he is anything but remote; former president is in regular contact with Gov Bush's senior campaign staff, including chief strategist Karl Rove; Mr Bush says, in written response to an interview request, that he and his son talk often and that he gives advice when asked for it; in recent interviews with nearly a dozen of the two men's associates, no one comes even close to suggesting that the elder Bush is trying to mold his son's candidacy; Gov Bush is currently on weeklong visit to family compound in Kennebunkport, Me, that includes celebration of Barbara Bush's 75th birthday; photos (M) By most outward signs, former President George Bush has maintained a cautious distance from Gov. George W. Bush's quest for the White House, seldom making joint appearances with his son and rarely commenting on the election. But behind the scenes, Mr. Bush is anything but remote. On several occasions between December and May, Karl Rove, the chief strategist for his son's campaign, traveled from Austin, Tex., to Houston, where the former president spends the winter, to give him private briefings. By most outward signs, former President George Bush has maintained a cautious distance from Gov. George W. Bush's quest for the White House, seldom making joint appearances with his son and rarely commenting on the election. But behind the scenes, Mr. Bush is anything but remote. On several occasions between December and May, Karl Rove, the chief strategist for his son's campaign, traveled from Austin, Tex., to Houston, where the former president spends the winter, to give him private briefings. His friends say that Mr. Bush regularly exchanges calls or e-mail messages with about a half-dozen senior officials in the Texas governor's campaign and that his chief of staff, Jean Becker, is on the phone with Mr. Rove almost every day. ''George and I do talk often,'' former President Bush said this week in written responses to questions that were electronically mailed to Ms. Becker. (Mr. Bush had declined through Ms. Becker to be interviewed on the telephone or in person for this article.) ''When he asks for advice,'' the former president added, ''I give it. He knows I will never breach a confidence or tell anyone.'' Their closeness was suggested by the fact that the Texas governor, who arrived at the family compound in Kennebunkport, Me., late Friday for a weekend celebration of Barbara Bush's 75th birthday, extended his stay until today, and punctuated meetings of his campaign's senior staff with plenty of time with Dad. They golfed together twice, Ms. Becker said, and fished every day. In recent interviews with nearly a dozen of the two men's political and personal associates, no one came even close to suggesting that the elder Mr. Bush was trying to mold his son's candidacy and act the part of a political Pygmalion. ''It added to convictions already held that I should not get out front, that I should continue to stay behind the scenes, off TV, out of the papers,'' Mr. Bush said. An adviser to the Texas governor said the Bush campaign had combed through polling data after the New Hampshire rally, found no evidence that the event had damaged the governor and made a point of reassuring the former president. In some respects, Mr. Bush's situation is similar to that of President Clinton's, and his son's challenge is like Vice President Al Gore's. Both the former president and the current one have knowledge, contacts and public clout that can help the men following in their footsteps. But they must marshal those resources discreetly and recede far enough into the background to let their heirs prove their own mettle. In other ways, the circumstance encountered by the older and younger Bush is almost unique. Only once before in American history did a president's son, John Quincy Adams, also end up in the job, and that was nearly two centuries ago. So former President Bush has no real point of reference for balancing his dual roles as his party's most recent occupant of the White House and the proud, doting father of its presumptive presidential nominee. ''If you ran for president,'' she noted, ''and your dad wanted to help in the campaign, that would be fine and everybody would think it was great.'' But she said that former President Bush knew that if he assisted his son in any way that became publicly apparent, ''Everybody tries to overanalyze it.'' People close to him say that he is a sponge for information about the campaign. His wife has described him as obsessed with the race and jokingly complained about having to tear him away from C-Span, and he receives faxes and e-mail messages from political contacts with thoughts on the race. In turn, he shares these bulletins with others, sometimes sending messages about the campaign to extended family members as often as once a week, said the oldest of his 14 grandchildren, George P. Bush. ''Bush is consumed with this,'' one of these officials said. Another described the former president as ''his own little hot line,'' referring to a daily political journal on the Internet that collects newsy tidbits from a dizzying array of sources. Mr. Bush's friends and associates reject any notion that the former president sees his son's campaign as a chance to avenge his loss to Bill Clinton in 1992. They say he relates to the campaign mostly in the manner of a watchful, nervous father rooting for his son to make it through a soccer match without injury and with several goals to his credit. When Thomas D. Rath, one of his son's advisers in New Hampshire, ran into the former president just before that state's primary on Feb. 1, Mr. Bush did not interrogate him on his son's chances of victory. Instead, he fretted over his son's health, mentioning that he had seen him on television the previous night and thought he looked worn down. ''Make sure he gets enough rest,'' Mr. Rath recalled the father as saying. Mr. Bush said he mainly tried to give his son emotional support, but his influence and assistance irrefutably extend beyond that. His vast network of political acquaintances contributed to the ability of his son's advisers to collect more contributions than anyone had ever raised for a primary campaign. Condoleezza Rice, the governor's chief foreign policy adviser, worked in the Bush administration and became personally friendly with the former president. So did Gen. Colin  L. Powell, who recently helped the governor pitch his proposal for a more expansive national missile defense system than President Clinton had proposed. And the list goes on.
