 When he was in Seattle last week, Vice President Al Gore dropped by a fund-raising reception for Gov. Gary Locke of Washington. The governor, in introducing the vice president to the crowd, followed a script suggested by Mr. Gore's presidential campaign. And here is what the campaign wanted these people to know: When he was in Seattle last week, Vice President Al Gore dropped by a fund-raising reception for Gov. Gary Locke of Washington. The governor, in introducing the vice president to the crowd, followed a script suggested by Mr. Gore's presidential campaign. And here is what the campaign wanted these people to know: Governor Locke, like countless others who are introducing Mr. Gore around the country these days, is what is known in the trade as a ''validator,'' or a character witness, someone who can attest to the nature of the real Al Gore and reassure voters that he is a decent man, a family man, a good guy. Although Mr. Gore has been campaigning intensely for more than a year now and has been in public life for nearly a quarter-century, he is still having trouble getting across this basic message. That is one reason why the campaign is enlisting scores of validators -- Democrats like Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts -- and deploying them on talk shows and the campaign trail. Their job is not just to attest to Mr. Gore's humanity, although that is a large part of it. They must also make the case for his policy proposals and be prepared to scold Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival, so that Mr. Gore does not have to do it himself and thereby contradict the positive, good-guy image that the campaign is so desperately seeking to convey. The deployment of validators is just one element of a new phase of the Gore campaign, one that the vice president agreed last week in an interview could be as dramatic a turning point as one last fall when he moved his campaign headquarters from Washington to Nashville and started engaging his now-vanquished Democratic challenger, former Senator Bill Bradley, with zeal. And he and his advisers hope the payoff is as great. The new phase is marked by a concerted effort to transmit more of Mr. Gore's personal side along with a positive presentation of his policy proposals. It includes a media blitz he plans to begin on Tuesday in New York, one so extensive that it will almost seem like a relaunching of his campaign, as he begins a ''progress and prosperity tour'' across the Middle Atlantic States and the Midwest. The new phase also features a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign, a retreat by Mr. Gore from his harsh assessments of Governor Bush and a cheery message of optimism. As he told a group of financial contributors on Thursday night in Beverly Hills, Calif., ''We'll make this decade the brightest time in American history.'' Unfortunately for Mr. Gore, the shift in strategy plays into one of the Republicans' chief criticisms of him: that he lacks consistency. ''Al Gore Reinvents Himself -- Again!'' blares a news release from the Bush campaign. It goes on to list six Gore incarnations since last summer: the underdog, the average Joe, the alpha male, the crusading reformer, the negative attacker and, now, the thinking man with a heart. The strategy also reflects some concern by the campaign that Mr. Gore needs to inspire core Democratic constituencies with whom he should be comfortably ahead. The tour will take him to places like Scranton, Pa., and Cincinnati, conveniently located in battleground states. Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said that this period was less a shift than a reflection of ''the natural ebb and flow'' of any campaign. ''There will be plenty of time down the road to draw the comparisons and contrasts with the options that Governor Bush wants to pursue,'' he said. On the first day of his ''progress and prosperity tour,'' in New York, Mr. Gore is to stand with Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary and Wall Street giant, at his side, and begin a national discussion on the upbeat subject of how best to use the burgeoning budget surplus and keep the economy roaring. The White House projects a surplus of $746 billion over the next decade, and the Gore tour, scheduled to span the next two weeks, is designed to coincide with forecasts of an even greater surplus. The emphasis on the nation's prosperity will give Mr. Gore a chance to remind voters that he has been part of the administration that has presided over the longest economic expansion in the nation's history. This, his advisers say, is his strongest suit and provides the most compelling argument for his election as president. Mr. Gore is to push proposals for helping to pay down the national debt, protect Medicare by removing it from the budget process, eliminate the long-term Social Security deficit, provide tax incentives, make investments in education, health care and job training, and create a new kind of personal retirement account, one based on a Clinton proposal for Universal Savings Accounts. The prosperity tour coincides with the opening of a two-month $25-million advertising campaign financed by the Democratic National Committee but produced by Gore consultants. The first commercial, running in 15 states, touts his support for a Medicare benefit to help the elderly pay for prescription drugs. Future commercials leading to the Democratic convention in August are to focus on parts of Mr. Gore's personal biography and his life outside Washington -- as a soldier in Vietnam and a divinity student and journalist in Tennessee, and, of course, as a family man. ''We want people to have an opportunity to learn more about Al Gore the person, where he learned his values and how he would lead,'' said Doug Hattaway, a Gore spokesman. Mr. Gore has also ceased attacking Mr. Bush. Although he spent much of the spring denouncing Mr. Bush as inexperienced and proffering ''risky'' schemes, he has not mentioned Mr. Bush's name in public since May 26, when he derided his call for an expansive missile-defense system. Since then, Mr. Gore has only sparingly referred to him as ''the other fellow'' or ''the other side.'' At the same time, Mr. Gore is stepping up his pleas to Democrats to work hard for him. As he said to a group of Democratic mayors last week: ''I'm asking you to really turn it on for me.''
 Critics of the court object to what they say is the legal authority it would have without an acceptable constitutional base. John Bolton, a former assistant secretary of state for international organizations in the Bush administration, calls the establishment of the court ''a stealth approach to eroding our constitutionalism'' for all branches of American government.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his fellow Republicans are beginning seven weeks of difficult politics around the issue of abortion. It is a potentially divisive element in his decision on a running mate, his handling of the party's platform and the moderate, upbeat image he seeks to project at the party's convention in Philadelphia. Some analysts give Mr. Bush high marks so far for sending conciliatory signals to both sides on the issue,  including openly considering potential running mates who support abortion rights while embracing his party's strict anti-abortion stand. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his fellow Republicans are beginning seven weeks of difficult politics around the issue of abortion. It is a potentially divisive element in his decision on a running mate, his handling of the party's platform and the moderate, upbeat image he seeks to project at the party's convention in Philadelphia. Some analysts give Mr. Bush high marks so far for sending conciliatory signals to both sides on the issue,  including openly considering potential running mates who support abortion rights while embracing his party's strict anti-abortion stand. Mr. Bush's opponents assert that his overtures to the middle are mere symbolic gestures. The next seven weeks, they say, will show Mr. Bush siding, ultimately and firmly, with his party's social conservatives on abortion. ''We think this flirting with moderation is very cynical, and we hope American women will see it for what it is,'' said Alice Germond, executive vice president of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, which has endorsed Vice President Al Gore. Ari Fleischer, spokesman for the Bush campaign, said, ''The governor's record and his inclusive tone speaks for itself.'' Already, Mr. Bush and Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, the party's platform chairman, have served notice that they want to preserve the current platform position on abortion, which calls for a ban on the practice, without exception, and the appointment of judges who respect ''the sanctity of innocent human life.'' The political risk for Mr. Bush is that his effort to satisfy his conservative base could undermine his appeal to the center. The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, conducted May 10-13, showed that 15 percent of the independents said abortion should not be permitted; 22 percent of the suburban voters responded that way. Among Republicans, 32 percent supported a total ban. Another risk for Mr. Bush: If Republican abortion rights supporters decide to fight on the platform, it would inject a rough ideological struggle into the upbeat convention he seeks. Just because Mr. Bush has signaled his intentions on the platform, ''it doesn't mean everything is in his control,'' said Ann Stone, head of Republicans for Choice. ''Ask Bob Dole.'' She was alluding to the Republican nominee's efforts four years ago to add a ''tolerance'' provision expressing room for other views on abortion, an effort that was quashed by social conservatives. Moreover, the abortion issue has become a major subplot in Mr. Bush's selection of a running mate. ''They've got a situation where if they pick a pro-choice candidate, they've got enormous worries about the convention,'' one Republican strategist said of the Bush campaign, speaking on the condition that he not be identified. ''And if they don't pick one,'' the strategist added, the criticism will be ''you guys didn't have the guts to pick a pro-choice vice president.'' Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster, said: ''If Bush doesn't pick a pro-choice running mate, it gives the pro-choice movement credibility to say he also won't pick pro-choice judges for the Supreme Court.'' In general, both sides argue that Mr. Bush could pay a price if he rebuffs their constituents. Anti-abortion leaders have long argued that their rank and file has greater intensity on the issue than supporters of abortion rights -- and is far more likely to cast a vote on the basis of it. Republicans who support abortion rights, though, argue that the party's position hurts its candidates and its image in subtle and complicated ways. ''It's representative of a number of issues beyond abortion,'' said Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine. ''We have to demonstrate that we're not reflexively ideological. Clearly, Governor Bush is not.'' She added, ''I would think the logical step would be to have platform reflect an inclusive tone.'' Ms. Stone said that she told Governor Thompson, in a meeting last week, that the party needs to ease the fears of Republican abortion rights supporters who worry about the impact of a Republican Congress and White House on Supreme Court nominees. While Mr. Bush has declined to embrace an abortion litmus test for judicial nominees, his support for a platform that includes one is sure to be used against him this fall, many strategists agree. (Mr. Bush has indicated that he also supports exceptions to a ban on abortion for cases of rape, incest and when the life of the mother is at stake, although the platform includes none.)
 They see a presidential election in which most polls show Al Gore swamping George W. Bush in New York. They see an entire state, and some battleground districts, that have become more heavily Democratic in recent years. They see a voter rebellion against the Republican Party in the Republican bastion of Nassau County.
 Nevertheless, the company is pouring millions of dollars into both political parties, giving more to parties and candidates in the last 17 months ($2.2 million) than it did in the previous five years ($1.8 million). The company has donated $500,000 to each party's summer convention and is expected to provide a similar amount in free software and computer services. Microsoft officials attended a huge Bush fund-raiser in Washington in April and paid $30,000 for a table at a G.O.P. Congressional fund-raising dinner in May. The company was not represented at the $26 million tribute to President Clinton last month. An internal report of Microsoft's grassroots-level activities for a single week in March showed that the company generated letters to newspapers complaining about the antitrust case, lobbied a member of the Ohio legislature, contacted a researcher about producing a sympathetic study on the effects of the federal case and met with an engineer from Intel about recruiting people to advocate Microsoft's position. In addition, unnamed advocates of Microsoft's legal position engineered seemingly chance meetings with Governor Bush and Representative Henry Hyde at a Republican fund-raiser in DuPage County, Ill.. These interceptions took place on March 18 and were reported to top officials in Microsoft's legal affairs office. Microsoft's grassroots efforts are directed by a Republican consulting firm, Feather, Hodges, Larson & Synhorst. The firm counts among its other clients the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, which has paid it $2.2 million for polling and telemarketing since last October. Tony Feather is Mr. Bush's political director; Tom Synhorst, who handles the Microsoft account for the firm, did not return telephone calls. Microsoft has hired a flotilla of lobbyists of both parties, including Haley Barbour, former chairman of the Republican party and a senior adviser to Governor Bush, and a former Democratic Representative, Tom Downey, a close friend and adviser to Vice President Gore. While Microsoft has retained several influential Democrats, including Craig Smith, the former White House political director and onetime manager of the Gore campaign, the company seems to be betting heavily on Mr. Bush. Robert J. Herbold, Microsoft's chief operating officer, is a top fund-raiser for the Texas governor and an adviser on technology policy. Two former Republican members of Congress, Vin Weber and Bill Paxson, are both Microsoft lobbyists and Bush advisers. Microsoft earlier this year hired Ralph Reed, a top Bush adviser, to lobby Mr. Bush on behalf of the company. Mr. Reed quickly ended the relationship with Microsoft when it became public. Mr. Bush expressed sympathy for the company's legal plight during a campaign appearance in Washington state last February, saying he was ''worried'' about the consequences of a breakup of the company. Echoing a refrain from the company, Mr. Bush said he stood on the side of ''innovation, not litigation.'' Since then, however, Mr. Bush has declined comment on the case because it remains before the courts. Scott McClellan, a Bush spokesman, said, ''As president, he will enforce our antitrust laws to protect consumers and foster competition and innovation.'' Mr. Gore, by contrast, has expressed support for the government's position in the lawsuit. In a visit to Microsoft headquarters last November, Mr. Gore warned against ''the unfair use of market dominance in one sector to stifle innovation in another sector.''
 Both President Clinton and Gov. George W. Bush would like the Pentagon to get along with fewer nuclear warheads, and the Russians are eager for talks to push the numbers down. But top American military officers insist that current nuclear policy prevents them from shrinking our arsenal to fewer than 2,000 to 2,500 strategic weapons -- and that going lower would threaten our security. The reason for their position is a matter of simple arithmetic, buried in the nation's strategic war plan and ultimately linked to presidential guidance. Both President Clinton and Gov. George W. Bush would like the Pentagon to get along with fewer nuclear warheads, and the Russians are eager for talks to push the numbers down. But top American military officers insist that current nuclear policy prevents them from shrinking our arsenal to fewer than 2,000 to 2,500 strategic weapons -- and that going lower would threaten our security. The reason for their position is a matter of simple arithmetic, buried in the nation's strategic war plan and ultimately linked to presidential guidance. Add it all up, and at least 2,500 American warheads are deemed necessary to carry out nuclear war against Russia and China, countries that Al Gore recently said represent our vital partners, not our enemies.
 But after Mr. Cuomo's address today to the mayors, a majority of whom are Democrats, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas planned to lay out his plans for housing and economic development in a speech to the same group by satellite. ''We've come a long way in four years,'' Mr. Cuomo said. ''Four years after Republicans wanted to get rid of us, Governor Bush has a competing plan. I'd say that was progress.''
 Ask Gov. George W. Bush of Texas about the intellectual origins of his campaign's mantra and he says, ''Compassionate conservatism is first and foremost springing from the heart.'' Yet well before Mr. Bush began building his presidential campaign around the words ''compassionate conservative'' -- reshaping the image of his party to follow suit -- a  cadre of thinkers on the right had been trying for years to fashion a form of conservatism that rejected the welfare state but did not turn its back on the poor. And with his campaign strategist Karl Rove acting as his guide, Mr. Bush began reading their books and meeting them, even before his first race for governor. Ask Gov. George W. Bush of Texas about the intellectual origins of his campaign's mantra and he says, ''Compassionate conservatism is first and foremost springing from the heart.'' Yet well before Mr. Bush began building his presidential campaign around the words ''compassionate conservative'' -- reshaping the image of his party to follow suit -- a  cadre of thinkers on the right had been trying for years to fashion a form of conservatism that rejected the welfare state but did not turn its back on the poor. And with his campaign strategist Karl Rove acting as his guide, Mr. Bush began reading their books and meeting them, even before his first race for governor. Mr. Rove gave the governor ''The Dream and the Nightmare,'' a book by Myron Magnet of the Manhattan Institute that Mr. Bush said helped crystallize his thinking about culture. The book is an indictment of the attitudes of the 1960's counterculture and its legacy to the poor. Mr. Rove also introduced Mr. Bush to Marvin Olasky -- a proponent of 19th century-style charity over the entitlements of the welfare state -- whom the governor calls ''compassionate conservatism's leading thinker'' in a foreword to Mr. Olasky's newest book. Those introductions amounted to the first building blocks of the ''compassionate conservative'' platform Mr. Bush is running on today: tax incentives that he predicts will lead to an explosion of charitable giving; an emphasis on using religious institutions to deal with poverty, drug abuse and other social problems and a pledge to ''usher in the responsibility era,'' to replace the notion that ''if it feels good, do it.'' The core concept of this platform is that while government has a responsibility to the needy, it does not have to provide the services itself. This approach can be seen in everything from Mr. Bush's proposals for a tax credit to help people buy health insurance to his call to divert some Social Security payroll taxes into individual investment accounts. As Stephen Goldsmith, Mr. Bush's chief domestic policy adviser, describes it, ''compassionate conservatism means providing help in such a way as to stimulate and reinforce self-governance.'' Such thoughts have been germinating for years, and the Bush campaign drew from several different schools of conservative and neo-conservative thinkers. Mr. Bush describes ''compassionate conservatism'' as being rooted in values rather than as an intellectual movement. ''It is the understanding that lives can be changed and that cultures can change,'' he said in a recent interview. ''The origins are not just logical thought and inspirations from writings.'' ''News to me,'' Mr. Bush said when told that former House Speaker Newt Gingrich had been captivated by many of the same writers as he had. And while Mr. Gingrich not only read Mr. Olasky's ''The Tragedy of American Compassion'' but gave copies to freshmen lawmakers in 1995, Mr. Bush said he had primarily learned about Mr. Olasky's concepts from talking with him, rather than from reading his books. But Mr. Bush is clearly devoted to the new conservatism. As governor he has promoted hostels for welfare mothers and legislation that encouraged religion-based drug treatment centers and prison ministries. And when the time came to assemble his campaign staff, he tapped two apostles of compassionate conservatism: Michael Gerson, his chief speechwriter, had been a senior aide to Mr. Coats; and Mr. Goldsmith, his chief domestic policy adviser, had tried to create a laboratory for compassionate conservatism as the mayor of Indianapolis in the 1990's. When Mr. Bush made welfare's overhaul one of the main planks of his first campaign for governor and later wrestled with it after his election, Mr. Rove arranged for Mr. Bush to meet conservative academics like James Q. Wilson, who has studied character and social policy, urban problems and crime, as well as Mr. Olasky and Mr. Magnet, who were looking into the causes of entrenched urban poverty. As Mr. Magnet, who had been a scholar of Dickens, put it, ''Weren't dizzying contrasts of wealth and poverty supposed to have gone out with Dickensian London?'' The attack on the counterculture struck a chord with Mr. Bush. ''It really helped crystallize some of my thinking about cultures, changing cultures,'' he said in the interview, ''and of part of the legacy of my generation.'' Mr. Bush quickly acknowledged, though, that ''positive things'' also came out of the activism of the baby boom generation, like environmentalism and the women's movement. As governor, Mr. Bush also met David Horowitz, once a voice of the New Left, who later turned conservative. In his book ''Destructive Generation: Second Thoughts About the 60's,'' written with Peter Collier, Mr. Horowitz branded the 1960's as a time when ''the System -- that collection of values that provide guidelines for societies as well as individuals -- was assaulted and mauled.'' The Bush campaign also owes an intellectual debt to Catholic neo-conservatives who have based their advocacy of empowering grass-roots groups on concepts articulated by several encyclicals. As described by John J. DiIulio Jr., a University of Pennsylvania professor who has become a leading researcher of faith-based social services, the idea is that ''charity begins at home. You always try to solve serious social problems as close to the people as possible.'' In other words, the federal government steps in only when problems become too big for other institutions. And even among proponents of  compassionate conservatism there is debate about how far to go. Mr. DiIulio, a professed New Democrat who has also advised some of Vice President Al Gore's aides, said he did not believe that the civic sector could replace government as a means to help the poor. Some of these differences of opinion were hashed out for Mr. Bush in early 1999 when a group assembled by Mr. Goldsmith in Texas met with  Mr. Bush and his top aides to prepare for the coming presidential campaign. For perhaps four hours that day, as the group discussed policies for the poor, Mr. Bush asked what would work and what would not. Mr. Olasky recalled that Mr. Bush was less interested when the conversation touched on tax policy and tax credits and more engaged by the discussion of particular faith-based institutions. He attributes Mr. Bush's interest in faith-based charitable institutions to Mr. Bush's personal conversions in the 1980's. Mr. Bush straddled the views that had been aired that day in Texas months later when he spoke in Indianapolis about using churches and neighborhood groups to help the needy. Like Mr. Olasky, Mr. Bush said charities should make demands of the recipients of aid. ''At Teen Challenge -- a national drug treatment program -- one official says, 'We have a rule: if you don't work, you don't eat,' '' the Texas governor said. ''This is demanding love,'' he said, ''a severe mercy. These institutions, at their best, treat people as moral individuals, with responsibilities and duties, not as wards or clients or dependents or numbers.''
 Wisely, Bill Clinton decided to bypass this chance at wearing his inimitable lip-biting mournful look, and won't dispatch Vice President Al Gore, his normal substitute, to Damascus.
 Making the Case for Gore  The Gore campaign is enlisting scores of character witnesses and deploying them on talk shows and the campaign trail. Their job is to attest to Vice President Al Gore's humanity and make the case for his policy proposals.
 The debate has even made a surprise entrance into the presidential race, where Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee who has been an outspoken supporter of the penalty, postponed the execution of a convicted killer earlier this month to allow DNA testing. It was the first stay Mr. Bush had granted, after presiding over 131 executions, the most of any governor since the death penalty was reinstated. A spokesman for Governor Bush, Ari Fleischer, said that ''Some people will use this study to call for the abolition of the death penalty.'' But, Mr. Fleischer said, the finding of so many errors in the appeals process ''shows that there is an extra level of vigilance and caution in death penalty cases, appropriately so.''
