 Vice Pres Al Gore, in yet another reshuffling of his presidential campaign, announces that William M Daley, secretary of commerce and a shrewd operative in Democratic politics, will replace campaign chairman Tony Coelho; Coelho, who has been in hospital with inflamed colon, says he decided to step down on his doctors' advice; but many observers say move was inevitable, given way Gore's campaign has struggled in recent months; coming less than five months before Election Day, change seems unlikely to bring any immediate strategic or visible changes to campaign but, even so, Daly is taking over at time when important decisions will have to be made about a running mate, national convention and where to pump campaign resources; photo of Gore and Daley (M) In yet another reshuffling of his presidential campaign, Vice President Al Gore announced today that William M. Daley, the secretary of commerce and a shrewd operative in Democratic politics, would replace the campaign chairman, Tony Coelho. Mr. Coelho, who has been in a hospital since Monday night with an inflamed colon, said he had decided to step down on the advice of his doctors, who urged him to restrict his travel and slow his pace. But many Democrats said the move had been inevitable, given the way Mr. Gore's campaign has struggled in recent months. In yet another reshuffling of his presidential campaign, Vice President Al Gore announced today that William M. Daley, the secretary of commerce and a shrewd operative in Democratic politics, would replace the campaign chairman, Tony Coelho. Mr. Coelho, who has been in a hospital since Monday night with an inflamed colon, said he had decided to step down on the advice of his doctors, who urged him to restrict his travel and slow his pace. But many Democrats said the move had been inevitable, given the way Mr. Gore's campaign has struggled in recent months. Mr. Daley flew from Washington to Lockland, Ohio, a Cincinnati suburb, to join Mr. Gore at a scheduled campaign event this afternoon as Gore advisers sought to project a sense of optimism, despite the upheaval to the campaign. Mr. Daley is to visit the Gore headquarters in Nashville next week and will relocate there to become what Mr. Gore called a ''full-time, hands-on'' manager. He will leave his cabinet post on July 15. ''We're not going to miss a beat,'' Mr. Gore told reporters as he announced Mr. Daley's appointment, the secretary at his side. For his part, Mr. Daley said of the campaign, ''I don't see any problems whatsoever.'' [Man in the News, Page A27.] While Democrats hoped that the shift in chairmen would energize the campaign, it created another unwelcome distraction for Mr. Gore, largely overshadowing his recent efforts to capitalize on the prosperity of the Clinton years and offer new proposals for taking advantage of the growing budget surplus. Today, in fact, Mr. Gore doubled the size of his proposed tax cut, to $500 billion over the next decade. [Page A27.] Mr. Gore's campaign has been largely on the defensive since the primary season, and his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has begun pulling ahead in many surveys, including those in states expected to be pivotal in November. But what is most troubling to Democrats is a sense among strategists in both parties that Mr. Bush has been far more successful in making the transition to the general election campaign. While the overhaul was prompted by Mr. Coelho's health, several Gore campaign officials said that in recent weeks the vice president had recognized that he needed to make changes in his campaign, which seemed to drift after Mr. Gore clinched the Democratic nomination nearly three months ago. Two people close to the campaign also said that Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, had expressed concerns about Mr. Coelho's health for the past month or more, wondering whether he was up to the job. In contrast, Mr. Bush has maintained the same tight circle of aides since announcing his candidacy, and those aides seemed to take delight in the Gore campaign's woes. ''I wonder whether naming a new chairman involves yet another reinvention of the Gore campaign,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. Today's move also underscored a belief among Democrats that Mr. Gore needs to move quickly to energize his campaign as it prepares for the Democratic National Convention in August, when the vast majority of voters traditionally begin to pay close attention to the election. ''This transition better be seamless and it better be fast, because there is no time to lose,'' said Senator Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey. ''George Bush is well-funded and well organized, and clearly has developed a sense of momentum.'' The real problems of the Gore campaign, of course, may come down to more than just one man. People close to Mr. Coelho and Mr. Gore said that the two had never worked well together, and that the vice president was increasingly bypassing him and turning to other advisers like Carter Eskew. ''Tony and Al Gore never really liked each other,'' said a top Democratic official who knows Mr. Coelho well. ''There's little mutual respect and no affection. They're very different people.'' When Mr. Gore named Mr. Coelho as his campaign chairman in May 1999, the campaign was beset by overspending, and many Democrats credit Mr. Coehlo with cutting costs and steering through a treacherous series of primary contests. Moreover, they said, federal investigations into his past financial activities had created even more problems. For example, one Gore ally said, Mr. Coelho could not be an effective spokesman for the vice president because he declined to appear on television, largely out of concern that he might be questioned about the federal investigations. While most of his problems were internal to the campaign, Mr. Coelho also took the blame for one of Mr. Gore's biggest political fiascos: his call for Elian Gonzalez, the 6-year-old Cuban boy, to be given permanent residence in the United States, a position that put him at odds with President Clinton and others in the administration. In a recent interview, Mr. Coelho acknowledged there had been mistakes, particularly that the campaign had allowed Mr. Gore to become enmeshed in the Gonzalez case. But Mr. Coelho also said that he had brought discipline and order to the campaign -- and that he had stepped in so the vice president did not have to make all the decisions. Asked if, before he took over, Mr. Gore was a micromanager in the mold of President Jimmy Carter, Mr. Coelho said: ''I think he probably was. People said he did. But since I've been on board he doesn't.'' Many inside and outside the campaign perceived the illness as a convenient cover for Mr. Gore to ease Mr. Coelho to the sidelines after a somewhat tumultuous yearlong reign. ''The call I made to the vice president last night informing him of my doctor's advice is one of the most difficult calls I have ever had to make,'' he said in a statement released by Gore headquarters in Nashville. ''My doctors have told me that I need to slow down, eat better and travel less for a period of time. Unfortunately, none of this advice is consistent with the rigors of chairing a presidential campaign.'' Mr. Daley had been under consideration as a running mate for Mr. Gore. But Mr. Gore said in an interview tonight that he had removed Mr. Daley from consideration because ''it is not possible to be a full-time hands-on campaign manager all the way through the election and also be a vice-presidential running mate.'' Mr. Gore said today that Mr. Daley sprang to mind last night immediately after he spoke with Mr. Coelho. Mr. Coelho had called Mr. Gore, who was attending a fund-raising dinner on the Upper East Side last night, about 11 o'clock. Mr. Gore said he called Mr. Daley in Washington after midnight, waking him up. Mr. Gore and Mr. Daley said neither of them had notified President Clinton until today. ''I took his commerce secretary away before I told him,'' Mr. Gore said, adding that he called the president this morning.
 Gore Replaces Chairman Of Presidential Campaign  Vice President Al Gore said Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, regarded as a shrewd operative in Democratic politics, would replace Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, Tony Coelho, who is hospitalized with an inflamed colon. Mr. Daley, a scion of the Chicago political family, will leave the cabinet on July 15. Though Mr. Coelho's departure was attributed to the advice of his doctors, many Democrats said the move was inevitable, given the way that Mr. Gore's campaign had been struggling. Citing rising budget surplus estimates, Mr. Gore said he would offer Americans $500 billion in tax cuts over 10 years, twice what Mr. Gore had proposed and half of what his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush had proposed. Gore aides said the tax cuts would primarily be limited to families with children and aging parents while Mr. Bush's would apply across the board. Bush Plan for the Disabled  Gov. George W. Bush proposed an additional $880 million in federal spending and tax incentives over five years to help disabled Americans with work, public access and new technology. No Doubt on Murder Testimony  Bernadine Skillern, the lone witness to identify Gary Graham as the killer in a Texas parking lot 19 years ago, came forward to repeat that she was certain that the right man had been convicted. Mr. Graham is to die on Thursday in a case that has drawn national attention and created a political headache for Gov. George W. Bush.
 Vice Pres Al Gore proposes $500 billion in tax cuts over next 10 years, twice what he proposed earlier and half of what his rival Gov George W Bush has proposed (M) Expecting a shower of gold at the end of the month when new budget surplus estimates are released, Vice President Al Gore said today that he would offer Americans $500 billion in tax cuts over 10 years. The amount is twice what Mr. Gore had proposed earlier and half of what his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has proposed. Mr. Gore has been extremely critical of Mr. Bush's proposal, saying that the nation cannot afford it and that vital programs and entitlement benefits would have to be cut to pay for it. Expecting a shower of gold at the end of the month when new budget surplus estimates are released, Vice President Al Gore said today that he would offer Americans $500 billion in tax cuts over 10 years. The amount is twice what Mr. Gore had proposed earlier and half of what his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has proposed. Mr. Gore has been extremely critical of Mr. Bush's proposal, saying that the nation cannot afford it and that vital programs and entitlement benefits would have to be cut to pay for it. Gore aides said the chief difference between their proposals was that the vice president's tax cuts would be limited primarily to families with children and aging parents. Mr. Bush's income tax cut of $1.3 trillion over 10 years would apply to everybody across the board. Mr. Gore is basing his proposal on the expectation that the federal budget surplus outside of Social Security, already forecast to range from $750 billion to $2 trillion, will expand by perhaps $1 trillion. He had already proposed the broad outlines of most of the tax cuts, but today he offered estimates of how much money he would devote to each. ''This tax relief package for middle-income families can help to solve the most important challenges that families face today,'' Mr. Gore said. ''This package, big as it is, stands in sharp contrast to an alternative that would completely eliminate the budget surplus and threaten the underlying prosperity.'' The discussion here in Lockland, a Cincinnati suburb of about 4,400 people, came on the third day of Mr. Gore's ''progress and prosperity tour,'' which is designed to take the vice president to battleground states and give him a chance to highlight the booming economy and take some credit for it. The tour is premised on Mr. Gore's  belief that the economy is his trump card in the election. He says the unprecedented growth in the economy has given the nation the luxury of talking about ''big ideas,'' though on his tour he has mostly offered new ways of spending the swelling surplus rather than wrestled with philosophical choices. But Mr. Gore is also proposing ways to make money. At two fund-raisers in New York on Wednesday night, he gave a mini-preview of a speech on the environment that he plans to make the week after next, when he will argue, as President Clinton has, that protecting the environment does not have to mean sacrificing the economy, and that in fact money can be made off cleaning up the environment.
 Article profiles Condoleeza Rice, who refers to herself as 'quarterback' of disparate team of foreign policy experts who are advising and tutoring Gov George W Bush in international relations; Rice is professor of political science at Stanford University and was member of National Security Council in first two years of former Pres George Bush's administration; her specialty is Russia, its nuclear arsenal and America's defense posture; in series of interviews, Rice herself admits that there are vast swaths of world that are new to her; Rice photo; brief biographical sketches and photos of rest of Bush's foreign policy team: Richard L Armitage, Robert D Blackwell, Stephen J Hadley, Richard Perle, Paul D Wolfowitz, Dov S Zakheim, and Robert B Zoellick (M) Arrayed behind George W. Bush as he unveiled his nuclear policy initiative last month were two former secretaries of state, two former national security advisers and a former secretary of defense. But once Mr. Bush and his formidable lineup of older men left the stage, the foreign policy expert who fielded questions on the specifics of the Texas governor's proposal was not Henry A. Kissinger or Colin Powell. It was Condoleezza Rice, a 45-year-old university professor who is tutoring a presidential candidate who concedes that he has much to learn about the world. Arrayed behind George W. Bush as he unveiled his nuclear policy initiative last month were two former secretaries of state, two former national security advisers and a former secretary of defense. But once Mr. Bush and his formidable lineup of older men left the stage, the foreign policy expert who fielded questions on the specifics of the Texas governor's proposal was not Henry A. Kissinger or Colin Powell. It was Condoleezza Rice, a 45-year-old university professor who is tutoring a presidential candidate who concedes that he has much to learn about the world. The nuclear policy speech provided the ideal platform for Ms. Rice, Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser. Russia, its nuclear arsenal, and America's defense posture are areas that she has studied for years,  both as a professor of political science at Stanford University and as a Russia specialist on the National Security Council in the first two years of the Bush administration. Now she plays what she calls ''quarterback'' for a disparate foreign policy team, the ''Vulcans,'' whose mission is to prove that Mr. Bush has enough global brainpower to be president. (The advisers take their name from the ancient god of the forge, whose statue is a symbol of  Birmingham, Ala., Ms. Rice's hometown.) Among the Vulcans, Ms. Rice is closest by far to Mr. Bush, whom she is leading in a grand global tutorial as she tries to convince others that what he lacks in international knowledge and experience he makes up for in what she calls ''good instincts.'' Her first book was a learned work on the Czechoslovak Army; another  she co-authored on the reunification of Germany in 1995 was extremely well-received. Ms. Rice is talked about in Washington circles as a shoo-in for national security adviser if Mr. Bush makes it to the White House, perhaps twinned with General Powell as secretary of state. When Mr. Bush was asked in a telephone interview about the possibility of having two African-Americans leading his foreign policy team, he said, ''It's way too premature.'' When Ms. Rice was asked the same question, she replied, ''It's really not appropriate to talk about a cabinet until he's won.'' As for General Powell, his answer was more concise: ''Nice try.'' Ms. Rice, an only child raised in a segregated, bourgeois district of Birmingham, and originally destined to be a concert pianist, can dazzle on many a stage. At a recent Republican fund-raising reception in Silicon Valley, she sang part of the Star Spangled Banner (the obscure second verse). She played The Battle Hymn of the Republic on a grand piano. She showed off snippets of fluent Russian. And she delivered -- with no notes -- a 20-minute speech praising the potential of Mr. Bush to lead the world. Ms. Rice and Mr. Bush seem to share a similar view of the world. It is a balance-of-power, realist Republican approach that is generally short on details and might be summed up like this: strengthen America's military, scale back military commitments abroad and focus on the big powers. Mr. Bush has unabashedly shown his dependence on Ms. Rice, the daughter of educators who started her political life as a Democrat, switched sides in 1982, informally advised Democrat Gary Hart on foreign policy in his 1988 bid for the presidency, and has called herself ''an all-over-the-map Republican.'' Ms. Rice is a fit for Mr. Bush. ''There's a real chemistry between them,'' said Dov S. Zakheim, one of the Vulcans. ''I like to be around her,'' Mr. Bush said. ''She's fun to be with. I like lighthearted people, not people who take themselves so seriously that they are hard to be around.'' Besides, he said, ''She's really smart!'' Mr. Bush feels comfortable asking her the most basic questions. He has identified Ms. Rice as the person who ''can explain to me foreign policy matters in a way I can understand.''  Karen Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said that when she recently showed him a news article about the strife in Sierra Leone, Mr. Bush told her to ''call Condi and see what she thinks.'' Ms. Rice's role is all the more critical because Mr. Bush doesn't like to read briefing books on the nuts-and-bolts of national security, and his lack of experience in foreign affairs has raised questions about his preparedness for the White House. When a writer for Glamour Magazine recently uttered the word ''Taliban'' -- the regime in Afghanistan that follows an extreme and repressive version of Islamic law -- during a verbal Rorschach test, Mr. Bush could only shake his head in silence. It was only after the writer gave him a hint (''repression of women in Afghanistan'') that Mr. Bush replied, ''Oh. I thought you said some band. The Taliban in Afghanistan! Absolutely. Repressive.'' On Iraq, she believes that President Saddam Hussein is an evil man, but declined to say what a George W. Bush administration would do to get rid of him. She spent endless hours with Mr. Bush himself, going over the speech line by line, explaining the implications of every issue. When he didn't want to read the questions and answers about the speech prepared for him, she and Mr. Wolfowitz drilled him verbally instead. Ms. Rice (whose first name is pronounced kahn-dah-LEE-za) and Mr. Bush got to know each other in 1995, when she traveled to Austin at the invitation of former President Bush. She and the younger Mr. Bush bonded over baseball, as Mr. Bush, then a co-owner of the Texas Rangers, showed off his display cases full of signed baseballs. Ms. Rice, a self-described fanatical sports fan, told stories about Willie Mays, whom her mother had once taught in high school. ''Governor Bush was very impressed,'' Ms. Rice said. They met again at the Bush family vacation compound in Kennebunkport, Maine, in 1998. While she ran on the treadmill, he rowed and pedaled. ''What about relations with Russia, what about relations with China?'' Ms. Rice quoted Mr. Bush as asking. ''What about the state of the military?'' Like Mr. Bush, Ms. Rice is a fitness enthusiast. She does strength training twice a week with Stanford's football coach and endurance training with a second Stanford coach twice more. Single, she said she does not do recreational reading and does not have fun by accident. ''I schedule fun,'' she said. A headline in the current issue of George Magazine, which included eight photos of Ms. Rice in the gym, reads, ''Bush's Kissinger. She Can Kick Your Butt, Too.'' Indeed, said Mr. Armitage, an assistant secretary of defense in the Reagan administration, ''I would bet that if you look behind her, the ground is littered with the bodies of those who underestimated her.'' Although Ms. Rice is determined to see her star pupil make it to the White House, she insists that she is not wedded to the idea of serving in government again. She lasted only two years in the Bush administration before she went back to Stanford. General Scowcroft, her former boss, said in an interview that she left to find a spouse and have a family. Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's spokesman, said, ''I offered to marry her every other day.''
 The loss or theft of two computer hard drives containing highly sensitive data at Los Alamos National Laboratory (front page, June 13) is another shocking example of the Clinton-Gore administration's disdain for national security. The loss or theft of two computer hard drives containing highly sensitive data at Los Alamos National Laboratory (front page, June 13) is another shocking example of the Clinton-Gore administration's disdain for national security.
 Gov George W Bush returns to campaign trail and embarks on 72-hour, five-state fund-raising drive that is expected to bring in nearly $5 million (M) After five days at his family's compound at Kennebunkport, Me., Gov. George W. Bush returned today to the campaign trail and embarked on a 72-hour,  five-state fund-raising drive that is expected to bring in nearly $5 million for Republicans to wage the fall campaign. After five days at his family's compound at Kennebunkport, Me., Gov. George W. Bush returned today to the campaign trail and embarked on a 72-hour,  five-state fund-raising drive that is expected to bring in nearly $5 million for Republicans to wage the fall campaign. ''Our goal now is clear -- to speed up the day when our country has removed the last barrier to full independent productive lives for every person with or without disability,'' Mr. Bush said in a 15-minute speech to a small group of people, many in wheelchairs, at Alpha One, a nonprofit organization that provides services to the disabled. ''All citizens with disabilities ask is a chance to use their own gifts and talent to make their own contribution,'' Mr. Bush said after making a quick tour of the facility. Mr. Bush, who brought in a record $80 million for his presidential primary campaign, spent much of the day raising $1.1 million for the Republicans' autumn offensive, including the kinds of unregulated, unlimited donations that the House has voted to ban. Senate Republicans have consistently blocked the legislation. At the Eastland Park Hotel in Portland, Me., Mr. Bush raised an estimated $100,000 for the Maine Republican Party. On Friday, Mr. Bush plans to raise another $1.1 million for Republicans in appearances in Ohio and Kentucky and on Saturday in Florida he is to raise $2.75 million for the state and national parties. The fund-raising followed Mr. Bush's five-day retreat at his family's Maine compound, where he celebrated his parents' birthdays and made plans, with aides and strategists, for the Republican National Convention, at the end of July in Philadelphia. Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Bush's main rival in the Republican primaries -- who had put the abolition of big money fund-raising at the center of his campaign -- has agreed to speak on the second night of the convention, said Karen Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman. Mr. Bush's advisers said that historical spot might be done away with. Mr. Bush's aides were planning for retired Gen. Colin L. Powell to speak on the opening night of the convention, Monday, July 31. Mr. Bush, in his Boston news conference, repeated that he wanted to preserve the current Republican platform's plank on abortion, which calls for a ban on the practice, without exception and the appointment of judges who respect ''the sanctity of innocent human life.'' ''We are a pro-life party,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I recognize good people can disagree. We are going to be a pro-life party at the convention.''
 Mark Maslan letter on Michael Beschloss's June 11 Op-Ed article on presidential reading habits; points out that George W Bush's school records are relevant to help answer urgent question of whether he has earned his success or merely inherited it Clearly, nobody thinks that a presidential candidate needs to have the academic record of a distinguished professor. What causes people to look all the way back to George W. Bush's school days to help evaluate his fitness for the presidency is the question of whether he has earned his success or has merely inherited it. This question is made urgent by the fact that his political career has been neither long nor distinguished. Grades are among the few things for which Mr. Bush has had to fend for himself. The results are not encouraging.
 However the issue may affect Congressional candidates, prescription drugs were the subject last week of Vice President Al Gore's first national television commercial, which portrayed the prospective Democratic presidential nominee as ''fighting for a prescription drug benefit.''
 Sarah Hopkins letter on Michael Beschloss's June 11 Op-Ed article on presidential reading habits; says that what concerns electorate is not George W Bush's book list but his derision of intellectuals and disdain for learning (S) It is not George W. Bush's reading list that concerns the electorate but his anti-intellectual stance. Equipped with degrees from some of the best schools, Mr. Bush, while deriding intellectuals, says he would be an ''education president.'' I have little interest for what Mr. Bush has on his bookshelf, but I would mind an ''education president'' who disdains learning.
 It's hard to feel unloved in the middle of a big election year. Al Gore  wants your vote so badly he'll come to your house and spend the afternoon telling you about the Industrial Revolution -- if you'll only ask. George W. Bush has probably already memorized your kids' ages, and given you a nickname. It's hard to feel unloved in the middle of a big election year. Al Gore  wants your vote so badly he'll come to your house and spend the afternoon telling you about the Industrial Revolution -- if you'll only ask. George W. Bush has probably already memorized your kids' ages, and given you a nickname. Except for the occasional fund-raiser, Massachusetts has already been deposited by both parties in Al Gore's column, and crossed off their list of concerns. Even if the polls start to show that Mr. Gore's hold on the state is looking shaky, the vice president will not come by to shore up his support, because he will be too busy remaining under the bed in a fetal position.
 NAZER-Eva. Beloved wife of the late Raymond. Devoted mother of Sari (Dr. Arthur) Goren and Suzanne (Dr. Herbert) Golomb. Loving grandmother. Devoted sister. Graveside services Sunday 1:30 PM at Beth David Cemetery, Elmont, New York. NAZER-Eva. Beloved wife of the late Raymond. Devoted mother of Sari (Dr. Arthur) Goren and Suzanne (Dr. Herbert) Golomb. Loving grandmother. Devoted sister. Graveside services Sunday 1:30 PM at Beth David Cemetery, Elmont, New York.
 ''This just proves that Governor Bush is the leader of the party of optimism,'' said MARK PFEIFLE, a G.O.P. spokesman, adding that he did not know how Mr. Cuomo -- the keynote speaker at the Democratic National Convention in 1984 -- wound up on a Republican mailing list.
 Man in the News profile of Commerce Sec William M Daley, named new chairman of Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign (M) But there is broad agreement among those who know him that Mr. Daley is perhaps the best political mind in President Clinton's cabinet. And for that reason, many Democrats cheered the announcement today that Mr. Daley will be leaving the administration next month to become chairman of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign. But there is broad agreement among those who know him that Mr. Daley is perhaps the best political mind in President Clinton's cabinet. And for that reason, many Democrats cheered the announcement today that Mr. Daley will be leaving the administration next month to become chairman of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign. He is a centrist with strong ties to business leaders at a time when Mr. Gore is trying to position himself as a prudent manager of the economy. He is a consummate behind-the-curtains manager adept at avoiding the kind of controversy that has at times bedeviled the Gore campaign. And he is tough enough an in-fighter to enforce discipline on a campaign that has sometimes lacked it. Still, Mr. Daley's effective handling of the China bill did not sit well with leaders of organized labor, and Mr. Daley will have to move swiftly to smooth things over with Mr. Gore's union allies.
 BUSH SNUBS KENNEDY FOE  It would seem like an easy decision for the Republican presidential contender to endorse the Republican challenger to Senator Edward M. Kennedy. But Gov. George W. Bush of Texas knows how to walk around a political minefield when he sees one. Asked yesterday about Jack E. Robinson, the only Republican candidate to collect enough signatures to take on Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Bush said at Logan International Airport in Boston, ''It's hard to endorse somebody I've never heard of.'' Earlier in the day he told radio station WBZ: ''I'm very close to Governor Cellucci. I'm going to take my advice from Paul.'' After some uncomplimentary news articles, Mr. Robinson, a 39-year-old businessman, released an 11-page list of embarrassing incidents in his life. Mr. Cellucci, who had originally backed Mr. Robinson, dropped his support. G.O.P. AVOIDS FLORIDA FIGHT  Anxious to avoid a divisive primary and protect the party's hold on a Senate seat, Florida Republican leaders and Gov. Jeb Bush orchestrated a shuffle that left Representative Bill McCollum as the party's presumptive Senate nominee and shifted his chief opponent to a race for state office. That opponent, the state education commissioner Tom Gallagher, announced yesterday that he would seek his old job as insurance commissioner, deferring to Mr. McCollum in the race to succeed Senator Connie Mack, who is retiring. Mr. McCollum was far ahead in the money race, but the primary was likely to have been tough and could have left the winner weakened in the general election against the Democratic candidate, Bill Nelson, the current insurance commissioner. While Florida Democrats are disappointed that the Republicans will skirt an intramural fight, many believe that Mr. McCollum, who was a House impeachment prosecutor, will make the better foil.  CARL HULSE (NYT)
 Administration official says Pres Clinton is likely to name Robert L Mallett, deputy commerce secretary, to replace William M Daley as acting secretary as result of announcement that Daley will lead Vice Pres Gore's presidential campaign (S) President Clinton is likely to name Robert L. Mallett, the deputy commerce secretary, to replace William M. Daley as acting secretary as a result of the announcement that Mr. Daley would lead the Gore campaign, an administration official said tonight. President Clinton is likely to name Robert L. Mallett, the deputy commerce secretary, to replace William M. Daley as acting secretary as a result of the announcement that Mr. Daley would lead the Gore campaign, an administration official said tonight.
 With protests planned in Texas for next week, the Graham case is attracting national attention and creating a political headache for Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. Mr. Bush has defended capital punishment in his state despite growing outside criticism focusing on, among other issues, the quality of legal representation. As is his custom, Mr. Bush has remained silent about the Graham case, but a campaign aide said the governor's legal advisers believed that under the law, Mr. Bush cannot grant a stay. Advocates for Mr. Graham say the law could be interpreted to mean one stay per governor, but they say commutation or a conditional pardon to allow a new trial, which can occur only with the parole board's blessing, is their real goal.
