 Ms. Choi, 32, is keeping her name. In 1998 and 1999, she was a domestic policy adviser to Vice President Al Gore, and before that held posts at the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Commission. She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and was a Fulbright scholar in 1988 and 1989 at Georg-August University in Gottingen, Germany, where she studied East and West German feminist literature. Ms. Choi, 32, is keeping her name. In 1998 and 1999, she was a domestic policy adviser to Vice President Al Gore, and before that held posts at the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Commission. She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and was a Fulbright scholar in 1988 and 1989 at Georg-August University in Gottingen, Germany, where she studied East and West German feminist literature.
 Death Row Record a Concern  New lawyers for Gary Graham, who is on death row in Texas, say he is innocent and are seeking to have Gov. George W. Bush grant him some form of clemency. Mr. Graham's lawyers portray his case as a textbook example of how bad lawyering sends poor people to death row. G.O.P. on the Counterattack  The Republican Party, responding to an advertising campaign by the Democrats, unveiled its first national commercial, detailing Gov. George W. Bush's proposals for overhauling Social Security.
 Both men know that if they don't get a deal this year it may be a long time before a similar opportunity comes. Mr. Clinton offers a carefully built reputation as an honest broker that neither of the presumptive presidential nominees, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, enjoy. Over the years, Mr. Gore has taken an uncritical pro-Israeli stance; Mr. Bush is a blank slate when it comes to the Middle East.
 WHEN Len Desiderio thinks of the Republican Convention, he doesn't think of hoopla at Philadelphia's First Union Center or George W. Bush giving a rousing acceptance speech or even a Republican landslide in November. WHEN Len Desiderio thinks of the Republican Convention, he doesn't think of hoopla at Philadelphia's First Union Center or George W. Bush giving a rousing acceptance speech or even a Republican landslide in November.
 For example, you probably think you are watching the presidential race of 2000. Wrong. It is really 1988, or at least that is where many political scientists and Democratic strategists will transport you. They cite the familiar dynamic of a vice president (George H.W. Bush then, Al Gore now) who belonged to a successful administration and whose apparent disadvantage against a  heavily promoted governor (Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts then, George W. Bush of Texas now) turned out to be temporary. For example, you probably think you are watching the presidential race of 2000. Wrong. It is really 1988, or at least that is where many political scientists and Democratic strategists will transport you. They cite the familiar dynamic of a vice president (George H.W. Bush then, Al Gore now) who belonged to a successful administration and whose apparent disadvantage against a  heavily promoted governor (Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts then, George W. Bush of Texas now) turned out to be temporary. Or perhaps it is 1960, as other political scientists and Republican strategists would have you believe. The vice president (Richard M. Nixon then, Mr. Gore now) cannot trade on his administration's high regard in the face of an upbeat, arguably more charismatic challenger (John F. Kennedy then, Mr. Bush now), who ultimately prevails. Any takers for 1992? That was when the administration in power was challenged and eventually defeated by an intermittently folksy southerner (Bill Clinton then, Mr. Bush now), who was attacked as both a foreign policy know-nothing and the chief executive of a state (Arkansas then, Texas now) with abysmally low national ratings on several important issues. Whatever the cause, the practice is rampant. At a briefing for reporters in Austin, Tex., last week, Mr. Bush's advisers variously mentioned 1960, 1968, 1980 and 1988 as providing omens favorable to their candidate. One of the advisers dwelled for a bit on 1980, when Ronald Reagan defeated President Jimmy Carter, the incumbent. By this example, a Republican governor tarred by opponents as risky and extremist defeated a nationally known quantity who was regarded as perhaps a little dull and pious. Karl Rove, the Bush campaign's chief strategist, has been known to derive inspiration from as far back as 1896, when William McKinley, a Republican governor, united a divided party and reached out to new groups of voters. He was reaching out to immigrants; Mr. Bush is making his appeal to minorities. Martin P. Wattenberg, a political scientist at the University of California at Irvine, is not buying it. ''It's definitely not 1896,'' he said, ''because that was a realignment election. Although, if Bush does win big, then I guess it could be 1896.'' Then again, he added, ''1988 sounds pretty good to me.'' ''I'd have to say 1960, when you had a vice president running against an upstart,'' said Mr. Graff, who played down 1988 for several reasons. Mr. Dukakis's period of ascendance in polls, he noted, was briefer than Mr. Bush's has been, and it came when he was less familiar to voters than Mr. Bush is now. ''It's much more informative,'' said Alan Abramowitz, a political scientist at Emory University whose mathematical model augurs a victory by Mr. Gore.
 The once-popular UConn course has been savaged by new construction. These days Mr. Wollner gratifies his disk-golf urges by playing at Mansfield Hollow State Park in Mansfield and Bushnell Park in Hartford. At Bushnell he plays against fellow brewer and pub owner Les Sinnock of the Hartford Brewery in Hartford. ''I find it relaxing,'' Mr. Sinnock said. ''It's a little competitive, but not so competitive you get on people about things.''
 Still, Mr. Corzine's jaw-dropping spending spree should not come as much of a surprise in a year when Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has already spent a record $73 million to win the Republican presidential nomination and experts estimate that a record $3 billion will be spent on the 2000 presidential and Congressional elections.
 The subject was helping people afford prescription drugs. But the object was getting Vice President Al Gore a promotion. ''Al Gore is taking them on,'' the announcer declared, ''fighting for a Medicare prescription drug benefit for seniors like Bob Darthez.'' The subject was helping people afford prescription drugs. But the object was getting Vice President Al Gore a promotion. ''Al Gore is taking them on,'' the announcer declared, ''fighting for a Medicare prescription drug benefit for seniors like Bob Darthez.'' Mr. Gore and Mr. Darthez, a 74-year-old Medicare recipient, were the star players in the first national commercial of the general election, a 30-second spot by the Democratic National Committee that ran this weekend in 15 states, including Michigan, Illinois, Pennsylvania and Ohio, all considered especially decisive this fall. In a March 14 e-mail message, Mr. Gore had challenged Gov. George W. Bush to a bilateral ban on the use of soft money to pay for issue commercials. So Republicans were only too happy to point out that the vice president was the first to go back on the offer. But Mr. Gore asserted that he could not be bound by a proposal that Mr. Bush had rejected. (The exchange occurred just as the Senate was approving a campaign finance reform measure, imposing financial disclosure requirements on tax-exempt special interest groups that raise and spend money secretly on political activities.) At week's end, the Republicans were preparing to unveil their own ''party-building'' ads on behalf of Mr. Bush, to run in all the states in which Mr. Gore and Mr. Darthez are appearing. ''Each night will have a positive discussion of Governor Bush's proposals,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director.
 Steven R Weisman Editorial Observer column sees some historical basis for notion that Al Gore's repeated efforts to reinvent himself stem from the inherent difficulties of being Vice President, but worries that it also indicates Gore has not yet discovered his real personality and real views on issues At the risk of self-parody, Al Gore is trying once again this month to break out of a slump by reintroducing himself to voters. He isn't changing his clothes this time, but he is avoiding personal attacks and unveiling big policy ideas connected in some way to life stories. Yet Mr. Gore still seems unable to exploit his obvious advantages as a partner in an administration with policies that most Americans support. Why, the candidate must wonder, can Gov. George W. Bush reposition himself as a moderate with such ease while his own reinventions draw ridicule? At the risk of self-parody, Al Gore is trying once again this month to break out of a slump by reintroducing himself to voters. He isn't changing his clothes this time, but he is avoiding personal attacks and unveiling big policy ideas connected in some way to life stories. Yet Mr. Gore still seems unable to exploit his obvious advantages as a partner in an administration with policies that most Americans support. Why, the candidate must wonder, can Gov. George W. Bush reposition himself as a moderate with such ease while his own reinventions draw ridicule? One reason may be that there have been so many of them. But the dominant theory is that Mr. Gore simply does not connect with people. He is seen as too stiff, too eager to please, too caught up in policy gobbledygook to excite voters. Campaign aides prefer, for obvious reasons, another explanation. They believe that most of Mr. Gore's problems stem from the inherent difficulties of being vice president. If so, they say, Mr. Gore may not be able to make serious headway in reversing his fortunes until the Democratic convention, when he assumes command of the party, selects a vice president and delivers an acceptance speech. It is a self-serving theory, but history provides some basis for it. In studying past election cycles, the Gore campaign has found that at this time of year, sitting vice presidents like George Bush in 1988, Hubert Humphrey in 1968 and Richard Nixon in 1960 were all behind in the polls. So were vice presidents who had acceded to the White House, like Harry Truman in 1948 and Gerald Ford in 1976. The problem is that, of all these, only Truman and Mr. Bush went on to win in November. The Gore campaign likes to think of the Bush campaign in 1988 as  a model. Mr. Gore aims to raise doubts about the qualifications of his less experienced opponent the way the elder Mr. Bush did about Gov. Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts. But the more apt comparison may actually be 1960. Indeed, the author Richard Reeves, who is writing a book about Nixon, likens Mr. Gore's situation now to the one that Nixon found himself in against John Kennedy. In that year, Mr. Reeves points out, Nixon was the experienced Washington hand with a great reputation as a debater and infighter, running against an opponent widely dismissed as a charming lightweight. There were also a lot of ''new Nixons'' foreshadowing the ''new Gores'' of today. Many political experts back then said that all Kennedy had to do was deliver a credible performance at the debates, and he would be deemed a winner. Some even contend to this day that Nixon won the debates on points, while Kennedy won on style, changing politics forever, possibly to Mr. Gore's disadvantage. Mr. Gore's problem is that he may need President Clinton to help him, at least in the states where Mr. Clinton is most popular, without turning off voters in other states and making the vice president feel diminished just as he is trying to stand on his own. From Eisenhower to Lyndon Johnson to Ronald Reagan, there is a rich history of presidents having deeply mixed feelings about seeing their chosen vice presidents succeed them. Mr. Clinton apparently has no such ambivalence, although by some accounts he has been critical of Mr. Gore's stump style and his campaign team. Whether or not the theory of the burden of the vice presidency is valid, Mr. Gore's reinventions show that he has yet to communicate -- and perhaps settle on -- a riveting narrative for himself. It must be said that Mr. Bush, while he is campaigning more smoothly right now, has not exactly pulled the sword from the stone yet either. We are still waiting for the moment when a successful candidate fashions a reason for running and grows as a result of a series of ordeals. From Ronald Reagan's ''Shining City on the Hill'' to Bill Clinton's ''Man From Hope,'' truly successful politicians have a knack for sculpting a sense of destiny for themselves. Heroic or not, the vice president has done well in those moments when he appeared to be facing long odds. His campaign in the primary had its excesses, but he came across as a tough combatant and drew strength from that image. The challenge facing Mr. Gore now may paradoxically help him reach that image again. For now, however, he faces not only a contest against Mr. Bush, but also, after a lifetime in public life, a battle to define himself in the eyes of the nation he wants to lead.
 Mr. Mroz added that while his boss had not engaged in the speculation about herself as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate, ''she has said if she is asked, she would love to do it.'' It would not be the first time Mrs. Whitman and Mr. Bush shared the stage at a Republican National Convention; at the 1996 gathering in San Diego, they were co-chairman and chairwoman.
 The gospel that bigness is not necessarily badness has been preached on both sides of the political aisle for about 20 years. During the 12 years of the Reagan and Bush administrations, an era widely remembered for frenzied merger activity and devotion to a laissez-faire regulatory approach, there were 44,518 mergers and acquisitions in the United States, with a combined value of $2.17 trillion, according to Thomson Financial Securities Data. By contrast, the seven-and-a-half years of the Clinton administration have witnessed 71,811 corporate deals valued at $6.66 trillion.
 Among the modern presidents, Johnson was hardly alone. If an intellectual is defined as someone passionately interested in ideas for their own sake, then in the past century, we have sent exactly one intellectual to the White House -- Woodrow Wilson.  Yet it seems that in every presidential campaign season, we demand that our candidates prove their depth. They are asked to tell us the books they've read, what presidents they've been influenced by, how they did in school. This campaign season has proved no exception, and attention has been focused on the presidential finalist George W. Bush. As we assess Al Gore and George W. Bush in this campaign, we must also remember that appearances can be deceiving. As president, Dwight Eisenhower was content to let Democrats lampoon his ''lowbrow'' tastes in music and literature (Lawrence Welk and Louis L'Amour). But, as we now know, Ike had both a formidable command of military history, gained through decades in the Army, and an intellect that allowed him, more than anyone realized, to manage the peace and prosperity of the 1950's.
 Nevertheless, Mr. LaRouche continues to campaign as a Democrat and, in states where election officials permit his name on the ballot, he draws some votes, sometimes thousands of votes. In last month's Democratic primary in Arkansas, for example, he got more than 53,000 votes, or 22 percent of the total cast. The other candidate on the ticket, Vice President Al Gore, got 194,000 votes. As Senator Tim Hutchinson, the chairman of the Bush campaign in Arkansas, sees it, the reality is that 53,000 Democrats ''couldn't stomach Al Gore'' so they voted for a candidate ''not famous for being somebody you can support.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore moves his campaign headquarters from downtown Nashville to suburban mall; photo (M) Shortly after Vice President Al Gore moved his campaign headquarters from Washington to downtown Nashville in search of an outside-the-Beltway image, anti-Gore ads began showing up on billboards near the new digs. Many were paid for by the Republican National Committee, and the committee's chairman, Jim Nicholson, said he hoped Mr. Gore and his aides found them so annoying that ''their teeth hurt, like scratching nails on a blackboard.'' Typical ad: A picture of Mr. Gore embracing President Clinton, with a Gore quote underneath from the impeachment days: ''One of our greatest presidents.'' Shortly after Vice President Al Gore moved his campaign headquarters from Washington to downtown Nashville in search of an outside-the-Beltway image, anti-Gore ads began showing up on billboards near the new digs. Many were paid for by the Republican National Committee, and the committee's chairman, Jim Nicholson, said he hoped Mr. Gore and his aides found them so annoying that ''their teeth hurt, like scratching nails on a blackboard.'' Typical ad: A picture of Mr. Gore embracing President Clinton, with a Gore quote underneath from the impeachment days: ''One of our greatest presidents.'' Whether the ads set the Gore camp's teeth on edge is but a guess. But this much is clear: Last week the Gore headquarters was moved again, to a suburban mall where nary a billboard is in sight. Needed more office space, Gore aides explained.
 Republican Party unveils its first national TV commercial, which details Gov George W Bush's proposals for overhauling Social Security (M) Responding rapidly to a 15-state advertising campaign by the Democrats, the Republican Party yesterday unveiled its first national television commercial, a spot detailing Gov. George W. Bush's proposals for overhauling Social Security. It will begin running tomorrow in 17 states, from New England to the Pacific Northwest. Responding rapidly to a 15-state advertising campaign by the Democrats, the Republican Party yesterday unveiled its first national television commercial, a spot detailing Gov. George W. Bush's proposals for overhauling Social Security. It will begin running tomorrow in 17 states, from New England to the Pacific Northwest. The Republican commercial is being paid for with a mixture of hard  money, raised under federal limits, and soft money, the unrestricted contributions made to political parties by corporations, unions and wealthy individuals. The Democrats' spot,  which went up on Thursday to advertise Vice President Al Gore's support for expanding Medicare benefits to cover prescription drugs, is being paid for in the same manner. The widespread use of soft money in political advertising itself became an issue in recent weeks, as Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore tried to portray each other as unwilling to stop employing the money in their campaigns. ''We had no intention of starting to run issue ads until Gore broke his pledge,'' Mr. Nicholson said. ''They pledged not to run issue ads. But they broke that pledge because their campaign is faltering. They're in a desperate situation.'' Mr. Gore has said he made no such pledge, but had told Republican leaders that he would not run issue spots paid for with soft money if the Republicans promised not to do so. He said the Republicans declined to take up his challenge. Unlike the Democrats' half-minute spot, the Republican commercial runs 60 seconds, and it takes on a far riskier and more complicated issue. It is one that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have sparred over in recent weeks: how to ensure the federal retirement-benefits system does not go bankrupt as vast numbers of aging baby boomers move ever closer to eligibility for retirement checks. In the commercial, produced by Alex Castellanos, a media consultant, an announcer explains Mr. Bush's approach: ''The Bush plan guarantees everyone at or near retirement every dollar of their benefits. You paid into it, it's your money and it will be there for you. And the Bush plan gives younger workers a choice to invest a small part of their Social Security in sound investments they control, for higher returns.'' That last declaration derives from a speech on May 15 by Mr. Bush, in which he proposed a partial privatization of Social Security that would fundamentally change the system by allowing workers to invest some of their payroll taxes on their own. Mr. Gore denounced the proposal as dangerous, contending that taxpayers would be vulnerable to losing their retirement savings in fraudulent and foolhardy investments. Some Republican strategists close to Mr. Bush acknowledged the Republican National Committee spot addressed a much more politically treacherous issue than the one the Democrats chose for their first commercial for Mr. Gore. That, they said, was part of the point. ''It's as much a spot about leadership as it is about Social Security,'' asserted a Bush adviser. ''What people like most is someone who seems to have the courage to do what's right.'' Democratic officials, however, said they thought there was a lot in the spot that would work against Mr. Bush. It begins, they point out, with the announcer noting that ''our nation is at peace and more prosperous than ever.'' Joe Andrew, national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said, ''I'm going to be quoting the first sentence of the ad between now and the election.'' He added that Democrats would assert  that the Bush plan could force cuts in retirement benefits and lead to an increase in the retirement age.
 The only drawback, of course, is that many of us quite like our bourgeois individualism. I am somewhat fond of the fact that I will actually get paid for writing this column, rather than sharing it free. So you can see the ideological battle ahead: greed on one side will face a feasible high-tech commune on the other. Big corporations will take on plucky teenagers. But given the track record so far, the teenagers and the commies may well win. Indeed, they already have. Take journalism. I can see the attraction of dot-communism in my own profession -- you could call it Hackster -- but I'm not sure I want to sign up. But then the more I think about it, the more I realize I already have. Almost every newspaper now gives away online what it used to charge for on paper. The proliferation of links, cybergossip and cyberhype means that articles online soon lose their point of origin, and, like orphaned MP3 files, Love Bug viruses and Al Gore jokes, move around the world with lightning speed. Eventually, even journalists may get used to the Marxist idea of writing for more than a bourgeois readership -- and writing for more than a check. Before too long, we may find ourselves setting up a Web site, penning bons mots each day and giving them all away for free! Come to think of it, AndrewSullivan.com will be up and running by Labor Day. I'm serious.
 But that theme has not played so well lately. It did, in the Newt Gingrich era, forcing the national Democratic Party into the centrist postures that Al Gore is taking in his presidential campaign, which views New Jersey as crucial. But that was then, and that was before Mr. Corzine's $35 million primary campaign brought out voters who had not for a moment considered his plans for universal health coverage or pre-kindergarten programs.
 Mr. Gregory is a political correspondent covering the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush for NBC News. He graduated from American University. He is the son of Carolyn Surtees of Los Angeles and Don Gregory of Newport Beach, Calif. His father is a theatrical and film producer in Newport Beach. The bridegroom's mother is an account manager in the business services division, in San Fernando, Calif., for Office Depot, the office supplies chain.
 New lawyers for Gary Graham, who is on death row in Texas, say he is innocent and are seeking to have Gov George W Bush grant him some form of clemency; portray his case as textbook example of how bad lawyering sends poor people to death row; Ronald G Mock, court-appointed lawyer, represented Graham, who is scheduled to be executed on June 22 after 19-year court battle; believes that he has had more clients sentenced to death than any lawyer in country; photos (M) Mr. Graham's is the latest high-profile death penalty case to focus attention on Gov. George W. Bush and how the death penalty is administered in his state. With their appeals exhausted, Mr. Graham's lawyers are asking the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles to recommend that Mr. Bush grant Mr. Graham some form of clemency. Last week, Mr. Bush granted a 30-day reprieve to another condemned prisoner, Ricky Nolen McGinn. It was only the second time during his tenure that he has stepped in to stop an execution. The performance of appointed lawyers in capital cases has become a subject of national concern. Here in Texas, which, with 468 condemned prisoners, has the second-largest death row population in the country (California has the largest), Mr. Bush has vigorously defended the fairness and professionalism of his state's judicial system. He insists that none of the 131 people executed during his tenure were innocent. Governor Bush declined a request to be interviewed about the Graham case. His spokesman, Dan Bartlett, said: ''Governor Bush takes every death penalty case very seriously. The governor's office conducts an exhaustive and lengthy review process of each death penalty case. Having said that, we believe it is inappropriate for the governor or his staff to grant an interview in the middle of this review process.''
 Pres Clinton will be heard on radio spots urging voters in Scranton-area to support Democratic candidate Jim Wansacz in special election for state House seat; Vice Pres Al Gore is scheduled to campaign for Wansacz; Republican candidate, Tom Parry, has called on Gov Tom Ridge for help (M) Why should President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore suddenly take interest in a special election in an obscure state legislative district in Pennsylvania? Starting tomorrow, Mr. Clinton will be heard on radio spots and in phone-bank messages urging voters in the Scranton-area district to support the Democratic candidate, Jim Wansacz. Then on Tuesday, Mr. Gore is scheduled to campaign for Mr. Wansacz. Why should President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore suddenly take interest in a special election in an obscure state legislative district in Pennsylvania? Starting tomorrow, Mr. Clinton will be heard on radio spots and in phone-bank messages urging voters in the Scranton-area district to support the Democratic candidate, Jim Wansacz. Then on Tuesday, Mr. Gore is scheduled to campaign for Mr. Wansacz.
