 Public Lives column; problems caused by appearance of Vice Pres Al Gore at New-York Historical Society discussed; cast of musical The Music Man perform rendition of Seventy-Six Trombones; author Jane Heller discusses her new novel Name-Dropping; photo (M)
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on Vice Pres Al Gore's performance in his interview with New York Times writers and editors; cites what she perceives as his long-winded evasion of questions; complains both Gore and Gov George W Bush never say anything, Gore because he knows a lot but is afraid to damage his campaign and Bush because he does not know much and lets others script opinions that will not mar campaign (M) Al Gore met yesterday with Times writers and editors. The first question put to him was: How do you assess George W. Bush as a candidate? Al Gore met yesterday with Times writers and editors. The first question put to him was: How do you assess George W. Bush as a candidate? Once eyes began to glaze, Mr. Gore happily slipped in his new happy maxims: ''Prosperity and progress,'' ''Ideas and not insults,'' the Popeyesque ''I am who I am,'' and, on his lack of appeal to women, ''All in due time.'' Asked if Governor Bush had made better use of the last two months, Farmer Al sanguinely offered this Chauncey Gardiner moment: ''When you plant seeds you don't know what the crop will be like just by the way the planting has occurred.'' Mr. Gore replied with a treatise on post-World-War-II America and another plug for his plans for clean air, clean energy and health care. Take the death penalty. Mr. Bush opened himself up on the issue by first bragging that all the prisoners executed on his watch in Texas were guilty. Then he issued his first reprieve in a move that seemed politically inspired. But Mr. Gore is so afraid of reviving the old Democratic label of being soft on capital punishment that he can't capitalize on the issue despite fresh evidence that the administration of the death penalty is seriously flawed. A new Columbia University study found that two of every three death sentences are overturned on appeal. Asked repeatedly at The Times whether he is comfortable with the death penalty now, Mr. Gore weaved and waffled. That should be easy to answer,  even for someone who likes to hedge: Zero. But Mr. Gore simply reiterated that he thought the level of error was low. ''Yes,'' Mr. Gore said, adding carefully: ''Did my answer sound too careful?'' ''Napoleon,'' Mr. Gore shot back, ''also invented canned food.''
 Your article says that ''Yale, like Andover, gave a helping hand to alumni sons in the admission process . . . and it seems unlikely that Mr. Bush would have been admitted into Yale otherwise.'' For the white and the rich, it was called a ''helping hand''; for minorities, it is called affirmative action and is in danger, especially in states led by the brothers Bush.
 Letter by Michael Bochenek of Human Rights Watch says Gov George Bush should end Texas's use of death penalty on mentally retarded people and those who committed crimes when they were under 18 (S) The risk of executing the innocent and the lack of competent counsel for indigent defendants aren't the only problems with the ''conveyor-belt death penalty system'' in Texas (''The New Death Penalty Politics,'' editorial, June 7). Gov. George W. Bush should also end the use of the death penalty on mentally retarded people and those who committed crimes when they were under 18. The record 131 executions during Governor Bush's tenure include 3 juvenile offenders, 2 with severe brain damage. On June 22, Gary Graham is scheduled to become the fourth youthful offender to be put to death on Governor Bush's watch. The risk of executing the innocent and the lack of competent counsel for indigent defendants aren't the only problems with the ''conveyor-belt death penalty system'' in Texas (''The New Death Penalty Politics,'' editorial, June 7). Gov. George W. Bush should also end the use of the death penalty on mentally retarded people and those who committed crimes when they were under 18. The record 131 executions during Governor Bush's tenure include 3 juvenile offenders, 2 with severe brain damage. On June 22, Gary Graham is scheduled to become the fourth youthful offender to be put to death on Governor Bush's watch.
 Gore Cites Clinton Record In a Call for New Spending  Vice President Al Gore, invoking the economic record of President Clinton, called for a new retirement program to supplement Social Security, elimination of the nation's debt in 12 years, modest tax cuts and systematic spending increases for education, health care and the environment. His speech in Manhattan was the first in a series elaborating on his message of ''prosperity and progress.'' Mr. Gore suggested that recent studies citing legal errors in death penalty cases could prompt a fresh evaluation of the nation's use of capital punishment. But he did not suggest that he was ready to abandon his support for the death penalty.
 It is nice to see that Vice President Al Gore seems to be showing an interest in Indian affairs (''At Meeting of Tribal Leaders, Gore Taps a New Font of Cash,'' news article, June 8). Perhaps he will begin to address the real issues that plague the majority of Indians in this country: staggering unemployment, substandard living conditions and lack of adequate health care, just to name a few. It is nice to see that Vice President Al Gore seems to be showing an interest in Indian affairs (''At Meeting of Tribal Leaders, Gore Taps a New Font of Cash,'' news article, June 8). Perhaps he will begin to address the real issues that plague the majority of Indians in this country: staggering unemployment, substandard living conditions and lack of adequate health care, just to name a few.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, in interview with New York Times editorial board members, reporters and editors, says studies showing drastic error rates in court appeals of death penalty cases could spur re-evaluation of capital punishment; does not abandon his longstanding support for death penalty or criticize Gov George W Bush on issue; generally refrains from direct criticism of Bush; stresses his economic plan; photo (M) Despite his longstanding support for the death penalty, Vice President Al Gore suggested yesterday that recent studies showing drastic error rates in court appeals of death penalty cases could prompt a fresh evaluation of the nation's use of capital punishment. ''If there is a study that shows a large number of mistakes, that has to make you uncomfortable,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I have assumed up until very recently that the mistakes were rare and unusual.'' Despite his longstanding support for the death penalty, Vice President Al Gore suggested yesterday that recent studies showing drastic error rates in court appeals of death penalty cases could prompt a fresh evaluation of the nation's use of capital punishment. ''If there is a study that shows a large number of mistakes, that has to make you uncomfortable,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I have assumed up until very recently that the mistakes were rare and unusual.'' Mr. Gore, speaking with members of the editorial board, a reporter and editors of The New York Times, chose his words carefully and did not suggest that he was ready to abandon his support for the death penalty. And he said he would not impose on federal capital cases the kind of moratorium that Gov. George Ryan has imposed in Illinois. Mr. Gore's meeting with the editorial board was part of a daylong media blitz of national news organizations. The sessions coincided with the opening of his three-week ''progress and prosperity tour,'' a concerted effort to get credit for the nation's booming economy as well as to kick-start his campaign into a positive yet aggressive mode before the convention. The economy was clearly Mr. Gore's message of the day. He even stopped himself short at one point in the interview as he was about to ''commit news,'' as he put it. The first question posed to him concerned his assessment of Mr. Bush as an opponent. In response, he recapped his economic plan in an answer lasting about 15 minutes. Mr. Gore's comments on the death penalty were his most extensive to date on the topic in this presidential campaign. Despite a handful of votes to the contrary while he was in Congress, he has generally supported the death penalty since he was first elected to the House in 1976, and his support for it was viewed as a political plus in 1992 when Bill Clinton chose him as his running mate. Still, the death penalty is a topic that Mr. Gore has virtually ignored during this campaign, even as it has swirled around Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his expected Republican rival. Mr. Bush has presided over 131 executions, the most of any governor since the death penalty was reinstated, although he recently issued a stay of execution. Aside from the fact that Mr. Gore has never been in the position to sign a death warrant, there appears to be little difference between the two candidates' positions. And Mr. Gore said yesterday that he was not prepared to criticize Mr. Bush over it. Diann Rust-Tierney, director of the capital punishment project for the American Civil Liberties Union, said in a telephone interview later that Mr. Gore's comments represented ''a higher level of thought and discussion around this issue'' than pro-death-penalty candidates have exhibited in the past. ''It sounds like he is at least thinking about it,'' she said. ''It sounds like there is some sense of progress in his thinking.'' In an apparent attempt to neutralize questions about earlier votes that some have said indicated a change in his position on the death penalty, Mr. Gore volunteered: ''There have been a number of cases where proposals came before the House of Representatives and the Senate when I voted against capital punishment. But those votes were the exception rather than the rule. I have insisted upon certain criteria before I'm willing to support the death penalty. But where those criteria are present, I have always supported it.'' In the 75-minute interview, Mr. Gore generally refrained from direct criticism of Mr. Bush, saying at one point, ''I choose not to attach any elegant epithets to my opponent.'' But he also said he believed the Republicans, and by implication Mr. Bush, would advance a right-wing agenda if they won the White House. He said that after Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson, the evangelists, had met with Mr. Bush, the two were ''happy as clams'' and were not saying anything publicly to contradict the impression that Mr. Bush had agreed to appease them. ''I infer from that,'' Mr. Gore said, ''that the basic arrangement is that the agenda per noted in the closing days of the Republican primary contest is still very much the real agenda, at least where the Supreme Court appointments are concerned, and that those who are most interested in that agenda have agreed to be completely silent about it during this period of the campaign.'' Mr. Gore, who said the next president's ability to name three or four Supreme Court justices was one of the top issues in the election, noted in passing that ''Governor Bush has said his favorite justice is Antonin Scalia; mine would be Thurgood Marshall.'' The analogy was perhaps slightly inapt. It was not clear whether Mr. Bush was picking his all-time favorite justice or just those on the bench now, while the late Mr. Marshall is no longer on the bench. Throughout the interview, Mr. Gore offered an uncharacteristically modest assessment of his grasp of detail. These assertions seemed an attempt to put the brakes on his tendency to veer toward the tutorial and didactic. ''You're taking me outside my depths,'' he said of a discussion on missile technology. ''I do not claim expertise,'' he said of a discussion of the Microsoft case. And, in response to a question from William Safire, the language authority and New York Times columnist, about choice in matters of privacy, Mr. Gore replied: ''Along with roughly 270 million other Americans, I use words more carelessly than Bill Safire, and in choosing the word 'choose,' I did not inform myself of the deeper, more subtle meanings, which I can now see clearly.'' At the same time, he seemed to enjoy showing off his knowledge. At one point, Mr. Gore was asked about his tactical positioning in a question referring to Napoleon's military strategy, and surprised listeners by saying, ''Napoleon also invented canned food.''
 Diplomats say that Dr. Assad must rely on his brother-in-law, Asef Shoukat, who is married to Dr. Assad's strong-willed sister, Bushra, to keep a lid on dissent.
 Considering that many environmentalists, including Al Gore, have for years been urging Americans to believe the United Nations panel, it seems peculiar that the administration's report should diverge from it so sharply. Also open to question is the fact that the report's overview draft was been made public even though a few of the underlying studies are still not complete. It's hard not to suspect rushing for political purposes; perhaps there was a ''unique level of stakeholder involvement'' on the part of the Gore campaign.
 Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the likely Republican nominee for president, said Mr. Bush hoped Congress and the president could agree on a way to provide drug benefits this year.
 Excerpts from Vice Pres Al Gore's interview by New York Times editorial board members, reporters and editors (M) Following are excerpts from the interview of Vice President Al Gore yesterday by members of the editorial board and reporters and editors of The New York Times: Following are excerpts from the interview of Vice President Al Gore yesterday by members of the editorial board and reporters and editors of The New York Times: There are two alternative courses of action. Governor Bush already assumed the large increase in the surplus a month ago and used it for his tax-cut proposal and his Social Security-privatization proposal. The estimates of the so-called Star Wars proposal are not even included yet, but before the midsession review is completed, before either the Congress -- Congressional Budget Office or the O.M.B. released a new estimate, Governor Bush's budget proposals have already completely spent all of that and more: 1.6 trillion for the tax cuts and one trillion for Social Security privatization to make up the amount lost to the trust fund in the next 10 years. That does not include all the new defense spending and the new proposals that he's made, but it's clear from his own numbers that his plan, even with the large increase in the surplus, predicted with the new numbers coming out soon, even with them, by his own numbers, he is way over and beyond that amount. Further, I will propose that we give a new savings incentive to give Americans the option for tax-free, voluntary savings accounts over and above Social Security. And I will call it Social Security Plus, and it will be in sharp contrast to Governor Bush's proposal, which I think can be described as Social Security Minus, because his proposal would come with a price tag of a trillion dollars and with the risk that bad investments would be subtracted from the Social Security foundation. . . . Q. Do you share the conventional wisdom, though, that Governor Bush and his campaign have made better use of the last two months than you and your campaign? My own philosophy is that this is one of the most important issues in the campaign. The next president will appoint three, perhaps four, justices of the Supreme Court, probably. Governor Bush has said his favorite justice is Antonin Scalia. Mine would be Thurgood Marshall. I think that the appointments by the president will surely determine the way our Constitution is interpreted for the next 30 to 40 years, not only concerning a woman's right to choose but also on issues like privacy, more broadly defined, civil rights, federalism, individual rights, environmental rights. The violence against women act was just struck down on a 5-to-4 vote with all the usual suspects lined up on both sides. And it was reintroduced yesterday, incidentally, to try to reclaim it. Why shouldn't a woman be able to sue in such circumstances? I agree with the four justices who affirmed what the Congress said. What would the difference be between my appointments and those of my opponent? I think it's very, very clear. I'm not in favor of specific, narrow litmus tests, but we all know that there are ways to ascertain with high confidence the general approach that potential justices will take to the Constitution. I believe it's a living and breathing document, and I don't think it should be narrowly constrained to the meaning of words 200 years ago -- 211 years ago -- as Justice Scalia and, apparently, Governor Bush would. . . . Q. In your list of issues that could come before the courts in the coming years, conspicuously absent is capital punishment. And it's something that obviously Governor Bush has had to talk about a lot so far this year. You've been largely silent on it. My question is that through a whirlwind, is there any substantive difference between your position on capital punishment and Governor Bush's?
 In District 32 in Bushwick, Brooklyn, which ranks 10th in total spending, at $8,900 per student, 10 cents of every dollar goes to pay for school aides and other jobs that historically have been used as sources of patronage for school board members and local politicians. By contrast, District 2, which embraces Lower Manhattan and the Upper East Side, ranks 23rd in total spending. It lays out about 45 percent less than District 32 on aides and similar jobs, and 40 percent more on teacher training. District 2, it turns out, is one of the city's best-performing, while the Bushwick district's test scores are generally in the bottom half of city rankings. District 32 in Bushwick ranks first in the city in spending on categories traditionally associated with patronage -- paraprofessionals, school aides and assistant principals. Last year, 10 percent of the district's total spending, or roughly $884 a student, went to pay for those categories of employees.
 Vice Pres Al Gore seeks to hitch his presidential campaign to Pres Clinton's economic record and calls for new tax-free voluntary retirement accounts to supplement Social Security, elimination of nation's debt in 12 years, modest tax cuts and creation of trust fund to divert some projected surplus to increased spending on education, health care and environment, speech, New York City; is flanked by Robert E Rubin, former Treasury secretary who is symbol of Clinton's economic policies; urges excess Medicare funds be put into 'ironclad box' to bar Congress from using them for other programs; speech is billed as major address intended to open new thematic chapter in campaign; contains few details; Gore, as part of new initiative, also holds round of news interviews in NY; excerpts from speech (M) Vice President Al Gore moved yesterday to hitch his presidential campaign to the economic record of President Clinton and called for a new retirement program to supplement Social Security, the elimination of the nation's debt in 12 years, modest tax cuts and systematic increases in spending on education, health care and the environment. ''I intend to build even higher on the foundation of the Clinton years,''  Mr. Gore declared in a speech in a cramped auditorium at the New-York Historical Society on Manhattan's Upper West Side, standing next to the very symbol of Mr. Clinton's economic policies, Robert E. Rubin, the former secretary of the treasury. Vice President Al Gore moved yesterday to hitch his presidential campaign to the economic record of President Clinton and called for a new retirement program to supplement Social Security, the elimination of the nation's debt in 12 years, modest tax cuts and systematic increases in spending on education, health care and the environment. ''I intend to build even higher on the foundation of the Clinton years,''  Mr. Gore declared in a speech in a cramped auditorium at the New-York Historical Society on Manhattan's Upper West Side, standing next to the very symbol of Mr. Clinton's economic policies, Robert E. Rubin, the former secretary of the treasury. Mr. Gore, speaking in the heart of a New York neighborhood that has long been identified with liberal political thought, urged creation of trust funds that would systematically divert parts of the nation's projected surplus to spending on education, health care and the environment, as well as to eliminate the nation's debt. He called for creation of new tax-free, voluntary retirement accounts that would supplement Social Security benefits. Mr. Gore's speech was advertised as a major address intended to inaugurate a new thematic chapter in a campaign that many Democrats have come to view as adrift. For the next three weeks, he plans to deliver a series of speeches elaborating on his message of ''prosperity and progress,'' with one of the weeks devoted to environmental issues. As part of the initiative, Mr. Gore also conducted a round of news interviews in New York, including a meeting with members of the editorial board, a reporter and editors of The New York Times, where he suggested that he was concerned about recent studies that showed high rates of mistakes in death penalty cases. [Excerpts, Page A20.] In his economic speech, Mr. Gore restated his support for a variety of limited tax reductions, including the elimination of the so-called marriage penalty for working couples. And he urged that excess Medicare funds be put into ''an ironclad box,'' preventing Congress from using them for other programs, like the big tax cut being pursued by his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush. But these presumably complicated proposals were addressed in a few quick and fleeting sentences. Instead of offering details, Mr. Gore, speaking broadly, sought to wrap himself in the legacy of Mr. Clinton's economic accomplishments, while offering his general views on how the nation should best use the surpluses that are being projected for the years ahead. Although he did not mention Mr.  Bush by name, he offered clear criticism of Mr. Bush's advocacy for large tax cuts, and for allowing the private investment of some Social Security funds. Mr. Gore's advisers declined to offer much elaboration on any of the proposals, saying that the vice president would instead seek to stretch out this repackaging of his candidacy by returning to each of these subjects in coming days. Most of the proposals Mr. Gore said would provide the foundation of his campaign through the summer came as a result of the projected surpluses that  have allowed him to advocate new spending without calling for new taxes or cuts in other programs. Mr. Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, criticized the speech, describing it as representative of an activist view of government. ''By offering new ways the federal government can gain more control, apparently Al Gore does not trust individual Americans to make decisions regarding their own retirement, health care needs, education, and finances,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''Just as hard-working Americans deserve credit for our economic prosperity, Governor Bush believes Americans should have more control over saving for their retirement, planning for their children's education.'' There were numerous indications of the importance that Mr. Gore and his aides attached to a speech that his campaign hopes will shift the terms of debate in his contest with Mr. Bush. The vice president tinkered with the text until the very last minute, and then read from a Teleprompter, with barely a variation, when delivering it to his invited audience. To make sure that no one missed the point, the stage was festooned with a banner reading ''Prosperity and Progress.'' As has been fairly standard in recent weeks, Mr. Gore avoided mentioning Mr. Bush by name. Which is not to say he was not critical of his opponent. For one thing, he suggested that the large tax cuts advocated by Mr. Bush would derail the nation's economic recovery. ''I won't be profligate with your money,'' Mr. Gore declared. ''I won't spend money that we don't have on a tax cut that our economy can't afford.'' Similarly, he criticized Mr. Bush's proposal to allow some private investment of Social Security funds. ''I will oppose any effort to make Social security a gamble, instead of a guarantee.'' That said, a number of polls have found strong support among voters for Mr. Bush's Social Security plan, and Mr. Gore sought yesterday to counter that with his own plan. ''Social Security Plus,'' as he named it, would allow taxpayers to invest a certain amount of money every year to be used for retirement, beyond the payroll taxes that workers pay for Social Security. That money, as well as any interest earned on the investment, would be exempt from taxes, though further details on the program, including the amount of annual investment allowed, remained to be worked out, said Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane. Traditional I.R.A.'s defer taxes. In some ways, the spending proposals made Mr. Gore sound like a pre-Clinton Democrat as he spoke about ''reforming our schools, curing disease and making all of our families healthier than ever before, and protecting the environment.'' But he also sounded tried and true Republican themes, saying: ''We can never go back to the days when we spent money that we just don't have'' and describing his plan to pay the debt as ''plain good capitalism.'' In the past year, Mr. Gore has drifted back and forth in terms of his willingness to align himself with the president. But yesterday, he clearly stood on the Clinton administration's shoulders, arguing that its economic policies account for today's economic prosperity. A full transcript of Mr. Gore's remarks is available from The New York Times on the Web:  www.nytimes.com
 One victim of the controversy at Los Alamos may be Mr. Richardson, a former House member from New Mexico whose political prospects had appeared bright until recently. He has been mentioned as a possible running mate for Vice President Al Gore on the Democratic ticket, but the scandals at the Energy Department and the rising price of gasoline may have doomed his chances.
 CURRENT EVENTS  By David Marshall Grant; directed by David Petrarca; sets by Derek McLane; costumes by Jane Greenwood; lighting by Brian MacDevitt; sound by Bruce Ellman; original music by Jason Robert Brown; production stage manager, Jason Scott Eagan; production manager, Michael R. Moody; associate artistic director, Michael Bush; general manager, Harold Wolpert. Presented by the Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, artistic director; Barry Grove, executive director. At City Center Stage 2, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
 RATING RUNNING MATES -- The speculation started two weeks ago with a report in Time that Gov. George W. Bush was giving serious consideration to former Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri as his running mate. Mr. Danforth, who retired from the Senate in 1994 and is now leading the special investigation into the Branch Davidian incident in Texas, declined to comment. So did Mr. Bush, except to insist that despite all the rumors in the air, only his wife and his vice-presidential search adviser knew what he was thinking. Whereupon the rumors picked up speed. By the end of last week, Mr. Danforth ranked 15th on the ''Veepstakes Scoreboard,'' the tally the Hotline political tip sheet keeps of how often possible vice-presidential choices merit a major media mention. Mr. Danforth had 10 mentions, compared with 49 for Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, No. 1 on the 53-name list. On Monday, Mr. Danforth made a move, telling The St. Louis Post-Dispatch that he had told Mr. Bush that the idea was ''very tempting,'' but that the six years since he had left Washington and politics had been the best of his life. So wherever Mr. Danforth stood on the rumor list, was he ever really on the Bush list? No comment from Mr. Bush. RATING RUNNING MATES -- The speculation started two weeks ago with a report in Time that Gov. George W. Bush was giving serious consideration to former Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri as his running mate. Mr. Danforth, who retired from the Senate in 1994 and is now leading the special investigation into the Branch Davidian incident in Texas, declined to comment. So did Mr. Bush, except to insist that despite all the rumors in the air, only his wife and his vice-presidential search adviser knew what he was thinking. Whereupon the rumors picked up speed. By the end of last week, Mr. Danforth ranked 15th on the ''Veepstakes Scoreboard,'' the tally the Hotline political tip sheet keeps of how often possible vice-presidential choices merit a major media mention. Mr. Danforth had 10 mentions, compared with 49 for Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, No. 1 on the 53-name list. On Monday, Mr. Danforth made a move, telling The St. Louis Post-Dispatch that he had told Mr. Bush that the idea was ''very tempting,'' but that the six years since he had left Washington and politics had been the best of his life. So wherever Mr. Danforth stood on the rumor list, was he ever really on the Bush list? No comment from Mr. Bush. STILL TOO CLOSE -- A new national poll has Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore locked in a race too close to call. But as in most recent polls, this one, conducted for ABC News and The Washington Post, shows Mr. Bush with a slight edge, 49 percent to 45 percent. A month ago, an ABC/Post poll gave Mr. Bush a five-point edge; two months ago, Mr. Gore led by one point. The new poll covered 1,204 registered voters, was conducted June 8 to 11 and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three points. Respondents gave Mr. Gore the edge in protecting Social Security, 43 percent to 40 percent, but said Mr. Bush would be better with the economy, 46 percent to 41 percent.
