 Bush Criticizes Security Lapses  Gov. George W. Bush crisscrossed Florida and criticized security lapses at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, saying ''America's nuclear security should not be a matter of lost and found.''
 Military officials immediately tested samples of the cable, found that they began to break at barely half the load they were supposed to support, and started inspections of all aircraft equipped with it. In August 1999, Air Froce mechanics replaced cable linked to the engine controls of a backup plane to Air Force Two, which is used by Vice President Al Gore.
 It has not helped the firm that Al Gore fired Penn late last year, in part because, as one aide to the vice president said, Gore wanted to ''move beyond the small-bore issues.'' He also wanted to distance himself from Clinton, and some aides faulted Penn as failing to ring the alarm over Bill Bradley. Yet since defeating Bradley in the primaries, Gore has not seemed so sure-footed, and George W. Bush, after his swing to the right, has been sidling toward the center. One political vulnerability of Penn's approach, with its emphasis on efficient regulation, low costs and accountability, is that it left the door open for a Republican smart enough to say, ''Hey, me, too!'' But we may yet see some values-based, small-bore initiatives from Gore. Penn is still polling for the D.N.C., where the national chairman, Joe Andrew, compares him to de Tocqueville. Through the D.N.C., Penn's work is available again to Gore as the party's certain nominee.
 Stephen S Hall article warns Americans' reflexive distrust of political anger has delegitimized things that should make voters angry; holds George W Bush's victory in Republican presidential primaries has quelled healthy political anger; deplores failure of politicians to get publicly angry about anything larger than own ambitions; photo (M) Anger is already a leitmotif in this year's presidential campaign. In April, George W. Bush vowed to ''end the arms race of anger'' in American politics and called for a return to comity in the public conversation. Al Gore's handlers, meanwhile, have been trying to make him more huggable. In New York, Mayor Giuliani has molted his cutworm skin and emerged as the Love Bug. But here's what comity gets you: that picture of Hillary Clinton and Rick Lazio stiffly shaking each other's hands with transparently insincere smiles as brittle as frost. Anger is already a leitmotif in this year's presidential campaign. In April, George W. Bush vowed to ''end the arms race of anger'' in American politics and called for a return to comity in the public conversation. Al Gore's handlers, meanwhile, have been trying to make him more huggable. In New York, Mayor Giuliani has molted his cutworm skin and emerged as the Love Bug. But here's what comity gets you: that picture of Hillary Clinton and Rick Lazio stiffly shaking each other's hands with transparently insincere smiles as brittle as frost. I'm not sure that the reflexive distrust of anger serves politics well now. The Republicans are talking about making their convention a vitriol-free zone this summer, even trotting out a rehabilitated John McCain. But his participation will serve only as a reminder of the kind of healthy political anger that Bush's victory managed to quell. Back in February, conceding to Bush after the South Carolina primary, McCain was mad. With barely contained indignation, he condemned Bush's winning strategy -- the below-the-belt questioning of his military valor, the relentless attack ads, the courtship of the religious right. On CNN, Jeff Greenfield and Judy Woodruf wagged their fingers at McCain's outburst -- and his temper, not what prompted it, became the story. Bush wiped the mud off his hands and, his party's nomination safely in possession, suddenly became the king of comity.
 EWING TOWNSHIP 5 Windy Bush Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; patio, front porch, h/w floors, 2-car garage, c/a, family room, 159-by-155-ft. lot; taxes $5,657; listed at $229,000, 10 days on market (Broker: Weidel)
 Tax the visitor is a old game, but it has recently developed wrinkles as big as the Rocky Mountains. Earlier this year, Florida legislators received a bill similar to the Texas bill,  to finance a $400 million baseball stadium through a tax on cruise passengers using ''big ports,'' defined so that only Miami qualified. It would have come to $4 to $8 a day per passenger. The president of Carnival Cruise Lines, Bob Dickinson, said at the end of March that if the bill passed, the line would not base a new vessel in Miami but in Port Everglades, and Cunard, which Carnival owns, would cancel Miami calls by the Queen Elizabeth 2. The bill was then buried by Gov. Jeb Bush, who said he would veto it.
 Wave has ties to some luminaries. The chairman and founder, Peter J. Sprague, was chairman of National Semiconductor, a big chip maker, for three decades. Among Wave's board members are George Gilder, the  technology guru, and Nolan Bushnell, the founder of Atari, the pioneering video game company.
 Kae L McLaughlin letter responds to June 12 Political Memo; asserts Republican presidential candidate George W Bush misrepresents himself as moderate on issue of abortion rights, noting he signed seven anti-choice bills as Governor of Texas It will be a tragedy for the reproductive rights of American women if Gov. George W. Bush of Texas does not come clean on abortion and quit trying to fool voters into thinking he's a moderate on the issue (Political Memo, June 12). Here in Texas, we've seen how his actions belie his words. In 1999, Mr. Bush tied with Gov. John Engler of Michigan in signing seven anti-choice bills into law -- more than any other states. It will be a tragedy for the reproductive rights of American women if Gov. George W. Bush of Texas does not come clean on abortion and quit trying to fool voters into thinking he's a moderate on the issue (Political Memo, June 12). Here in Texas, we've seen how his actions belie his words. In 1999, Mr. Bush tied with Gov. John Engler of Michigan in signing seven anti-choice bills into law -- more than any other states. A prominent Texas anti-choice leader, Bill Price, said it best. When talking about pro-choice Texans, he crowed that Mr. Bush ''pulled the wool over their eyes.'' We hope the rest of America doesn't let that happen.
 Al Gore and George W. Bush are knocking themselves out to court women, even adopting more feminine metaphors and schmoozing on networks for women. I have nightmarish visions of Android Al desperately trying to show he's soulful by sniffling at the podium, dredging up more Gore tragedy. In Philadelphia, W. has to prove he is strong enough to be president. On ''60 Minutes'' in 1987, Bush senior defended himself against the wimp label by citing the strength needed to deal with the death of his 3-year-old daughter, Robin, from leukemia. Let's hope the younger Bush doesn't revisit that awful time. Mr. Gore is more of a threat on this score. In L.A., the man who has been satirized as having a romantic relationship with his Palm Pilot will have to prove he is human enough to be president. Taking his confessional cue from Bill Clinton at the '92 convention, Mr. Gore told in gruesome detail about his 6-year-old son being struck by a car in 1989: ''When you've seen your reflection in the empty stare of a boy waiting for his second breath of life, you realize that we were not put here on earth to look out for our needs alone. . . .''
 Editorial finds economic prosperity and federal budget surpluses are testing creativity of both Vice Pres Gore and Republican presidential rival George W Bush A deadly familiarity has crept into the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Last week, as Mr. Gore embarked on a new series of ''prosperity and progress'' speeches, Mr. Bush immediately derided his efforts as ''Al Gore's 'I Invented Prosperity' Tour.'' Underneath the surface of such exchanges, however, the political terrain may be undergoing some redefinition. For the first time in decades, a presidential race is occurring at a time of economic abundance and budget surpluses. These unusual circumstances are testing the creativity of both major candidates. Seven years ago, hemmed in by massive budget deficits inherited from the Reagan years, President Clinton could not deliver on his promises to stimulate the economy with major investments in infrastructure and other programs. But suddenly the candidates are now arguing over what to do with surpluses that no candidates in recent history have enjoyed. This has allowed Mr. Gore, who has been stumbling for months, to present the public with a detailed policy agenda of spending proposals. It has also allowed Mr. Bush to warn -- echoing the traditional anti-government rhetoric of Republican candidates -- that the money must not be commandeered by federal programs. A deadly familiarity has crept into the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Last week, as Mr. Gore embarked on a new series of ''prosperity and progress'' speeches, Mr. Bush immediately derided his efforts as ''Al Gore's 'I Invented Prosperity' Tour.'' Underneath the surface of such exchanges, however, the political terrain may be undergoing some redefinition. For the first time in decades, a presidential race is occurring at a time of economic abundance and budget surpluses. These unusual circumstances are testing the creativity of both major candidates. Seven years ago, hemmed in by massive budget deficits inherited from the Reagan years, President Clinton could not deliver on his promises to stimulate the economy with major investments in infrastructure and other programs. But suddenly the candidates are now arguing over what to do with surpluses that no candidates in recent history have enjoyed. This has allowed Mr. Gore, who has been stumbling for months, to present the public with a detailed policy agenda of spending proposals. It has also allowed Mr. Bush to warn -- echoing the traditional anti-government rhetoric of Republican candidates -- that the money must not be commandeered by federal programs. Mr. Gore proposes to use the extra money for an accelerated program to retire the national debt and to set up three ''trust funds'' for health care, the environment and education. He argues that his approach is more fiscally prudent than Mr. Bush's, especially because it aims to make America debt-free for the first time since the 1830's. For its part, the Bush campaign will argue that its tax cut of more than $1 trillion over 10 years is now more affordable than before, and that spending the surplus is a decision best left to individuals. Both campaigns seem aware of surveys showing that Americans are not nearly as angry about the government as they were in the early or even the mid-1990's. The Gore campaign is tapping into an emerging American recognition that economic change has made it more urgent for government to train workers, invest in health and research, and protect families left behind or hurt by new rules in the workplace and marketplace.
 University of Michigan Business School prof Jim Reece recalls teaching Al Gore calculus in 1964-65 academic year at St Albans School in Washington (DC), but needs his memory jogged to recall that he later also taught George W Bush as a professor at Harvard Business School; recalls Bush as 'a very friendly guy' and 'a good student'; photo (M) ''Al Gore,'' she said. ''Al Gore,'' she said. ''No, George Bush.'' ''He didn't teach George Bush,'' she corrected me. ''He taught Al Gore.'' When he returned my call, Jim Reece, a professor of accounting and operations management at the University of Michigan Business School, explained that Mr. Gore was a student in his calculus class in the 1964-65 academic year at the St. Albans School in Washington. Yes, he later taught at Harvard Business School, Mr. Reece said, but George W. Bush had never been in his class. Still, he agreed to check his files and call me back. Fifteen minutes later, Mr. Reece acknowledged that he might be the only teacher to have taught the presidential candidates of both major parties. He had found Mr. Bush's class card and photograph, with a few notes in the margins; they helped jog his memory. ''I remember George being a very friendly guy,'' he said, ''and a good student.'' The class was an introduction to management accounting. In part, he better remembered teaching Mr. Gore because his St. Albans class had only 13 students, versus 84 in Mr. Bush's section. Also, it was Mr. Reece's rookie year as a teacher. ''You never forget your first year in the classroom,'' he said.
 George W Bush, Havard Business School Class of 1975, will be first president with a master's degree in business administration, if he is elected; though Bush has not made much of connection, his generalist, big-picture, highly delegative management style is in keeping with Harvard Business School training; classmates and professors remember Bush's relaxed attitude and unusual confidence; alumni scoff at suggestion that Bush is not smart enough to be president-- though theirs is not necessarily an impartial view; photo (M) A quarter of a century later, one of those students is up for a big management position that has never been filled by someone with such preparation. If he gets the job, George W. Bush would be the first president with a master's degree in business administration. A quarter of a century later, one of those students is up for a big management position that has never been filled by someone with such preparation. If he gets the job, George W. Bush would be the first president with a master's degree in business administration. And while it is not a part of his biography that he often discusses, Mr. Bush is in many ways the archetypal Harvard Business School-trained manager. As someone who went through the same training, 16 years after Mr. Bush, I find it striking how his style -- generalist, big picture, highly delegative -- is almost exactly in line with the management approach taught at Harvard. But is that a good thing? Is a Harvard M.B.A. appropriate training for the presidency? And how much of George W. Bush, presidential candidate, is really a reflection of his Harvard years? In his autobiography, ''A Charge To Keep'' (William Morrow & Company, 1999), Mr. Bush mentions his time at Harvard only briefly, calling it ''a turning point for me'' that taught ''the principles of capital, how it is accumulated, risked, spent, managed.'' Classmates and professors say that while the raw elements of Bush management were in place when he arrived at Harvard, business school had a significant role in melding his style. They remember a relaxed attitude and an unusual confidence that stood out even in a class of some of America's most confident. Alumni scoff at the suggestion that Mr. Bush is not smart enough to be president -- though, of course, that is not necessarily an impartial view, given that his grades fell in the middle of the bell curve, along with most of theirs. Mr. Bush was known as a quick study -- not a very deep thinker, but an efficient one. In class, he was more of a listener than a participant. (That may be why Mr. Bush left Harvard without having substantially improved his extemporaneous speaking abilities, though it also may be that heredity ultimately trumps business school.) In Mr. Bush's class, that point was made presciently during discussion of one of the very rare public-sector case studies, on the paper flow in the office of Edward M. Kennedy, then as now a senator from Massachusetts. Classmates said that when a student challenged the case's relevance to a business degree, the professor responded: Who knows? Someone in the class could end up as president of the United States. From his seat in the top row, Mr. Bush -- often relied upon for humor -- raised his arms over his head in a Nixonesque victory gesture. From the start, Mr. Bush made a distinct impression on Section C, the group of 84 students with whom he would go through his first year of course work. But not Mr. Bush, who was 27 and had just completed his service in the Air National Guard when he arrived at Harvard. Mr. Winston remembers entering the class the first day and seeing Mr. Bush flying paper airplanes around the room. ''George felt that this environment was something he could handle,'' Mr. Winston said. ''The case method relentlessly trains you come up with solutions to problems,'' said Michael E. Porter, the Christensen Professor of Business Administration, whose first teaching assignment at Harvard was Mr. Bush's Section C class. It was in team activities that Mr. Bush asserted himself. In the three-day, campuswide business simulation game, Section C elected Mr. Bush one of six team presidents. His 15-person ''company'' did not win, but Mr. Porter, the group's faculty supervisor, told the class that it worked best together and would have had the best long-term results. ''He was not a star academic performer here,'' said Mr. Porter, now an economic policy adviser to the Bush campaign. ''But he was very good at getting along with people and getting things done.'' There was more evidence of those abilities in the highly competitive intramural basketball league. Despite hoop skills that one teammate described as ''mediocre at best,'' Mr. Bush, at point guard, took control of a squad of more talented players. By the mid-70's, distrust of the cold certitude of the McNamara style -- expert-oriented management by numbers -- put a premium on the consensus-building style of someone like Mr. Bush.
 Mr. Buckley, who is married to Anna Bennett, a consultant to Democratic candidates, said he recently contributed from their joint account to George W. Bush and received in return a mail solicitation for more money -- addressed to both him and his wife. On an earlier occasion, he had to move quickly to intercept a letter thanking both for a contribution he made to Senator Christopher S. Bond, the Missouri Republican. Perhaps the best-known unmatched pair is James Carville, a chief troubleshooter for President Clinton, and Mary Matalin, a top campaign aide for former President George Bush who now appears on CNN's ''Crossfire'' and advises George W. Bush's presidential campaign. Then there is Ronald O. Perelman, the billionaire businessman who splashes money around to an assortment of mendicant parties and politicians, and Patricia Duff, a major fund-raiser for Democrats. The pair had a loud confrontation at the Democrats' 1996 convention in Chicago, just before the breakup of their stormy marriage of less than two years. Charlotte Kramer of Shaker Heights, Ohio, for example, gave $1,000 to Senator McCain, while Vice President Al Gore got $1,000 from her husband, Leonard S. Schwartz. ''His leanings are more Democratic,'' said Ms. Kramer, who administers a charitable foundation. ''I'm sort of a Ripon Republican,'' referring to the centrist organization. Even so, the ''discussion'' rarely escalates into argument, she said. And in some cases donations are spread among opposing candidates or parties for business, not personal, reasons. According to the records, Stephen K. Lambright, general counsel for the Anheuser-Busch Companies, gave $1,000 to George W. Bush, $1,000 to Al Gore and $2,000 to the Democratic Leaders' Victory Fund 2000 last year, while his wife, Gail, gave $1,000 each to Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. ''You could look at any given election and probably find us both on both sides,'' Mr. Lambright said.
 In a sense, that good news presented a problem for Vice President Al Gore by undermining one of the central messages of his campaign, that Gov. George W. Bush was fiscally irresponsible. Faced with the likelihood of a much larger surplus, Mr. Gore scrambled to turn the news to his advantage, doubling the size of his tax cut, proposing his own version of retirement savings accounts and making the case for additional spending on education, health care and the environment. With his expensive platform of tax cuts, Social Security overhaul and a national missile defense program suddenly looking more affordable, Mr. Bush could have been forgiven a smirk. The Texan even gained room to claim that he would be committed to debt reduction, just like his opponent. Yet Mr. Bush's insistence that Washington is profligate and would have to tighten its belt in most areas other than the military began to ring hollow. In such a fluid situation, the rules of the political game are uncertain. Mr. Gore began a push last week to wrap himself in the strong economy, assuming that voters, as they always have, will tend to favor the incumbent party when times are good. But polls do not show much evidence that Mr. Gore is seen as prosperity's steward. What if voters see the economy as a the creation of rapid technological change, and no longer connect it with Washington?
 National party platforms are where activists of both parties most often have their say; platform can reveal much about the power of various constituency groups and the extent to which a nominee is willing to take them on; George W Bush is distancing himself from Republican Party platform being assembled at policy forums this week; photo (M) This, of course, can be troublesome for nominees, ever hopeful of a harmonious, triumphant convention for a middle-of-the-road audience. That may help explain why Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed Republican nominee, and his fellow party leaders are not exactly throwing a spotlight on the platform process, which begins in earnest this week with two ''policy forums'' in Dayton, Ohio, and Billings, Mont. ''The less said about the platform the better, is their message,'' said Susan Cullman, co-chairwoman of the Republican Pro-Choice Coalition, one of many groups trying to influence the document. Seemingly intent on avoiding the platform nightmares of Bob Dole, the 1996 Republican nominee, Mr. Bush signaled early on that he would not seek to contest the most contentious plank in the document: the call for an end to legalized abortion, with no exceptions for rape, incest or danger to the life of the mother. (Mr. Bush says he personally supports such exceptions.) Republican leaders in recent days have also indicated that there will be no public hearings on the abortion issue before the convention. At the same time, the Bush campaign is also distancing itself -- ever so respectfully and gingerly -- from the platform itself. ''The platform is a grass-roots document that percolates up from below and that reflects the views of the grass-roots activists of the party,'' said Ralph Reed, an adviser to the Bush campaign, adding that he believed this was true of both parties. ''And while that sets an overarching philosophical tone for the party, the nominees of the party at every level reserve the right to differ on particulars.'' SO, for example, the party that in its 1972 platform railed against the evils of ''forced work requirements'' for welfare recipients was declaring in 1996 that welfare should be ''a second chance, not a way of life.'' Vice President Al Gore seems likely to follow suit thematically: the former editor of the leadership council's policy journal will be the main draftsman of the new Democratic platform. It is that mentality, of course, that the Bush campaign would like to foment in its party, after eight years out of power. Because another important truth about platforms, some analysts say, is that the only way average voters learn of a platform is when the opposition uses it against you. ''It is a document that can get you into trouble and can do you no good,'' said Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster. The National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, for example, intends to highlight the Republican platform's abortion position -- including its demand for the appointment of judges who respect ''the sanctity of innocent human life.'' Mr. Bush has declined to embrace such a litmus test. But his critics argue that if a candidate cannot override his party's constituent groups on the platform, he is unlikely to do so in office.
 ''It is a huge industry, but it keeps to itself,'' said Kamuran Tepedelen, who owns Bushmaster Reptiles, a Boulder, Colo.-based company that employs Indonesian snake catchers for the pet trade. But since then, opinions on the hunt's impact have varied. Mr. Tepedelen, of Bushmaster Reptiles, said harvests are sustainable because  catchers generally do not kill immature reptiles, meaning most of those killed have already been allowed to lay clutches of eggs and propagate the species.
 Last week, I traveled to Houston to beg Gov. George W. Bush and his parole board not to execute Gary Graham based on this kind of evidence. I have never before spoken out on behalf of any inmate. I stood with a group of 11 men and women who had been convicted based on mistaken eyewitness testimony, only to be exonerated later by DNA or other evidence.
 Change is something Vice President Al Gore is not afraid of. Particularly when it involves his campaign. On Thursday, the Gore 2000 machine underwent its second major overhaul in a year, with the departure of Tony Coelho as campaign chairman and the installation of William M. Daley, the commerce secretary, as his replacement. Change is something Vice President Al Gore is not afraid of. Particularly when it involves his campaign. On Thursday, the Gore 2000 machine underwent its second major overhaul in a year, with the departure of Tony Coelho as campaign chairman and the installation of William M. Daley, the commerce secretary, as his replacement. Mr. Coelho, hospitalized on Monday with an inflamed colon, said his recurring condition was the reason for his leaving. But given the struggle of the Gore campaign in recent weeks to muster any momentum and slow the rise in the polls of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, many Democrats saw the changing of the guard as inevitable. ''We're not going to miss a beat,'' Mr. Gore told reporters in Cincinnati. Still, the announcement diverted attention from the campaign's own efforts to reinvigorate itself. On Tuesday, Mr. Gore stood before supporters at the New York Historical Society in Manhattan to unveil his ''prosperity and progress tour,'' in which he is to crisscross the country, laying out his priorities for how the projected budget surpluses can be used to improve programs like Medicare and Social Security. The tour is intended to be a kind of memorandum to the country, reminding voters of what Mr. Gore's advisers believe is the winning message for the fall: that under the Clinton-Gore administration, the United States has experienced unparalleled economic success. (Indeed, in a commercial running in 17 states last week, the Republican National Committee began its pitch for Mr. Bush by conceding that the nation was ''more prosperous than ever.'') Mr. Bush took a respite from the road for much of the week at the family vacation compound in Kennebunkport, Me. The layover was a reminder of the closeness of the Bush clan. In written responses to a reporter's questions, Mr. Bush's father, the former president, acknowledged that he deeply felt each and every sling and arrow of the campaign as if it were his own.
 BUSHNELL-Isabelle K. (Marckwald) in Boston formerly Morristown, New Jersey age 86. Wife of Daniel Bushnell. Mother of H. Davis Bushnell of Boxborough, Massachusetts. Also survived by four grandchildren and by 3 great grandchildren. A memorial service will be held on Thursday, June 22, 2000 at 11 A.M. at the Church of The Redeemer 379 Hammond St. Chestnut Hill (Newton) Massachusetts. Burial will take place in Osterville, Cape Cod. BUSHNELL-Isabelle K. (Marckwald) in Boston formerly Morristown, New Jersey age 86. Wife of Daniel Bushnell. Mother of H. Davis Bushnell of Boxborough, Massachusetts. Also survived by four grandchildren and by 3 great grandchildren. A memorial service will be held on Thursday, June 22, 2000 at 11 A.M. at the Church of The Redeemer 379 Hammond St. Chestnut Hill (Newton) Massachusetts. Burial will take place in Osterville, Cape Cod.
 BIKER BABES -- Motorcycles and diapers are an unlikely combination,  but the ''Bikers for Babies'' Pamper run requires a diaper donation;  riders take a police-escorted route from Brooklyn to Hale House in Harlem; food and festivities are the rewards for donations; meet at 9 a.m. Saturday, depart 11 a.m. from  240 Cook Street, between Bogart Street and Evergreen Avenue, Bushwick; (917) 567-9580.
 Military officials immediately tested samples of the cable, found that they began to break at barely half the load they were supposed to support, and started inspections of all aircraft equipped with it. In August 1999, Air Force mechanics replaced cable linked to the engine controls of a backup plane to Air Force Two, which is used by Vice President Al Gore.
 Presidential race of 2000 raises questions about whether new economy has changed some of old rules of politics; in past presidential elections, economic health of nation has largely determined who wins White House; by rights, this should bode well for Vice Pres Al Gore; but polls show him lagging behind Gov George W Bush when Americans are asked which candidate they trust more to handle nation's economy; Bush is calculating that concerns about president's character and unease with society's moral tone will prove stronger than economy; some Republican strategists suggest that boom has changed politics; say country has been so prosperous for so long that voters simply take good times for granted; photo (M) It has long been a maxim that the economic health of the nation goes a long way toward determining who wins the White House. Voters reward the party in power for good times and punish it for bad. By rights, this should bode well for Vice President Al Gore as the Clinton administration presides over a 112-month economic expansion, the longest in the nation's history. It has long been a maxim that the economic health of the nation goes a long way toward determining who wins the White House. Voters reward the party in power for good times and punish it for bad. By rights, this should bode well for Vice President Al Gore as the Clinton administration presides over a 112-month economic expansion, the longest in the nation's history. But as Mr. Gore set off on his ''prosperity and progress'' tour this week, staking his most forceful claim yet to the administration's economic legacy, polls showed him lagging behind Gov. George W. Bush of Texas when Americans were asked which candidate they trusted more to handle the nation's economy. And Mr. Bush, for his part, simply shrugs off those who say that the nation's prosperity will ultimately derail him. ''If people want four more years of Clinton-Gore,'' Mr. Bush told an audience in Connecticut late last week, and ''all that matters is the stock market, I'll be the governor.'' In part, Mr. Bush, like Republicans throughout the Clinton years, is calculating that concerns about the president's character and unease with society's moral tone will prove stronger than the economy. Mr. Bush's aides make a slightly different argument: that in this economic boom driven by high technology, people view the titans of e-commerce and the computer age as the job creators, not the government. ''I think the American people instinctively know a lot of today's economy and a lot of today's prosperity was created by the young entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. Another Bush adviser pointed to a Fox News poll taken last month showing that Americans overwhelmingly give more credit to William H. Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, for creating jobs than they do to President Clinton. ''One of Gore's fundamental problems is he's not getting any credit for the good economy,'' the adviser said. And in some ways the Bush campaign is as vested in this faith in the new economy as Mr. Gore is, though for different reasons. In making his proposal to divert some of the Social Security payroll tax into private investment accounts, Mr. Bush is gambling that with half of American households now holding stock, voters will not see the stock market as more risky than having a guaranteed Social Security benefit. Democrats argue that prosperity will still sway voters come Election Day and note that Mr. Clinton has consistently won extraordinarily high approval ratings for his stewardship of the economy. A New York Times/CBS News Poll taken in February found that an unprecedented 73 percent of all Americans said they approved of the way Mr. Clinton was handling the economy. Indeed, 88 percent said the national economy was in good shape, a far cry from the  23 percent who said that about the economy in 1992, when Bill Clinton defeated President George Bush. The challenge for Mr. Gore, his supporters say, is to convince voters that when it comes to the economy, it matters who is president. ''The danger to Gore is not that people don't give Clinton credit for the economy but that people think the economy is so good Bush couldn't possibly screw it up,'' Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster, said. ''He needs to make the case why Bush represents an economic risk for middle class Americans.'' Mr. Gore took up that challenge this week when he went beyond his previous warnings that Mr. Bush's proposals were risky, a strategy that had left him looking like the candidate of the status quo. This week, he made the argument that the administration had given Americans the tools to succeed and that he would continue to do so. He then set out alternatives to Mr. Bush's proposals. So instead of diverting some Social Security payroll tax to individual investment accounts as Mr. Bush would, Mr. Gore proposed to create similar savings accounts on top of Social Security. Instead of Mr. Bush's 10-year, $1.3 trillion across-the-board tax cut, Mr. Gore would offer $500 billion in cuts aimed at particular purposes like college education. And Mr. Gore's aides hope to contrast his advocacy of education and environmental programs with Mr. Bush's support for a missile defense system. Mr. Gore's aides say that these choices will work to their benefit in the fall with the moderate middle. ''We think the dynamics are going to be very different probably come convention time or Labor Day,'' Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman, said. ''The election is not about who gets credit for the economy so much as who will make the right choices for the future,'' Mr. Hattaway said. A key question is how voters will respond to Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush has spent months trying to erase doubts about his intellect and to raise questions about whether Mr. Gore is enough of a leader to take advantage of the good economy. The governor's spring blitz of policy speeches showed him setting the campaign's agenda. And he used the speeches to charge that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore were squandering the good times instead of dealing with longer-term problems. ''At a time for leadership -- for long-term thinking -- my opponent proposes a Band-Aid approach,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Gore in his speech proposing Social Security investment accounts to deal with the strain on Social Security's finances when the baby boom generation retires. In Ohio on Friday, he tried to undercut Mr. Gore, portraying the Democrats' tax cut proposals as products of polling. ''America doesn't want a focus-group driven presidency,'' he said, and added later, ''I'm not one of those people who likes to chase after public opinion.''
 ''Chuck, it's time to quit hiding behind parliamentary chicanery and paid attack dogs,'' boomed Mr. Allen, his love of political battling palpable, as he ignited the state party convention this month. ''Heck, I'll bet Hillary doesn't support Bill 87 percent of the time, but Virginia's junior senator surely does,'' Mr. Allen declared, burnishing his favorite sound-bite denunciation of the ''Clinton-Gore-Robb crowd.''
 Deborah Learn Kadagian letter on Andrew Sullivan's May 21 column on double-life crusade opposes George W Bush, John McCain and Alan Keyes for defending life of unborn children while supporting death penalty Several months ago, I watched George W. Bush, John McCain and Alan Keyes debate on TV. I shook my head in disbelief as all of them, but especially Keyes, defended the life of the unborn child and then turned around and supported the death penalty. Keyes's conviction for the death penalty didn't make sense after his extremely passionate argument for life. I didn't get it. And then, as I read Sullivan's article, I felt that I could breathe again. Thank you for putting into words my exact sentiments. Several months ago, I watched George W. Bush, John McCain and Alan Keyes debate on TV. I shook my head in disbelief as all of them, but especially Keyes, defended the life of the unborn child and then turned around and supported the death penalty. Keyes's conviction for the death penalty didn't make sense after his extremely passionate argument for life. I didn't get it. And then, as I read Sullivan's article, I felt that I could breathe again. Thank you for putting into words my exact sentiments.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in Florida with his brother, Gov Jeb Bush, and criticizes recent security lapses at Los Alamos National Laboratory; says that if he is elected president, nation's nuclear secrets will be safe again; federal officials are investigating disappearance and reappearance at laboratory of two computer hard drives containing nuclear secrets; Bush is expected to have powerful advantage campaigning in Florida, where his brother is governor; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas crisscrossed Florida today with his brother -- the other Governor Bush -- at his side, and criticized the recent security lapses at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, saying ''America's nuclear security should not be a matter of lost and found.'' Campaigning at the Veterans of Foreign Wars Florida state convention in Kissimmee, Governor Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, promised, ''In my administration our national labs will be secure again, our vital information will be sealed again, our nuclear secrets will be safe again.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas crisscrossed Florida today with his brother -- the other Governor Bush -- at his side, and criticized the recent security lapses at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, saying ''America's nuclear security should not be a matter of lost and found.'' Campaigning at the Veterans of Foreign Wars Florida state convention in Kissimmee, Governor Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, promised, ''In my administration our national labs will be secure again, our vital information will be sealed again, our nuclear secrets will be safe again.'' Most of the day was more light-hearted, with the Texas governor even teasing reporters with the possibility of a Bush-Bush ticket. As he fended off the daily deluge of questions on his campaign plane about his vice-presidential search, Mr. Bush turned to his younger brother Jeb, who was standing at his side. But the older brother relished the idea a moment longer. ''It would save space on bumper stickers,'' he said, imagining just one word: Bush. If not a ticket, the Bush brothers were still a hit with the veterans, who gave them a string of standing, cheering ovations. ''I particularly want to say something about the governor of Florida -- my big little brother,'' said George Bush, 53, referring to Jeb, 47, who stands half a head taller than him. ''We're all proud of him, and we know you are as well.'' With his brother serving as governor, Mr. Bush should have a powerful advantage campaigning for Florida's 25 electoral votes. But Vice President Al Gore has also mounted an all-out drive for the state. He even broke with the Clinton administration by supporting legislation to grant permanent resident status to Elian Gonzalez, a move that brought protests from many loyal Gore backers, who called it a craven bid to win Cuban-American votes. The last public poll, in May, showed Mr. Bush ahead but Mr. Gore gaining ground. President Clinton won Florida four years ago after narrowly losing it to President Bush in 1992. Asked how his brother was doing, Jeb Bush told reporters on the campaign plane, ''He's winning.'' But the Florida governor conceded that if Mr. Gore were to select Senator Bob Graham of Florida as his running mate, ''it would tighten the race up.'' Asked if Mr. Gore could win Florida, Jeb Bush said: ''Everything's possible. I'm pretty optimistic, though. As long as we get a few resources from the national campaign we'll do fine.'' Much of the day, in fact, was devoted to raising money for the campaign. George Bush brought in an estimated $2.75 million for the Republican National Committee and the state party at a midday reception in Coral Gables and at a fund-raising dinner later here in Orlando. Members of the Bush family have said, until he lost his first bid to be governor of Florida, they had expected that Jeb Bush would be the brother to run for president. But he said today that he did not have any ambitions to seek the presidency himself. ''I'm consumed by my work an my family,'' he said, ''and I've got the best job in the world.'' ''Interesting that you brought that up,'' George Bush said, when asked whether the choice of dress was intentional. ''You can see mine's a little kind of softer tone. It's a little more presidential look.''
