 Vice Pres Al Gore announces that Pres Clinton has designated Hanford Reach of Columbia River in south-central Washington, one of the most important salmon-spawning beds in the world, as a national monument; designation provides protection from dams, dredging and development for 195,000 acres of public land along the river; photo (M) After an hourlong ride in a speedboat up the choppy Columbia River, Vice President Al Gore today announced President Clinton's designation of the Hanford Reach in south-central Washington, one of the most important salmon-spawning beds in the world, as a national monument. The designation provides protection from dams, dredging and development for 195,000 acres of public land along the river, including the point, which a jeans-clad, wind-blown Mr. Gore examined by boat today, where more than 80 percent of fall chinook salmon spawn. After an hourlong ride in a speedboat up the choppy Columbia River, Vice President Al Gore today announced President Clinton's designation of the Hanford Reach in south-central Washington, one of the most important salmon-spawning beds in the world, as a national monument. The designation provides protection from dams, dredging and development for 195,000 acres of public land along the river, including the point, which a jeans-clad, wind-blown Mr. Gore examined by boat today, where more than 80 percent of fall chinook salmon spawn. As Mr. Gore told a small crowd today along the banks of the Columbia here, ''It is a great irony of our history that in closing off these lands to build great weapons of destruction in service to the cause of freedom, at the same time we actually ended up protecting one of our greatest natural treasures.'' Aides to Mr. Gore said the president's action relieved the vice president of any official obligation here and allowed him to stage the announcement as a campaign event.
 Re ''Gore Vows to Overhaul Child Support System'' (news article, June 3): Perhaps one way to bolster Al Gore's suggestion that fathers who owe child support be required to support their children would be to understand and remedy the reasons that they don't. Re ''Gore Vows to Overhaul Child Support System'' (news article, June 3): Perhaps one way to bolster Al Gore's suggestion that fathers who owe child support be required to support their children would be to understand and remedy the reasons that they don't.
 THE DEMOCRATS  GORE CONSIDERS HIS LEGACY  Vice President Al Gore has clearly given extensive thought to his legacy. Emphasis on extensive. Here was his answer Thursday at a fund-raiser in Los Angeles when a guest asked him how history would view him after two terms as president: ''I would hope that at the end of my tenure it would be said that during those years the American people reached their highest potential and had obstacles and impediments removed from their way, that the progress and prosperity of our nation continued and accelerated, that we gave every child health care and moved quickly toward universal health care for all, that we revolutionized the educational system and brought the productivity revolution of the private sector into the schools and respected teachers and made our schools the very best in the world. I would want it said that we were a more harmonious nation where race and ethnicity were understood and recognized but didn't make a difference because we respected one another's differences and embraced what we had in common. I would want it said that violence declined sharply. I would want it said that the environment became a central principle of what we did and how we did it and that we led the world toward a successful confrontation with the problem of global warming. I would want it said that we reformed our politics and campaign financing and that we made democracy more real in the lives of our people, and finally, I would want it said that at the end of those years we as Americans had a stronger belief in our own ability to govern ourselves and to make our dreams real.'' Katharine Q. Seelye (NYT) THE DEMOCRATS  GORE CONSIDERS HIS LEGACY  Vice President Al Gore has clearly given extensive thought to his legacy. Emphasis on extensive. Here was his answer Thursday at a fund-raiser in Los Angeles when a guest asked him how history would view him after two terms as president: ''I would hope that at the end of my tenure it would be said that during those years the American people reached their highest potential and had obstacles and impediments removed from their way, that the progress and prosperity of our nation continued and accelerated, that we gave every child health care and moved quickly toward universal health care for all, that we revolutionized the educational system and brought the productivity revolution of the private sector into the schools and respected teachers and made our schools the very best in the world. I would want it said that we were a more harmonious nation where race and ethnicity were understood and recognized but didn't make a difference because we respected one another's differences and embraced what we had in common. I would want it said that violence declined sharply. I would want it said that the environment became a central principle of what we did and how we did it and that we led the world toward a successful confrontation with the problem of global warming. I would want it said that we reformed our politics and campaign financing and that we made democracy more real in the lives of our people, and finally, I would want it said that at the end of those years we as Americans had a stronger belief in our own ability to govern ourselves and to make our dreams real.'' Katharine Q. Seelye (NYT) BUSH AND GORE STILL EVEN  Two new national polls have Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore still locked in a race that is too close to call. One new survey gives Mr. Bush a slight edge, 41 percent to 38 percent. The poll, conducted by Princeton Survey Research for Bloomberg News, surveyed 1,208 adults between May 25 and June 4 and has a margin of sampling error of 3 percentage points. A CNN-USA Today Gallup poll taken last week put Mr. Bush at 44 percent and Mr. Gore at 44 percent, with a margin of error of 5 percentage points.(NYT) THE 2000 CAMPAIGN  Correction:  June 13, 2000, Tuesday  A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Saturday misstated support for Gov. George W. Bush in a CNN-USA Today Gallup poll on the presidential race. He was favored by 48 percent of likely voters, not 44. A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Saturday misstated support for Gov. George W. Bush in a CNN-USA Today Gallup poll on the presidential race. He was favored by 48 percent of likely voters, not 44.
 But support is not widespread. Vice President Al Gore, the presumed Democratic presidential nominee, says he approves of the goals of the Leahy bill but has not endorsed it, and his spokesman declined to say whether Mr. Gore would back any legislation on the issue. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the expected Republican nominee, said last week that post-conviction DNA testing should be used when the results could bear on guilt. But Mr. Bush's aides refused to say whether he would support legislation -- either in Texas or Washington -- to make DNA testing available to inmates who currently cannot obtain it. The issue was highlighted last week in Texas when Governor Bush, who supports the death penalty, agreed to a 30-day reprieve to allow for DNA testing in the case of Ricky McGinn, sentenced to die for the murder and rape of his 12-year-old stepdaughter. Defense lawyers hope the DNA testing might cast doubt on the rape conviction, without which prosecutors would not have been able to seek the death penalty. In one case, A.B. Butler Jr. of Tyler, Tex., imprisoned since a 1983 rape conviction, was pardoned last week by Mr. Bush after DNA tests showing that evidence found on the victim did not come from Mr. Butler. Mr. Butler tried for seven years to obtain DNA tests but did not succeed until last year after he hired a new lawyer, Randy Schaffer of Houston.
 Robert Jaffe letter says politicians in both parties are making an issue of privacy (June 4 article), but some, including George W Bush, fail to recognize the most profound privacy right of all: the right to decide whether and when to have a child While some politicians, like George W. Bush, may seek the high ground in the privacy debate, they show no such commitment to protecting a woman's right to make private reproductive health decisions.
 Protection for a Salmon Run  Vice President Al Gore announced President Clinton's designation of the Hanford Reach section of the Columbia River in Washington, one of the most important salmon-spawning beds in the world, as a national monument. The designation provides protection from dams, dredging and development for 195,000 acres of public land along the river. Gore Faulted on Bureaucracy  Gov. George W. Bush assailed Vice President Al Gore's signature effort to streamline government, saying the Clinton administration had not reinvented the bureaucracy but ''simply reshuffled it.''
 His non-academic honors included the National Medal of Arts, given to him by President George Bush, and the Spingarn Medal, the highest honor awarded by the N.A.A.C.P.
 Another article in the series George W Bush's Journey focuses on his years at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass; says Bush's high school days were in most respects supremely undistinguished but it was during them that he first began to cultivate the people skills that served him well in later life; says it was also at Andover that Bush began turning some people off with what they saw as arrogance, emptiness and a tendency to smirk and be dismissive; photos (L) Perhaps there have been other presidential candidates who have dressed in drag, flaunting their legs from beneath a (fairly short) white skirt. But George W. Bush is probably the only one who has done it in front of a camera. Perhaps there have been other presidential candidates who have dressed in drag, flaunting their legs from beneath a (fairly short) white skirt. But George W. Bush is probably the only one who has done it in front of a camera. Governor Bush's student days were in most respects supremely undistinguished, and anyone hoping to find reassurance about his candidacy through signs of great intellect or gravitas in those years will be disappointed. There were many other students then who seemed far more likely to emerge as political leaders. In his stump speeches today, Mr. Bush comes across not as a policy maven or intellectual but as a politician motivated in large part by optimism and a yearning to ''lift the spirit of America,'' as he puts it. In all this, there is perhaps an echo of a boy at Andover long ago who finally found his niche by building coalitions across cliques and lifting the spirits of his school. No one thought of George W. Bush as a future politician, and he seemed oblivious to the civil rights struggle and other issues of the day. But he worked hard to remember everyone's name and managed to worm his way into the limelight. Early on, he showed one of the most fundamental political skills: the ability to make people feel good. What if George W. Bush's father had been an ordinary Texas oilman named Smith? Or, to ask it another way, how much of his achievement has been his own? This is a question that dogs him today as a presidential candidate, and it does seem that from the very beginning, Mr. Bush got a crucial helping hand in life because of his name and family connections. Otherwise, he would probably not have been admitted to Andover and then Yale. This question of privilege is one that rankles Mr. Bush, and when he was asked about it in a long interview about his past, he became prickly. ''I think I'm asked that all the time,'' Mr. Bush scolded. ''It's interesting, they always use the word 'Smith,' too.'' He deepened and modulated his voice to mimic a television interviewer: '' 'Would you be standing here as presidential candidate if your name were George Smith?' Well, you know, it's not George Smith. It is George Bush. And how did it influence? I don't have any idea.'' In fairness, aside from help with admissions committees, the name was not the eye-opener then that it is now. Young George's father was an obscure Texas oilman until he ran for the United States Senate in 1964, the year George graduated from Andover. His grandfather, Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut, occasionally visited George at Andover in a car with the senatorial ''Connecticut 2'' license plates, but several friends from that era insisted in interviews that they did not even know back then about his grandfather and did not see George as anyone special. (A family friend vaguely recalled the rejection, but when Governor Bush was interviewed he said he knew nothing of this. Later, after checking with his parents, he went out of his way to confirm, without any apparent embarrassment, that he had indeed been rejected.) This may diminish George's achievement in getting into Andover but it does not erase it. Even among sons of Andover graduates, fewer than half were admitted at that time. Mr. Bush says he has no recollection of his grades at Kinkaid, but a friend from that time says he was an A student, and it was those grades and his activities as a class officer and athlete that, along with his pedigree, put him over the top at Andover. As a presidential candidate, Mr. Bush has emphasized education policy and the need to raise expectations. That theme, he suggested, is rooted in those hours spent slaving over assignments at Andover. George W. Bush was a slob. Jose R. Gonzalez, a Puerto Rican, has the same memory of Mr. Bush, as unusually friendly, open and unpretentious. One of Mr. Bush's political problems today is a perception among some voters that he is arrogant, an empty suit smirking condescendingly at the world, and that perception seems to have first manifested itself at Andover. That is when he developed his smirk (which his friends insist is simply a self-deprecating smile), and even then it irritated some classmates who saw him as no more than an empty polo shirt. While Mr. Bush charmed his way into the most desirable social circle, some recall say that he was dismissive of other students and practiced his put-downs on them. Matthew J. McClure, who was then on a lower social plane than Mr. Bush's crowd, also remembers Mr. Bush's social skills as directed only at others who were ''in,'' while disdaining the less fortunate. That drew a swift rebuke from the school newspaper, the Phillipian, which ran a lead editorial in defense of ''Bush's antics.'' ''The Beavers were heartbroken, but it had been a hell of a season,'' recalled Zitney, more formally known as Peter T. Pfeifle. ''I doubt there has ever been anything like it again since that spring of 1964. Stickball was the thing, and Bush was stickball.'' ''We certainly didn't talk about world affairs,'' recalls Mr. Bush's girlfriend in those years, Debbie Taylor, with whom he danced the twist, played tennis and listened to the Crystals' song ''He's a Rebel.'' George was not involved in student government. But some classmates now think that his roles as stickball commissioner and head cheerleader were precursors of politics. When Governor Bush talks about making America feel better about itself -- well, some classmates think back to their old stickball commissioner. Mr. Bush himself does not claim, of course, that his student activities qualify him for the White House. Asked about his leadership at Andover, he said sarcastically, ''Well, I think the stickball commissioner makes me perfectly suitable to become the president.'' Ever since Andover, Mr. Bush has consistently demonstrated the same kind of leadership: not a powerful intellect or dazzling policy expertise but rather an exceptional ability to make friends, work a crowd, cheer people up and take them all in his direction. As Texas governor, for example, he worked with Democrats as well as Republicans, built successful coalitions and became a popular figure without typically becoming immersed in policy details. Yale, like Andover, gave a helping hand to alumni sons in the admission process -- far more than now -- and it seems unlikely that Mr. Bush would have been admitted into Yale otherwise. Several of George's classmates went to Harvard instead, and one of them, Mr. Schandorff, became friendly there with a young Tennessean named Al Gore. It is, of course, difficult to compare a high school pupil with a college student, but Mr. Schandorff recalls George Bush and Al Gore as strikingly different. Mr. Schandorff says that George was energetic, memorable and a constant cheerleader, but never showed any political interest, deep thoughts or long-term ambition. In contrast, he says he found the youthful Al Gore immersed in politics, very intelligent and fiercely ambitious. ''I always thought Gore might be president,'' Mr. Schandorff recalled. ''We talked about things like that. He talked about buying The Nashville Tennessean and working his way up to be president. We laughed and he said, 'What job would you like in the cabinet?' I said, 'National cruise director.' '' What would those Andover students have thought if they had been told back then that George W. Bush would become a candidate for president? This is the third in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will explore George W. Bush's years at Yale and Al Gore's years at Harvard.
 Gov George W Bush, campaigning in Philadelphia, assails Vice Pres Al Gore's signature effort to streamline government; says Clinton administration 'reshuffled' bureaucracy; says if he is elected president he would save save $88 billion over five years by phasing out 40,000 management jobs, contracting out services to private sector, and increasing use of Internet; Bush claims General Accounting Office has been unable to document two-thirds of savings Gore claims to have made in his efforts to streamline government (M) Gov. George W. Bush today assailed Vice President Al Gore's signature effort to streamline government, saying the Clinton administration had not reinvented the bureaucracy, but ''simply reshuffled it.'' Beginning the campaign day in Philadelphia at the Carpenter's Hall, the site of the First Continental Congress, Mr. Bush stepped squarely onto the territory of his opponent, who has overseen the administration's ''reinventing government program.'' Gov. George W. Bush today assailed Vice President Al Gore's signature effort to streamline government, saying the Clinton administration had not reinvented the bureaucracy, but ''simply reshuffled it.'' Beginning the campaign day in Philadelphia at the Carpenter's Hall, the site of the First Continental Congress, Mr. Bush stepped squarely onto the territory of his opponent, who has overseen the administration's ''reinventing government program.'' ''Today, when Americans look to Washington, they see a government which is slow to respond, slow to reform, ignoring changes that are taking place in the private sector and in some local and state governments,'' Mr. Bush told a small crowd of invited guests. The speech was his second in two days concentrating on government operations, and today he had Mr. Gore directly in his sights. ''You may recall the present administration came to Washington promising to change all this -- to clear away the clutter of bureaucracy and to streamline the system,'' Mr. Bush said. ''At last report they had, in the vice president's words, created government that works better and costs less. That doesn't really square with the facts.'' Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, campaigning at Mr. Bush's side, implicitly raised the questions about Mr. Clinton's character that are also at the heart of the Bush campaign. ''We need a president who people trust and we need a president who trusts the people,'' said Mr. Ridge, whose name has often appeared high on lists of potential running mates for Mr. Bush. Mr. Ridge even stole the slogan of the first Clinton campaign for president as he introduced Mr. Bush, saying, ''We need a president who puts people first.'' With Mr. Gore at the helm, the Clinton administration began an effort to streamline the government in President Clinton's first year in office. So far, administration officials say, the government has saved about $136 billion through the effort. Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore say the government work force is smaller than at any time since the early 1960's, with 377,000 fewer employees than when they came into office in 1993. The administration also says that changes in government procurement methods have saved more than $12 billion. ''The federal government is smaller than it's been in 40 years and we've balanced the budget to boot,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. ''At the same time that we've made government smaller, we've invested more in education, health care and other ways to help people.'' Mr. Bush challenged some of the administration's estimates of savings. He said that the independent General Accounting Office had been unable to document two-thirds of the savings. Mr. Bush made fun of the titles of some senior federal administrators. ''We now have Washington offices crowded with people bearing titles like associate principal deputy assistant secretary, or principal deputy to the deputy assistant secretary,'' he said to a ripple of laughter. ''The point is that for all the administration's rhetoric about reinvention, they never asked the fundamental question about the purpose of government,'' Mr. Bush said, ''what it's doing or whether it should be doing it at all. At a time when private businesses are turning to leaner management teams, Washington keeps adding new managers. They haven't reinvented the government bureaucracy; they have simply reshuffled it.'' Mr. Bush said he would not replace half of the managers at senior and middle levels who are expected to retire over the next eight years -- eliminating 40,000 jobs. He called on Congress to create a ''sunset review board'' to evaluate every government program and agency ''to make sure it has not outlived its usefulness.'' The Gore campaign responded by pointing to Texas, saying that since Mr. Bush took office in 1995, the Texas budget has grown to $98.1 billion from $72.8 billion, or by 36 percent, compared with 21 percent federally. Later in the day, Mr. Bush stumped before an enthusiastic crowd at a high-tech company here in Connecticut, the Silicon Valley Group Lithography Systems, and attended fund-raisers that aides said would generate nearly $2 million for Republican campaigns.
