 George W Bush accuses campaign rival Al Gore of doubling size of his proposed tax cut as result of polls (S) CHALLENGING GORE'S TAX PROPOSAL -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas yesterday accused his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, of doubling the size of a proposed tax cut as a result of polls. ''Surely America doesn't want a focus-group-driven presidency,'' Mr. Bush said. ''America wants somebody who makes decisions based on what's right, and what's right is sharing some of the surplus with the people who pay the bill.'' He called his proposal for a 10-year, across-the-board tax cut of $1.3 trillion preferable to Mr. Gore's latest plan for $500 billion in tax credits and deductions aimed at particular needs like education and child care. ''Everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief,'' Mr. Bush said in Canton, Ohio. Douglas Hattaway, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said, ''We need to use our prosperity wisely and give tax relief to working middle-class families.'' CHALLENGING GORE'S TAX PROPOSAL -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas yesterday accused his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, of doubling the size of a proposed tax cut as a result of polls. ''Surely America doesn't want a focus-group-driven presidency,'' Mr. Bush said. ''America wants somebody who makes decisions based on what's right, and what's right is sharing some of the surplus with the people who pay the bill.'' He called his proposal for a 10-year, across-the-board tax cut of $1.3 trillion preferable to Mr. Gore's latest plan for $500 billion in tax credits and deductions aimed at particular needs like education and child care. ''Everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief,'' Mr. Bush said in Canton, Ohio. Douglas Hattaway, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said, ''We need to use our prosperity wisely and give tax relief to working middle-class families.'' AN EDGE TO BUSH -- A day after Vice President Al Gore replaced his campaign manager, he awoke to yet another sign of the struggle he faces. A nationwide poll by The Los Angeles Times found Gov. George W. Bush leading Mr. Gore by a 10-point margin, 50 percent to 40 percent, and it found that Mr. Bush's support among Republicans was stronger than Mr. Gore's support among Democrats. Nine of 10 Republicans said they backed Mr. Bush, while 7 of 10 Democrats said they supported Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush also had substantially more support among Democrats than Mr. Gore had among Republicans. The poll surveyed more than 1,600 voters in the past week and has a margin of error of plus or minus three percentage points. A STAND-IN WITH A PUNCH -- Gov. George W. Bush and his wife, Laura, often say that when she agreed to marry him, it was on the condition that she would never have to give a political speech. But yesterday, Mrs. Bush addressed more than 10,000 people at the Texas Republican Party's convention in Houston. She was substituting for her husband and was mixing just a little vinegar into her remarks. She said that as her husband started his quest for the presidency, she had vowed to avoid newspapers and the inevitably critical articles and instead stick to fiction. ''But then I found out a lot of it was on the editorial page,'' she said.
 Common Cause and Democracy 21 accuse Democratic and Republican parties of breaking federal election law by using large soft-money contributions to pay for television commercials promoting campaigns of Al Gore and George W Bush; two nonpartisan groups will file complaints with Justice Department and Federal Election Commission (M) Two advocacy groups accused the Democratic and Republican parties today of breaking federal election law by using large soft-money contributions to pay for television commercials now showing across the country to promote the campaigns of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Two advocacy groups accused the Democratic and Republican parties today of breaking federal election law by using large soft-money contributions to pay for television commercials now showing across the country to promote the campaigns of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. In the first flurry of party advertisements that began running last weekend, both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush appear, with Mr. Gore expressing his concern about the high cost of prescription drugs and Mr. Bush detailing his proposals for overhauling the Social Security system. This weekend, the Democrats are introducing a new, soft-money issue advertisement. Timed for Father's Day on Sunday, the advertisement features Mr. Gore promoting ''responsible fatherhood,'' and it includes some biographical information about Mr. Gore's relationship with his father. Campaign reform advocates said the issue advertisements now being shown amounted to commercials to promote Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. As proof, they say the commercials are appearing in several important battleground states in the presidential race, including Florida, Missouri and Wisconsin. Democratic and Republican strategists acknowledged in interviews this week that there was close coordination between the Bush and Gore campaigns and the political parties to produce the advertisements. In 1996, consultants for the Clinton-Gore campaign and the Dole-Kemp campaign also created their parties' issue advertisements. Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's communications director, said that the same media consultants were working for Mr. Gore and the Democratic Party. The Republican National Committee hired a consultant, Alex Castellanos, to produce its advertisements. Mr. May, the committee spokesman, said Mr. Castellanos was not working on commercials for the Bush campaign. Joseph Sandler, the Democratic National Committee's top lawyer, said coordination between the Gore campaign and the national party was allowed, even assumed, under recent court rulings and Federal Election Commission opinions. An aide to the House Republican leadership said the national committee advertisements promoting Mr. Bush were not coordinated with Congressional leaders. ''They wouldn't do anything that would hurt us,'' the official said, ''but the R.N.C. is now a wholly owned subsidiary of the Bush campaign right now. We have two separate races.'' The Republican National Committee added a 30-second advertisement late this week to the 60-second spot that began running last weekend. Both are on Mr. Bush's plan to allow workers to invest a portion of their Social Security taxes in private investment plans. The spots are running in the same 15 states where the Democratic prescription drug commercials are being shown.
 The recovery of the computer drives was the latest twist in a case that has prompted harsh criticism of security at Los Alamos. Republicans have vented much of their anger at Energy Secretary Bill Richardson, who had been mentioned as a possible running mate for Vice President Al Gore.
 Election Law Abuses Cited  Two advocacy groups accused the Democratic and Republican parties of breaking federal election law by using soft-money contributions to pay for commercials promoting the Bush and Gore campaigns. Gore Reaches Out to Labor  Vice President Al Gore tried to tamp down unrest among labor leaders over his appointment of Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, a chief labor nemesis in the fight over the China trade bill, as chairman of his presidential campaign.
 Vice Pres Gore moves quickly to tamp down unrest among labor leaders over his choice of Commerce Sec William M Daley as chairman of his presidential campaign; photo; AFL-CIO president John J Sweeney issues statement opposing Daley for his advocacy of China trade bill and North American Free Trade Agremeent; other union leaders are also irked (M) Vice President Al Gore moved quickly today to try to tamp down unrest among labor leaders over his appointment of Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, a chief labor nemesis during the recent fight over the China trade bill, as chairman of his presidential campaign. Mr. Gore told reporters that the first person outside of his campaign circle whom he called with the news on Thursday was John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Vice President Al Gore moved quickly today to try to tamp down unrest among labor leaders over his appointment of Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, a chief labor nemesis during the recent fight over the China trade bill, as chairman of his presidential campaign. Mr. Gore told reporters that the first person outside of his campaign circle whom he called with the news on Thursday was John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. But Mr. Sweeney said in an interview today that he was traveling on Thursday morning and that he and Mr. Gore did not actually speak until afternoon, long after he had learned of Mr. Daley's appointment through news reports. Mr. Sweeney then accepted an urgent invitation by the vice president to meet with him today. And so Mr. Sweeney and Gerald McEntee, president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees and chairman of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s political arm, trooped to Mr. Gore's official residence here this afternoon and stayed for an hour to  discuss the Daley appointment. Mr. Sweeney said Mr. Gore had reflected on ''how unfortunate it was that this all developed, that the timing was difficult and it happened very quickly.'' It is not clear whether Mr. Gore made any promises to the labor leaders to make up for this appointment, although Mr. Sweeney said he expected Mr. Gore to continue advancing his agenda for working families and would perhaps ''accelerate'' it. Despite the discomfort of his flock, particularly in the industrial unions, Mr. Sweeney has remained a staunch Gore supporter. And he reflects the view of many in labor that the unions will ultimately be able to overlook the vice president's pro-trade activity because they are determined to keep the White House in Democratic hands. Aides of Mr. Gore said he believed that Mr. Daley would be a clear asset to the campaign, despite his having crossed swords with labor. The vice president ''has tremendous confidence in Secretary Daley, and they had talked about this job before,'' a Gore confidant said, adding: ''It would be a mistake to take today as a snapshot of where we will be in November. It's an issue that will be worked through, but in the end the interests of labor and the Democratic Party are so consistent with one another that everyone will be working toward the same goal.'' But the notion that labor has nowhere else to go in the presidential election infuriates others. The International Brotherhood of Teamsters, which called the Daley appointment a ''slap in the face,'' and the United Automobile Workers have both declined to endorse Mr. Gore and are toying with endorsing Ralph Nader or Patrick J. Buchanan instead. And the United Steelworkers of America, which has endorsed Mr. Gore, remains detached from his campaign.
 Mr. Feiffer, who is 71, writes plays, teaches a course on humor and truth at Southampton College of Long Island University, writes and illustrates children's books and still draws political cartoons for The New York Times, The New Yorker, American Prospect and Rolling Stone. It is very hard work trying to make Al Gore and George W. Bush funny all the time, he noted. ''Something had to give.''
 Excerpts and reviews of ads promoting candidacies of Al Gore and George W Bush; photos (S) The Republican and Democratic National Committees are on the air this weekend with issue advertisements on behalf of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore. The spots are running in 17 states, including crucial ones like Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. The Republican and Democratic National Committees are on the air this weekend with issue advertisements on behalf of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore. The spots are running in 17 states, including crucial ones like Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. ON THE SCREEN -- In the opening scenes, greeting-card images of America -- an orange sunrise, a windmill on a wheat field -- melt into one another. Cut to a quick succession of shots of Mr. Bush mixing with voters and then to a series of portraits of average citizens. SCRIPT -- Announcer: ''With our nation at peace and more prosperous than ever, now is the time to find real solutions to America's problems. George Bush knows that to keep our commitment to seniors we must strengthen and improve Social Security now, or the retirement of the baby boom generation will push it near bankruptcy. He's proposing a bipartisan plan to strengthen and improve Social Security. The Bush plan guarantees everyone at or near retirement every dollar of their benefits. No cuts in Social Security. You paid into it, it's your money and it will be there for you. And the Bush plan gives younger workers a choice to invest a small part of their Social Security in sound investments they control for higher returns. Learn more about George Bush's voluntary plan for personal Social Security retirement accounts. The Bush blueprint: Better for seniors today, better for all of us tomorrow. ACCURACY -- With aging baby boomers inching ever closer to eligibility for retirement benefits, shoring up Social Security has become a signature issue of the presidential campaign. The party's 60-second commercial highlights Mr. Bush's plans for a partial privatization of the system, allowing workers to invest part of their payroll taxes as they see fit. Vice President Al Gore has been a fierce critic of the idea, arguing that the less financially savvy could fall prey to foolhardy investment schemes. SCORECARD -- A direct appeal to Mr. Bush's own generation. While polls show that older people are wary of privatization plans for their retirement money, younger voters are more amenable to the idea. The spot is also an emblem of the Bush marketing style: no scare tactics, just lots of postcard panoramas and loving snaps of the candidate wading into crowds. As such, it is indistinguishable from Mr. Bush's own commercials. ON THE SCREEN -- In 30 seconds, with a musical underscoring but no voice-over, a Gore family album, including black-and-white pictures of Mr. Gore as a boy with his father, Senator Albert Gore Sr., and shots of the candidate with his wife, Tipper, and their children. Cut to a graphic that says, ''The Gore plan: promote responsible fatherhood,'' and shots of other fathers and children. SCRIPT -- (graphics only) Don't ever doubt the impact that fathers have on children. Children with strong fathers learn trust. That they're wanted, they have value. Boys learn from their fathers how to be fathers. I know I did -- Al Gore. ACCURACY -- Yes, that is Mr. Gore's family. SCORECARD -- The commercial, pegged to Father's Day, is serenely composed, and more of a traditional biographical spot than an issue advertisement. The reference to Mr. Gore's plan to encourage fathers to live up to their obligations comes from a proposal he recently outlined that would provide financial bonuses to states that did the most to crack down on deadbeat fathers. But that is almost subtext in this spot, which is essentially a testimonial to a candidate's family values.
 Anthony Lewis Op-Ed column reports that Gov George W Bush has defined himself as shallow and callous in handling of death penalty cases in Texas, where 131 prisoners have been executed in Bush's five years in office; cites notorious examples of unfairness that contradict Bush's repeated statements of confidence that every person put to death in Texas under his watch has been guilty and has had full access to courts(M) There have been questions all along about the depth and seriousness of George W. Bush. They have been brought into sharp focus now by a surprising issue: the way the death penalty is administered in Texas. In his comments on that subject Governor Bush has defined himself, unforgettably, as shallow and callous. In his five years as governor of Texas, the state has executed 131 prisoners -- far more than any other state. Mr. Bush has lately granted a stay of execution for the first time, for a DNA test. There have been questions all along about the depth and seriousness of George W. Bush. They have been brought into sharp focus now by a surprising issue: the way the death penalty is administered in Texas. In his comments on that subject Governor Bush has defined himself, unforgettably, as shallow and callous. In his five years as governor of Texas, the state has executed 131 prisoners -- far more than any other state. Mr. Bush has lately granted a stay of execution for the first time, for a DNA test. In answer to questions about that record, Governor Bush has repeatedly said that he has no qualms. ''I'm confident,'' he said last February, ''that every person that has been put to death in Texas under my watch has been guilty of the crime charged, and has had full access to the courts.'' This past week The Chicago Tribune published a compelling report on an investigation of all 131 death cases in Governor Bush's time. It made chilling reading. Asked about the Tribune study, Governor Bush said, ''We've adequately answered innocence or guilt'' in every case. The defendants, he said, ''had full access to a fair trial.'' There are two ways of understanding that comment. Either Governor Bush was contemptuous of the facts or, on a matter of life and death, he did not care. ''The State of Texas is a national embarrassment in the area of indigent legal services,'' a committee of the State Bar of Texas says in a report just approved. Again, Governor Bush has shown no concern about this reality. He vetoed a bill, passed by the legislature, that would have let Texas counties set up a limited public defender program for the poor. To all this George Bush is seemingly indifferent. Or perhaps not entirely. If he were not running for president, it is doubtful that he would just now have granted his first stay of execution. Next week Gary Graham, convicted of murder on the testimony of a single witness who said she saw him at night from 30 to 40 feet away, is due to be executed. Will Governor Bush care?
 An article on May 14 about executions in Texas during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year in which a federal judge in Austin ruled that the Texas pardons and paroles board barely met minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution. It was 1998, not 1988. An article on May 14 about executions in Texas during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year in which a federal judge in Austin ruled that the Texas pardons and paroles board barely met minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution. It was 1998, not 1988.
