 Public Lives column profiles US Republican Sen Paul Coverdell, Gov George W Bush's point man in Senate; photo (M) THIS reporter begged Senator Paul Coverdell for details, just a few colorful anecdotes to illustrate his longtime relationship with the Bushes. Senator Coverdell, who is Gov. George W. Bush's point man in the Senate, made a vague reference to ''socializing over dinner'' with former President Bush. ''I'm not a golfer. And I tangled up his fishing reel, I remember that.'' THIS reporter begged Senator Paul Coverdell for details, just a few colorful anecdotes to illustrate his longtime relationship with the Bushes. Senator Coverdell, who is Gov. George W. Bush's point man in the Senate, made a vague reference to ''socializing over dinner'' with former President Bush. ''I'm not a golfer. And I tangled up his fishing reel, I remember that.'' It turns out, a few inquiring phone calls later, that Mr. Coverdell had attended Barbara Bush's 75th birthday party at Kennebunkport, Me., on June 10, an affair that fell between intimate and gala. But cocktail chatter is simply not the senator's style. Neither is name-dropping. And really it was nobody's business but the Bushes'. Considering all of this, Mr. Coverdell seems a natural choice for the potentially treacherous job of liaison between Governor Bush's campaign and the Senate, famous for its zeppelin-size ego. He took on the job early last year, after a breakfast meeting with Mr. Bush, before the Bush exploratory committee was formed. Mr. Coverdell, 61, goes back two decades with the Bush family. He met Governor Bush's father at a small gathering in Atlanta in the 1970's, when the elder Mr. Bush was ambassador to the United Nations and he was a state senator. Mr. Coverdell made an impression on Mr. Bush, who invited him to Houston to chat about ideas, and then to Kennebunkport. A friendship ensued, and Mr. Coverdell became a regular guest at the Kennebunkport compound. When Mr. Bush ran for president in 1980, Mr. Coverdell was his finance chairman in Georgia. He never lost touch with Mr. Bush, and was justly rewarded. In 1988, he became Southern steering committee chairman for the Bush campaign. Then, after Mr. Bush won the election, Mr. Coverdell sent a polite letter. ''If I can help, I'd like to help,'' the senator said he wrote. The next year, Mr. Coverdell found himself at the helm of the Peace Corps, and his rise to the United States Senate was set in motion. He was elected in 1992. Now he hopes to help Bush fils rocket to the White House, a job he calls an honor, and the word is he would be justly rewarded again if Governor Bush were to land the presidency. Politically, Governor Bush and Senator Coverdell diverge; Mr. Bush is reaching out to the political center while Mr. Coverdell has grown increasingly conservative. No matter. His loyalty is what is important to Mr. Bush. Early on, the job was all about getting Republican senators to endorse Governor Bush instead of Senator John McCain. He did so, lining up almost every Senate Republican. After Mr. Bush's defeat in the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Coverdell bucked up supporters, although he said most senators were not too nervous about the stumble. Every other day or so, he touches base with Bush campaign aides to trade information and alert them to any political land mines. Early on, it was Karl Rove, Governor Bush's chief campaign strategist. Now it is Joe Allbaugh, the campaign manager. There have been disagreements, most recently over Kosovo. The Senate wanted to place a deadline on the troops there. Mr. Bush preferred preserving flexibility on the issue. But that is natural, Mr. Coverdell said. And last year, Senator Coverdell alerted the Bush people that a number of Republican senators opposed the nuclear test ban treaty. It was helpful information, and in the end, Mr. Bush opposed the treaty. Now, Mr. Coverdell often deals with requests from senators who want to talk to Governor Bush about his Social Security plan, for example, or who, just as important, want to air their views. ''We don't want black holes,'' he said. ''We want people feeling they are part of the effort. We want to create good will.'' What about all that distance Mr. Bush keeps putting between himself and Congress? It is all media hype, Mr. Coverdell says. ''I think the relationship with Congress has actually been quite comfortable,'' he said. ''By and large, the goals are very symbiotic.''
 Special report, Governor Bush's Journey, examines journey of George W Bush through counterculture upheaval of late 1960's when he was student at Yale; he remained noncombatant during years at Yale, when pressed to take sides in great battles unfloding over politics, civil rights, drugs and music; when forced to choose, he ultimately retreated to values and ideals established by his parents' generation, and to their accepted methods of rebelling; while many young people of privilege who encountered 1960's began to question system and their own values, Bush seems to have grasped his more tightly than ever; he never questioned the law, and much of his current underlying political philosophy rests on belief that nation still needs to reverse psychology of permissiveness and liberalism that began to take root in country in late 1960's; he was rabble-rouser of sorts, but only in high-spirited way that fraternity members generation earlier swallowed goldfish or sat on flagpoles; photos (L) The first time that George W. Bush was arrested, he had just stolen a Christmas wreath. Mr. Bush, then a 20-year-old junior at Yale, was head of a notoriously rambunctious fraternity, and with the Christmas holidays approaching, he and some of his buddies had declared themselves the ''decorating committee.'' They took off for a festive shopping street, where Mr. Bush spotted the wreath in a hotel -- and stole it. The first time that George W. Bush was arrested, he had just stolen a Christmas wreath. Mr. Bush, then a 20-year-old junior at Yale, was head of a notoriously rambunctious fraternity, and with the Christmas holidays approaching, he and some of his buddies had declared themselves the ''decorating committee.'' They took off for a festive shopping street, where Mr. Bush spotted the wreath in a hotel -- and stole it. It was not the perfect crime. Mr. Bush later recalled that he and his friends had perhaps had a few beers and were loud and boisterous. In addition, a police car was approaching. The police arrested Mr. Bush and charged him with disorderly conduct. Eventually the charges were dropped, but the episode underscored Mr. Bush's path through the uproar of the late 1960's: at a time when many university students risked arrest for their vociferous political protests, Mr. Bush broke the law not out of principle but for a prank. Others denounced the police as ''pigs,'' while Mr. Bush instinctively stood with the establishment, even as he casually breached its law. Born at the earliest fringe of the baby boom, Mr. Bush was pressed during his years at Yale, 1964 to 1968, to take sides in the great battles then unfolding over politics, civil rights, drugs and music. Mostly he was a noncombatant in those upheavals, but when forced to choose, he ultimately retreated to the values and ideals established by his parents' generation, and to their accepted methods of rebelling. In short, while some students took to the barricades, Mr. Bush took to the bar. Unlike others of his generation, like Bill Clinton or Al Gore, Mr. Bush never wore his hair long, agonized over Vietnam, wrestled with existentialism or cranked up Rolling Stones songs to annoy his parents (instead of hard rock music, he listened to soul). Even today, Mr. Bush thunders in his stump speeches against boomer-style self-indulgence and appeals for a ''responsibility era'' that in some respects sounds like the 1950's; he likes values as clean-cut as his hair. Many young people of privilege who encountered the 1960's began to question the system and their own values; Mr. Bush seems to have grasped his more tightly than ever. He may have broken the law, but he never questioned it. And today, much of his underlying political philosophy rests on the belief that the nation still needs to reverse the psychology of permissiveness and liberalism that began to take root in the country in the late 1960's. Mr. Bush was a rabble-rouser of sorts, but only in the high-spirited way that fraternity boys a generation earlier had swallowed goldfish or sat on flagpoles. For all the buffeting that late-night television has given Mr. Bush over questions of drug use, he was in most respects a very conventional young man, and classmates say they do not recall him ever using marijuana or other illegal drugs. One of the very few differences in mores between Mr. Bush and his parents came with changing patterns of courtship, for Mr. Bush busied himself with a string of girlfriends, while his father and mother both had married the only person they had ever kissed. Indeed, like many of his conservative peers, the only revolution for which the younger Bush ever demonstrated any enthusiasm was the sexual one. As Mr. Bush was frolicking around Yale, a young man named Al Gore was studying at Harvard. But they were very different. Mr. Gore had barely arrived on campus when he began going around the dormitories, campaigning for a spot on the freshman council; later, he spent his time worrying about Vietnam. He was, in short, just the kind of serious and self-important student whom the less reputable Mr. Bush liked to mock. ''Can you imagine how much it hurt,'' Mr. Bush once joked to a crowd, ''to know that Dad's idea of the perfect son was Al Gore?'' The Yale years can help address one of the fundamental questions often raised by critics of Mr. Bush: is he smart enough to be president? ''This guy is very smart,'' said Lanny J. Davis, a former special counsel to President Clinton and a supporter of Al Gore, as well as a fraternity brother of Mr. Bush at Yale. ''This notion of lightness is totally missing the point. There are many smart people, intellectually smart as well as street smart, who don't have the energy or motivation at times to act smart, but that doesn't mean they're not smart. There are times when George coasted through Yale courses or through exams or seemed overly facetious. But don't mistake that for not being intellectually acute. The notion that Mr. Bush is a low-wattage leader seems to be based on two factors. First, Mr. Bush never was a strong student. His transcript at Yale, leaked to The New Yorker, shows that he was a solid C student. Although a history major, he sampled widely in the social sciences and did poorly in political science and economics while achieving some of his best grades (the equivalent of a B+) in philosophy and anthropology. (The anthropology class, however, was taught by Margaret Mead that year and was enormously popular because she offered among the easiest grades at Yale.) Mr. Bush was not much of a student of politics, for he earned only a 73 in Introduction to the American Political System and a 71 in Introduction to International Relations. Few, if any, professors seem to have left a mark on him, or he on them. Several professors who taught him said he had simply been one student in a huge class. As the historian John Morton Blum put it, ''I haven't the foggiest recollection of him.'' Erich Segal, who later met Mr. Gore at Harvard and based the main character in ''Love Story'' partly on him, taught a classical comedy course that Mr. Bush took, but Mr. Segal said he had no memory of him. The transcript indicates that in Mr. Bush's freshman year, the only year for which rankings were available, he was in the 21st percentile of his class, meaning that four-fifths of the students had better grades than he did. Second, Mr. Bush is determinedly nonintellectual. He never seems to want to play with ideas and hold them up to the light; he drops names like Nolan Ryan, not Kierkegaard. In a long interview about his past, Mr. Bush quickly became edgy when he was asked about the internal motivations and pressures that have driven him over the years. Yet if his mind was not well suited to earning A's at Yale by categorizing information and coming up with the four major and three minor reasons why Rome fell, then it may be that his brain works best in other ways. Mr. Wood and many other acquaintances say Mr. Bush brims with a practical intelligence. At the same time that he was earning C's at Yale, Mr. Bush demonstrated a feat that old friends still shake their heads about. It was his induction into the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, or DKE, and the sophomores were cowering downstairs in the fraternity's lovely red-brick building (now the alumni center) as older students hit them and shouted insults as part of the hazing process. Terry Johnson, a roommate of Mr. Bush who entered DKE at the same time, recalled: ''One of the techniques of demonstrating what an abominable person you are is to ask you to name all your fellow pledges. It's a way of humiliating somebody in front of their fellow pledges, to show that you're not worthy of entering DKE.'' Several were called on and were able to name only 5 or 6 of the 55 pledges in the room. Then it was George Bush's turn. Those who were there say he named every single person. Mr. Bush rose to be president of DKE, beating out, among others, his friend Roland W. Betts, later an eminently successful businessman. The DKE presidency was a significant achievement, and those who came before and after him as president did very well in the business world, largely because of the same people skills that propelled them to the top of DKE. When Mr. Bush entered DKE, for example, the president of the fraternity was Frederick W. Smith, who founded Federal Express and remains its chairman and chief executive officer. The next president was Dayton Ogden, now chairman of Spencer Stuart, the executive search firm. Then came Mr. Bush, and after him was Michael M. Wood, now chief executive of Hanley-Wood, a publishing company in Washington. Those who remember Mr. Bush at DKE say he was similar to those other presidents, and that in the business world his people skills would have carried him far as well. For a leading presidential candidate, Mr. Bush has an unusually testy relationship with the Eastern establishment, although he also has an intimate history with it. His grandparents on both sides were card-carrying members of that establishment, yet ever since he showed up at Yale as a freshman in 1964, Mr. Bush has resolutely cultivated an anti-intellectualism and chafed at what he describes as the arrogance of liberal intellectual elitists. ''Look, when you're coming from Texas to some of these schools up there,'' Mr. Bush said in an interview, ''there's a -- you know, I can't point to a particular person, but there's that sense of, you know: 'Well, maybe these boys from Texas aren't quite bright enough to be here. I guess it's geographic distribution that got him here.' '' Mr. Bush made clear that what irritated him about Yale above all was its reluctance, many years later, to give his father an honorary degree. After dithering while the elder Mr. Bush was vice president and then president, Yale finally awarded the degree to President Bush in 1991. ''It wasn't politically correct,'' the younger Mr. Bush said. ''What kind of institution is that of higher learning? So I didn't react well to that.'' Indeed, Mr. Bush initially did not want to send a contribution to Yale on the occasion of his 25th reunion in 1993 (friends persuaded him to), and he did not submit an entry for his reunion class book. Mr. Bush's tension with what he sees as an arrogant Eastern elite, and his perception of himself as outside it, seem to have arisen initially from the clash of generations that occurred while he was at Yale. Mr. Bush entirely subscribed to his parents' and grandparents' view of absolute and immutable values, of privilege balanced by duty. He was proud when his grandfather, crusty old Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut, denounced his party for considering Nelson Rockefeller for the presidential nomination in 1964, after Mr. Rockefeller had divorced his wife and remarried. ''I think what happened is still informing his public policy today,'' said Bill Minutaglio, one of Mr. Bush's biographers. ''He was blindsided by a lack of certitude that spun him and by an ambiguity that is still spinning him today.'' Kingman Brewster Jr., the legendary president of Yale, moved to transform the university by admitting women beginning in 1968 and by restructuring admissions so that young men like George W. Bush, alumni children who were mediocre students, were far less likely to be accepted. Indeed, with his grades and college boards, Mr. Bush might not have been admitted if he had applied just a few years later. Just two months after Mr. Bush arrived at Yale, his father lost a closely watched Senate race in Texas to the incumbent, Ralph Yarborough. George W. had flown back to Texas for election night and watched as his father choked back his sorrow before a crowd in his concession speech. Young George watched wistfully from afar as his father, in the different political universe of Texas, basked in public respect and bounced back in 1966 to win a Congressional seat and be named president of the freshman class in the House. But as the elder Bush became more prominent as a Republican Congressman who supported the Vietnam War and opposed some civil rights legislation, he also became a target of criticism at Yale, deeply offending young George. Mr. Bush's loyalty to his father in the Yale years was filial rather than political. For a son of a politician, Mr. Bush was remarkably oblivious to current affairs. Other undergraduates at the time -- like (future governor) George E. Pataki, (future senator) John Kerry, and (future federal judge) J. Harvie Wilkinson III -- were active in campus politics, while at the law school (future senator) Joseph I. Lieberman was beginning his own political career. But Mr. Bush was the opposite kind of student: he never joined the Yale Political Union and rarely spent time talking about civil rights, the Vietnam War or other upheavals of the day. ''Gosh, I can't remember,'' Mr. Bush said, struggling to recall whether he had discussed these issues with his father. ''I mean, I'm confident we discussed issues. I just can't remember any long sessions sitting around.'' It is true that Yale did not explode until after the class of 1968 had graduated. But it is very odd to describe Yale in 1967-68 as ''a fairly placid period,'' as Mr. Bush does. Race riots erupted in New Haven between Mr. Bush's junior and senior years, antiwar ''teach-ins'' and protests multiplied, students burned draft cards and Mr. Coffin, the chaplain, was indicted for helping draft resisters. A group of nine students (including Strobe Talbott, now deputy secretary of state) circulated a statement among seniors saying that they would refuse to be drafted; Mr. Bush refused to sign it. The Yale Daily News captured the surly mood with an editorial headlined, ''Yale's Future, If Any.'' The upheaval may have left George W. Bush feeling uncomfortable, but he was not melancholy -- far from it. Friends remember him as cheerful, vigorously involved in intramural sports at Davenport, his residential college, and laughing with friends over beers. Roommates recall Mr. Bush studying the class register and memorizing names of classmates, and he clearly made friendships a great priority. Some other classmates regard that as a huge exaggeration, but even those who frowned on Mr. Bush, seeing him as an airhead party boy, tended to think of him as affable and unusually helpful to his friends. One of Mr. Bush's roommates, Frederick C. Livingston, who had academic problems that led him to drop out for a year, said, ''Of all my roommates, he was the one most obviously concerned and open about seeing if he could help.'' The DKE fraternity was a hub of Mr. Bush's life at Yale and offered a refuge from the upheavals of the day, and from the left. Leftist disapproval of the fraternities was growing, and The Yale Daily News published an expose about hazing by DKE. In the ensuing uproar, Mr. Bush appeared in the newspaper for perhaps the only time, defending the branding as ''insignificant.'' ''I can't understand how the authors of the Friday article can assume that Yale has to be so haughty not to allow this type of pledging to go on at Yale,'' the newspaper quoted Mr. Bush as saying. On April 28 of his junior year, as the bells on Harkness Tower sounded 8 p.m., a man strode over to Mr. Bush as he stood in the front courtyard of Davenport College. ''Skull and Bones!'' the man said, clapping his hands on Mr. Bush's shoulders. ''Accept or reject.'' ''I accept,'' Mr. Bush replied, and he was admitted to Skull and Bones, a secret society then made up of 15 of the most promising, talented or socially prominent men in each class. There have been reports that he was ''tapped'' by his father, who himself was a Bonesman, but that seems incorrect. An outgoing senior and Bonesman, David Alan Richards, acknowledges that it was he who tapped Mr. Bush that night. There has been speculation that Mr. Bush was admitted into Skull and Bones because of pressure from his father and grandfather. But the decision was made by the 15 departing members, albeit with some lobbying from past members, and what may have helped Mr. Bush more was that he was friends with one member of the outgoing group from DKE and knew three more from Davenport College. ''George W. Bush was tapped because the members thought that he was a natural leader and a good guy to be with,'' Mr. Richards recalled. ''Legacy was helpful but it didn't determine the result.'' If entry into Skull and Bones opened Mr. Bush to accusations of snobbery, it also meant association with a community of gifted people with whom Mr. Bush would form lifelong friendships -- and Mr. Bush's strategy at Yale was clearly to build great friendships, more than a great transcript. It was also a perfectly reasonable strategy, for one could argue that Yale graduates in the 1960's got further on the networks they made than on the grades they earned. That was certainly true of Mr. Bush. He was not quite John Belushi in ''Animal House,'' but like many of his DKE fraternity brothers, he did manage what could politely be called a full life. For starters, DKE was notorious for its rowdy weekend parties, attended by Yale men and by women from nearby women's colleges, in which alcohol was so plentiful that partygoers periodically threw up or passed out. When Mr. Livingston, his roommate, was married, Mr. Bush was an usher, and he led an effort to throw the groom and the fathers of the bride and groom into the swimming pool. Many years later, when Mr. Livingston's father was in a reception line and met Vice President Bush, he recalled the incident, saying, ''Your son once threw me into a swimming pool.'' The theft of the Christmas wreath appears to have been Mr. Bush's first tangle with the police, but it was not the last. A year after that arrest, he was attending a football game at Princeton and cheering for his DKE brothers on the Yale team. At the end of the game, he and other students charged onto the football field and tried to knock down the goal posts, seizing pieces as souvenirs. The Princeton police tried to re-establish order and caught Mr. Bush brazenly sitting on a crossbar of a goal post, determinedly trying to pry off a piece for himself. The police seized him, interrogated him and finally released him on the condition that he leave Princeton by dusk. Once while on a train to New York City from New Haven, he told a buddy, James Lockhart, that he had done a lot of partying in his freshman year but that he now wanted to buckle down. As Mr. Lockhart remembers the conversation, Mr. Bush said, very seriously: ''I want to do more. I want to make a mark here.'' Yet when Mr. Bush received his Yale diploma in 1968, he had third-rate grades, second-rate accomplishments and no firm career prospects. There was, however, one area where he had excelled: he had a huge number of very close friends, and long after course grades were forgotten, those friends would still stand by him, reach into their pockets for him and help propel him into politics. This is the fourth in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will look at Al Gore's years at Harvard.
 Editorial says case of Gary Graham, Texas death row inmate scheduled for execution on June 22, represents troubling saga of nation's justice system 'gone badly awry;' says shooting for which Graham was condemned poses test of moral leadership of Gov George W Bush, and should challenge his unwavering faith in state's administration of death penalty which has produced rate of execution that is by far highest in country; says conviction is shocking example of how inadequate legal representation sends poor people to death row, where some are no doubt wrongly executed (S) The case of Gary Graham, a convicted killer scheduled for execution by lethal injection in Texas on Thursday, is a troubling saga of the nation's justice system gone badly awry. Now, two decades after the shooting for which Mr. Graham was condemned, this case poses a test of moral leadership for Gov. George W. Bush. It should challenge his unwavering faith in his state's administration of the death penalty, which has produced a rate of execution that is by far the highest in the country. The case of Gary Graham, a convicted killer scheduled for execution by lethal injection in Texas on Thursday, is a troubling saga of the nation's justice system gone badly awry. Now, two decades after the shooting for which Mr. Graham was condemned, this case poses a test of moral leadership for Gov. George W. Bush. It should challenge his unwavering faith in his state's administration of the death penalty, which has produced a rate of execution that is by far the highest in the country. Earlier this month, in a nod to the new politics of the death penalty, Mr. Bush postponed the execution of an inmate named Ricky Nolen McGinn to allow DNA testing that could bear on his guilt or innocence. In the Graham case, there is no biological evidence to test, but the argument for a reprieve is at least as strong. Thanks to poor legal representation, and the impact of new state and federal laws designed to speed executions by truncating the appeals process, Mr. Graham has never gotten a fair hearing. It may be argued that Mr. Bush has no power to grant a reprieve, or postponement of the execution, since Texas law permits only one gubernatorial reprieve, and Mr. Graham received one from Gov. Ann Richards in 1993. However, it is not clear that the law precludes a second reprieve from a different governor. In any event, nothing prevents Mr. Bush from exercising leadership by urging the state's board of pardons to slow things down and conduct the careful review of the evidence that the courts failed to provide.
 Any deal, even without clear American fingerprints, would also put Vice President Al Gore into a difficult position during the presidential campaign and could undermine the international tribunal that indicted Mr. Milosevic. Within his ruling party, Mr. Milosevic has said that it is important to wait out the Clinton administration, and that a President George W. Bush  would be more ''realistic'' toward Serbia and carry less personal animosity from the Kosovo war. As for Mr. Milosevic's conviction that a Bush administration would be more realistic and less emotional toward him, a Bush foreign policy adviser cautioned that there was no agreed policy, and that the situation in Serbia could change a lot in six months. ''But Milosevic should take no comfort from the prospect of a Bush administration,'' the adviser said. ''There will be no sense of letting bygones be bygones. The strategy may change in different ways, and it will be worked out with the Europeans. But the idea that a bunch of Kissingerian realpolitikers will focus energy elsewhere and let him mind his own business is not something he should bank on.''
 List of Republican Vice Presidential possibilities seems to be getting shorter, with little more than month before Gov George W Bush settles on candidate; Gov Frank Keating of Oklahoma and Gov Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania are believed to be leading frontrunners (M) With little more than a month to go before Gov. George W. Bush settles on the person with whom he wants to share the Republican presidential ticket, the list of possibilities seems to be getting shorter. But that does not mean it is getting a whole lot clearer, because Mr. Bush is holding his cards so close to the vest that even his most trusted advisers insist they have not been able to sneak a peek. Karen P. Hughes, the Bush campaign's director of communications, said that Mr. Bush leaves the room when he gets a call from former Defense Secretary Richard B. Cheney, who is supervising the selection process. ''Get out a Ouija board,'' another adviser said when asked about the status of Mr. Bush's thinking on the matter. ''I'm not kidding, I'm totally clueless.'' ''I don't need a committee to figure out who's best to be the vice president,'' Mr. Bush said, adding, ''I'm going to take my time.'' That, of course, has not prevented fellow Republicans from handicapping the race. And some of the buzz they are generating seems to have a grounding in reality, because Republican officials, those who have no direct link to Mr. Bush's campaign and those who interact frequently with his advisers, keep coming up with the same handful of names. First and foremost among them is Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma, whose aides have acknowledged that he received a questionnaire that Mr. Cheney sent out to prospective vice presidential nominees. Republican officials noted that Mr. Keating is Roman Catholic, performed well on a national stage after the Oklahoma City bombing, has a squeaky-clean image and has long been friendly with Mr. Bush. Mr. Ridge, also Catholic, is said to be still in the running, although his support of abortion rights -- and the grief it has caused him with Catholic leaders in his state -- make him a riskier, more controversial choice. Republican strategists said that if Mr. Bush, who opposes abortion, were doing poorly with voters in the political center, Mr. Ridge might make more sense. ''The most basic rule of picking a vice president is 'First, do no harm,' '' said one adviser to the Bush campaign. In 1988, Mr. Bush's father took even members of his inner circle by surprise when he hitched himself at the last moment to Dan Quayle. Bob Dole's selection of Jack Kemp in 1996 also came out of left field. In many ways, Republican officials and several of Mr. Bush's advisers said, the Texas governor is freer than recent Republican nominees to let his eye wander or to go ultimately with his heart and his gut. In 1980, when Ronald Reagan selected Mr. Bush's father, who had opposed him in the primaries, he was working to unite the conservative and moderate wings of a fractured Republican party. In 1996, Mr. Dole's unexpected choice of Mr. Kemp was partly an attempt to inject some excitement into an underdog effort. ''The party's united now,'' said one of Mr. Bush's advisers, alluding to recent polls showing that 9 out of 10 Republicans support Mr. Bush. The adviser added that because of Mr. Bush's advantage over Vice President Al Gore in most of those surveys, ''He's not in the position of having to throw the long ball.'' Mr. Bush's advisers and Republican strategists agreed that geography, which would favor someone like Mr. Ridge, the governor of a swing state with 23 electoral votes, was increasingly unimportant. A more important factor to Mr. Bush may simply be choosing someone with whom he is extremely comfortable. He has said over and over that he wants a running mate whom he likes and who likes him, and while that may sound like a stock platitude, people who know him well note that he is a stickler for loyalty who puts great value on the ease and pleasantness of his interactions with associates. ''That's Bush's top priority, far more than any tactical, geographical or political consideration,'' said one Republican official who interacts with the campaign. One of Mr. Bush's advisers added that he does not want to replicate the dynamic between Mr. Reagan and his father, who were not that close when they entered the White House and whose staffs regarded each other warily. That concern favors candidates like Mr. Keating and Mr. Ridge, both friends of Mr. Bush's for many years. And because both of them are governors and not members of Congress, Republican officials said, they would also help Mr. Bush underscore his pledge to eradicate Washington's partisan acrimony and gridlock. ''One of the qualities that Bush has so successfully capitalized on is his outsider status,'' said Scott Reed, who managed Mr. Dole's presidential campaign. ''As he picks a running mate, I believe he will be looking for someone from outside of Washington.''
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore will propose $200 billion program to help low- and middle-income taxpayers build retirement accounts separate from what they will receive from Social Security; program, called 'retirement savings plus,' would work like 401(k) savings plans, but instead of employer contributions federal government would make contributions in form of tax credits, providing in some instances up to 3-to-1 match; would offer tax relief for couples with combined annual incomes of up to $100,000, or individuals making up to $50,000; would provide greatest benefit for couples with incomes less than $30,000 and would not be available to couples making more than $100,000; other provisions of plan discussed (M) Vice President Al Gore plans in a speech on Tuesday to propose a $200 billion program to help low- and middle-income taxpayers build retirement accounts separate from what they will receive from Social Security, his aides said. As described by Gore aides, the program would work like 401(k) savings plans, but instead of employer contributions, the federal government would make contributions in the form of tax credits, providing in some cases up to a 3-to-1 match. Vice President Al Gore plans in a speech on Tuesday to propose a $200 billion program to help low- and middle-income taxpayers build retirement accounts separate from what they will receive from Social Security, his aides said. As described by Gore aides, the program would work like 401(k) savings plans, but instead of employer contributions, the federal government would make contributions in the form of tax credits, providing in some cases up to a 3-to-1 match. Called ''retirement savings plus,'' the plans would offer tax relief for couples with combined annual incomes of up to $100,000, or individuals making up to $50,000. Mr. Gore's program would provide the greatest benefit for couples with incomes of less than $30,000 and would not be available to couples making more than $100,000. His aides estimated that the program would cost the government $200 billion over 10 years. The voluntary program, devised to compete with Gov. George W. Bush's proposal for individuals to invest an unspecified portion of their Social Security payroll tax in the stock market, would create a fund for each participant that could expand by a maximum of $2,000 a year. Like individual retirement accounts and 401(k) plans, contributions to the accounts would be tax deductible, accounts would grow tax free and withdrawals would be taxed. Private financial institutions would manage the accounts. Gore aides say an individual who took part in the program for more than 35 years would yield about $200,000 for retirement over and above Social Security. Mr. Gore's plan does two things that Mr. Gore had criticized in the plan offered by Governor Bush, his Republican rival. One, it allows people to invest taxpayer money in the stock market through the account managers. Two, it greatly increases the amount of the surplus that Mr. Gore would devote to tax cuts. Mr. Gore has been critical of Mr. Bush for devoting $1.3 trillion dollars of the surplus to an across-the-board income tax cut over 10 years. But now, with this new savings plan, Mr. Gore's total of targeted tax cuts comes in at $500 billion over 10 years, twice what he had proposed before and half of Mr. Bush's proposal. Gore advisers, in interviews today, said that the Gore plan is a hedge against what they see as the risky alternative that Mr. Bush is proposing. They said financial institutions would be limited to offering investment options based on broad-based mutual funds for equities, bonds and government securities. Mr. Gore intends to lay out the  plan in a speech on Tuesday in Lexington, Ky. The speech begins the second week of his three-week ''progress and prosperity tour'' (sometimes called the ''prosperity and progress tour'' by Mr. Gore) in which he is traveling to crucial battleground states to try to get credit for the booming economy. In New York last Tuesday, Mr. Gore called for a new program to supplement Social Security, but he offered only a broad outline. Details were released today in an effort to build momentum for the speech on Tuesday. The retirement plan is a vivid example of how Mr. Gore is trying to take advantage of the growing federal budget surplus by spending it on  groups of voters whom he needs in November -- in this case, low-income and middle-income working families, the core Democratic base that polls have indicated are slipping from Mr. Gore's grasp. Republicans said Mr. Gore's proposal revealed a weakening of his stance against putting taxpayer money in the financial markets and would thus contribute to an overall impression of Mr. Gore as someone without reliable core values. ''This week the vice president will flip flop flip by coming out for the use of tax money to be invested in the market to help people retire,'' said Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's campaign spokesman. ''It's his third position in six months on the soundness of using tax money to invest in markets to secure people's retirement.'' Mr. Fleischer pointed to the Clinton administration's now abandoned position laid out in this year's budget proposal to allow government-controlled investments in the markets, and then to a Gore speech in May when he criticized Mr. Bush's plan to allow people to invest a portion of their payroll taxes in the market. ''He's doing this to blunt Governor Bush's approach to allow people to invest in the markets to help them retire with more money,'' Mr. Fleischer said. Mr. Fleischer was not the only one suggesting today that Mr. Gore was perhaps going through multiple reinventions. These transformations were among the main subjects of the morning's talk programs, as Mr. Gore's new campaign chairman, William M. Daley, the commerce secretary, made the rounds. He was asked repeatedly about the vice president's continually evolving personas. Tim Russert posed the question on the NBC program ''Meet The Press'': ''Fairly or unfairly, there's a perception that Al Gore has changed positions on abortion, on gun control, Elian Gonzalez, wearing earth tones, wearing sports shirts, wearing coats and ties, changing campaign chairmen, moving from Washington to Nashville, suddenly in favor of a $500 billion tax cut -- that Gore has no center, that he flips and panders as a politician. Is that a problem?'' He added, ''The fact of the matter is, Al Gore has been consistent about working for the average man and woman out there and trying to address their problems.'' Although organized labor helped Mr. Gore secure the nomination, its enthusiasm for the vice president has been dampened lately by his support for a bill to make normal trade relations permanent with China and his selection of Mr. Daley as his chairman to replace the ailing Tony Coelho. Mr. Daley led the administration's fight on Capitol Hill to pass the trade bill, which labor had vehemently opposed. Mr. Daley said today that he had talked with several labor leaders over the last few days, including John Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., who met with Mr. Gore on Friday to complain about the Daley appointment. Mr. Daley suggested his talks with labor leaders had been fruitful and said he expected to meet with Mr. Sweeney on Tuesday. Other Gore aides spent the day briefing reporters on the retirement plan.
 ''In the F.B.I. files matter, the independent counsel determined that there was no substantial credible evidence that any senior White House official, or First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, was involved in seeking confidential Federal Bureau of Investigation background reports of former White House staff from the administrations of President Bush and President Reagan,'' Mr. Ray reported.
 Poet's Corner  The Nobel Prize-winning Irish poet William Butler Yeats will be celebrated in prose, poetry, song and music in the annual tribute of the W. B. Yeats Society of New York at 7:30 tonight at Frederick Loewe Theater of New York University at 35 West Fourth Street in Greenwich Village. Rare home movies will be shown; the actress Celeste Holm will read her favorite Yeats poem, ''The Three Bushes''; Irish music will be played; and there will be a re-creation of a 1925 Irish Senate debate in which Yeats delivered a famous speech against a ban on divorce. Information: (212) 780-0605.
 This year the Republicans are finally getting a payoff from the term limitation: Gov. George Bush does not have to run against President Clinton, who has already beaten his father and Bob Dole. Each man had his vice president as his party's candidate for the presidency. Eisenhower regarded the election of Vice President Richard Nixon as a referendum on his performance; Mr. Clinton sees Vice President Al Gore in the same light.  A major difference between Presidents Eisenhower and Clinton is that Eisenhower, a world figure long before he became president, did not have to worry about his reputation.  Yet as his public service was drawing to an end, Eisenhower turned his concerns more to long-range matters than to short-term political gains -- something Mr. Clinton is doing today. But Eisenhower's popularity, at home and abroad, was not enough to propel Richard Nixon into the presidency. What Mr. Clinton does for Mr. Gore is yet to be discovered. But it is already apparent that while Mr. Gore wants to run on the president's  record, he also wants to set his own agenda.
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore's weeklong 'prosperity' tour to revive flagging campaign by reminding voters of Clinton administration's economic record is off to rocky start, mainly because of lack of media interest (Political Memo); photos (M) Christina Zarek, a Pennsylvania Democratic campaign aide, was a little crestfallen. ''Five graphs,'' she said as she mingled with reporters on Wednesday at a medical center in Scranton, where Vice President Al Gore was speaking. ''It took up the first five graphs.'' What brought out Ms. Zarek's gloom was the front-page report in The Tribune, the Scranton daily, about Mr. Gore's appearance at an airport rally here the night before. In a speech to 400 supporters, Mr. Gore had introduced a Democrat running in a critical special legislative election as John Wansacz. Christina Zarek, a Pennsylvania Democratic campaign aide, was a little crestfallen. ''Five graphs,'' she said as she mingled with reporters on Wednesday at a medical center in Scranton, where Vice President Al Gore was speaking. ''It took up the first five graphs.'' What brought out Ms. Zarek's gloom was the front-page report in The Tribune, the Scranton daily, about Mr. Gore's appearance at an airport rally here the night before. In a speech to 400 supporters, Mr. Gore had introduced a Democrat running in a critical special legislative election as John Wansacz. That was one of several dispiriting media moments last week for the vice president, a week that his staff had been certain would be a winner for him. With Gov. George W. Bush on hiatus at the family compound in Kennebunkport, Me., Mr. Gore took the opportunity to unveil his ''prosperity and progress tour,'' a multiweek drive to revive his flagging campaign by reminding voters of what some strategists say has the potential to be a Gore trump card: the Clinton administration's economic record. But the message never seemed to sink in. An announcement of the tour at the New-York Historical Society in Manhattan proved to be short on the details Mr. Gore had promised about what he would do with the government's quickly growing surplus. The national news media was so unimpressed that ABC News did not even feature the event on its nightly newscast, and while some national dailies, including The New York Times, played it on the bottom half of Page 1 the next day, USA Today and The Los Angeles Times put it inside. Mr. Gore's campaign spokesman, Chris Lehane, said the ho-hum play was not a major concern; there would be ample time, he explained, for readers and viewers to absorb the message of the prosperity tour. But on Thursday, as Mr. Gore was planning to discuss some of the policy details missing from the tour's kickoff, another day was lost when Tony Coelho stepped down as campaign manager. That move, which revived impressions of a campaign in frequent turmoil, dominated the news coverage, leaving some Gore advisers in a state of frustration. The shake-up, in fact, was the dominant political news story on the Sunday morning talk shows. William M. Daley, the campaign's new chairman, appeared on at least five of them to try to refute the suggestion that Mr. Gore was in trouble. On the CBS News program ''Face the Nation,'' Mr. Daley said the campaign dynamic would shift as the pressure built on Mr. Bush to elaborate on his proposals. ''Then we will begin to see the contrast,'' he said. The confluence of events last week sometimes seemed out of any handler's control. The Scranton visit, for example, had another unexpected complication when Mercy Hospital, affiliated with the Roman Catholic Church, at the last minute withdrew an invitation to the vice president to speak after Bishop James C. Timlin cited Mr. Gore's support for abortion rights. ''No Mercy for Gore,'' The Tribune said. The week also illustrated what is in the view of some Democrats and Republicans alike Mr. Gore's surprisingly tough struggle to get out a message that clicks with voters. ''I don't want to say 'smothered in the crib,' '' Tom Hannon, the political director of CNN, said of the Coelho development's deflating effect just as the prosperity tour was getting started. ''But the timing from their standpoint is not very felicitous. This is clearly going to step on their rolling out of the new Al Gore look.'' Though it is early in the campaign, polls show Mr. Bush's numbers rising at Mr. Gore's expense, a reflection in part of the Bush campaign's seeming ability over the past several weeks to dominate the news coverage with policy declarations. ''How perceptions are changed begins with the way the day-to-day press covers the candidacy,'' said Greg Stevens, who was the media consultant to Senator John McCain, a presidential candidate known for enjoying the give-and-take with reporters. ''The interesting thing to me is that Gore in person is a pretty engaging person. But that certainly does not come across at all in the exposure in the media.'' Why Mr. Gore has not established a more winning presence in the news media is, of course, a subjective question. The topic has a chicken-or-egg component: is the press taking its cue from the polls in shaping its depiction of him, or are the people answering pollsters' queries based on conclusions drawn from newspapers and the nightly news? To Mr. Lehane, a candidate's ups and downs are partly a function of the predictable ebb and flow of a campaign and the desire of the press corps to build up and tear down. ''I think there's a natural cycle to all these campaigns,'' he said. He added that in the current instance, the ''serious'' nature of the issues on which Mr. Gore would be concentrating on the tour did not lend itself to sensational coverage. But some political observers say the problem goes deeper, that Mr. Gore has never managed to shed his wooden image and that he tries too hard to ingratiate himself. During his remarks at the Allied Services medical center, where the campaign moved its event after Mercy rescinded its invitation, Mr. Gore told the gathering: ''Tipper says hello. She enjoyed very much her trip to Scranton. She came back really glowing.'' Some commentators say Mr. Gore's tight handling of the news media has helped create negative impressions. Mr. Gore frequently gives one-on-one interviews with television anchors in local markets, and during his daylong visit to Scranton he was ushered into a stuffy equipment room at the medical center for a series of rapid-fire satellite interviews with anchors in places like Evansville, Ind., and Parkersburg, W.Va. But reporters who travel with Mr. Gore regularly say they get to ask him questions in a news conference setting less than once a week. In such a tightly controlled environment, people in the news business say, it is not surprising that reporters grasp for any development that does not follow the script -- and that blunders, no matter how innocent, get magnified, as when a candidate gets a local politician's first name wrong. Mark Halperin, the political director for ABC News, suggested that the fairly uninspiring initial response to the prosperity tour by the national press grew out of a general mistrust of the campaign's repeated efforts to reinvent Mr. Gore. ''The vice president, unfortunately for him, is not cut much slack,'' Mr. Halperin said. ''I think the Bush campaign has gotten some traction in saying, 'This is just Al Gore Version 6.0.' How many more times can they let the guy say that this is the start of the campaign?'' Democrats say, however, that with an emphasis on prosperity, Mr. Gore may have finally found a word he can repeat to his heart's content, one that has enduring power beyond the media's ability to discredit it. ''This is the message that Gore has to be on,'' declared Paul Begala, a former adviser to President Clinton and now a host of ''Equal Time'' on CNBC. ''I will say that when he focused on Elian Gonzalez, I was very unhappy. Now he's got the right focus.'' In fact, the vice president's boosters think the issue plays so well for him that even the most skeptical articles can work in his favor. As Joe Andrew, the national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, put it, ''Every single one of those process stories will contain the words 'peace,'  'prosperity' and 'Al Gore.' ''
 On Saturday, Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, assailed the Clinton administration for its handling of security, telling an audience in Florida that ''America's national security should not be a matter of lost and found.'' Mr. Bush added that the administration is to blame for ''confusion and chaos'' at Los Alamos.
 Federal Tax Credits In Gore Retirement Plan  Vice President Al Gore plans to propose in a speech tomorrow a $200 billion program to help low- and middle-income taxpayers build retirement accounts separate from what they will receive from Social Security, his aides said. The program would work like 401(k) savings plans, but instead of employer contributions, the federal government would make contributions in the form of tax credits, providing in some cases up to a 3-to-1 match. Running Mate Secret  With little more than a month to go before Gov. George W. Bush settles on the person with whom he wants to share the Republican presidential ticket, the list of possibilities seems to be getting shorter. And it is getting no clearer. Mr. Bush is holding his cards so close to the vest that even his most trusted advisers insist they have not been able to sneak a peek.
