 Justice Dept. Lawyer Urges Special Counsel for Gore  The head of the Justice Department's campaign finance unit recommended that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising activities in 1996, officials said. Mr. Gore visited a Minnesota school with Gov. Jesse Ventura. Nader Rocks Gore's Boat  Democratic and Republican strategists say Ralph Nader has emerged as more politically potent than Patrick Buchanan and may affect Vice President Al Gore's candidacy. Texas Execution Carried Out  Texas executed Gary Graham, who was convicted of a 1981 murder, although 5 of the 18 members of the state parole board had urged that the execution not be carried out and the United States Supreme Court was sharply divided on hearing a last-minute appeal. Gov. George W. Bush did not intervene.
 Domestic political calculations have weighed enormously with both Clinton administration and its Republican rivals in their maneuvering over missile defense system; an example is how administration was forced to abandon plans to locate system in Grand Forks, ND, which would not require renegotiation of Antiballistic Missile Treaty, because a system built there could not protect westernmost islands of the Aleutians, something sure to run afoul of Sen Ted Stevens of Alaska; a major aim of administration's plan has been to protect Pres Clinton--and more important, Vice Pres Al Gore--against Republican charges that Democrats have been soft on defense; a missile defense system was little more than a footnote to history when Clinton took office in 1992, but it has emerged as political litmus test since then as result of raw partisan politics, bitter fights over secret intelligence reports and an evolving missile threat; photos; maps (L) A major aim of the administration plan has been to protect Mr. Clinton -- and more important, Vice President Al Gore, the presumed Democratic presidential candidate -- against Republican charges that the Democrats have been soft on defense, according to administration officials and lawmakers. The administration's initial antimissile plan was forged in negotiations with Congressional leaders as the White House sought to defuse the missile defense issue before the 1996 presidential election. This year, Mr. Gore and Governor George W. Bush of Texas have both called for some version of a missile shield even before crucial tests of the technology, and before American intelligence experts had completed an assessment of how Russia, China, North Korea and other nations would be likely to respond to such a system. Their first attempt failed. To review the intelligence report, they established a panel whose chairman was Robert M. Gates, the director of central intelligence during the Bush administration. But its 1996 report basically supported the view of American intelligence experts. Two years later, however, the Republicans tried again. This time Congress set up a panel headed by Donald Rumsfeld, who was defense secretary under President Gerald R. Ford and was at Governor Bush's side recently when he unveiled his plan to build a more expansive missile defense system if elected this fall.
 Vice Pres Al Gore visits a Minnesota junior high school with Gov Jesse Ventura to promote proposal to increase federal aid for special education; but broader political point Gore seems intent on hammering home is his growing closeness to Ventura, who remains a favorite of independent voters across nation; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore visited a junior high school here today with Gov. Jesse Ventura, combining the earnestness of a policy forum with the forced joviality of a buddy movie, to promote a proposal to increase federal aid for special education. (Mr. Ventura's 16-year-old daughter, Jade, has a learning disability.) Vice President Al Gore visited a junior high school here today with Gov. Jesse Ventura, combining the earnestness of a policy forum with the forced joviality of a buddy movie, to promote a proposal to increase federal aid for special education. (Mr. Ventura's 16-year-old daughter, Jade, has a learning disability.) But the broader political point Mr. Gore seemed intent on hammering home was his growing closeness to Mr. Ventura, a former professional wrestler who won election on the Reform Party line in 1998 and remains a favorite of independent voters across the nation. ''It's no secret that I'm reaching out to independents and independent-minded Republicans,'' Mr. Gore said at a joint news conference. Many polls suggest that Mr. Gore needs a boost with those unaffiliated voters. Two weeks ago, for instance, a Los Angeles Times survey showed him trailing his likely Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush, by 23 points among independents. Mr. Gore has met three times with Mr. Ventura in the last four months, once to discuss campaign finance reform. Paradoxically, government officials said today that a Justice Department official had recommended an investigation of Mr. Gore's role in 1996 campaign fund-raising. When asked if he would endorse Mr. Gore, Mr. Ventura said he would consider that a betrayal of the third party movement. But he added that if the vice president came up ''with a policy that I agree with, like the one on special ed, I will come out and endorse that policy.'' Mr. Gore jumped in, saying: ''I'm not working on his endorsement. I'm working on his vote.'' ''I'm even thinking about a feather boa,'' Mr. Gore said, referring to one of Mr. Ventura's favorite accouterments as a wrestler. Later, in a joint news conference, Mr. Gore praised Mr. Ventura for bringing a ''spontaneous, freewheeling, candid style'' to governing. Moments later, as if on cue, Mr. Gore grabbed the cell phone that a CBS producer had just been talking on. ''This is the vice president,'' he said. ''Do you have a question?'' The caller asked to speak to Mr. Ventura, so Mr. Gore passed the phone to him. Just then, a phone belonging to a CNN producer rang, and Mr. Gore answered it. ''Gore news conference,'' he said. In his visit to North Junior High School here, Mr. Gore said he would increase federal aid for special education to $1.5 billion in his first year in office, from $700 million. He also called for protecting a portion of the federal surplus each year to use exclusively on education, including money for expanding preschool programs and recruiting new teachers. Later, Mr. Gore flew to Denver to speak at two fund-raisers for the Democratic National Committee that raised a total of $1.1 million.
 Editorial deplores execution of Gary Graham in Texas and says neither Gov George W Bush nor Vice Pres Al Gore has defended his support of death penalty in ways to confront the intellectual, legal and moral issues raised by state-sponsored killing Yet despite convincing new evidence of the system's fallibility, neither Gov. George W. Bush nor Vice President Al Gore has defended his support of the death penalty in ways that confront the intellectual, legal and moral issues raised by state-sponsored killing. Yet despite convincing new evidence of the system's fallibility, neither Gov. George W. Bush nor Vice President Al Gore has defended his support of the death penalty in ways that confront the intellectual, legal and moral issues raised by state-sponsored killing. Mr. Bush did nothing to stop the Graham execution, but instead defended his state's actions, telling reporters that ''as far as I'm concerned there has not been one innocent person executed since I've been governor.'' Mr. Bush has now presided over 135 executions. In Illinois, Gov. George Ryan declared a moratorium on executions after 13 death row inmates were exonerated, as compared with the 12 who had been executed since Illinois reinstated capital punishment in 1977. It defies common sense to conclude that Texas, a state with a notoriously weak public-defender system, could conduct such a huge number of rapid executions without a  single mistake. Mr. Gore has a more nuanced position, but one that is also deeply troubling. He was quoted this week by The Associated Press as saying that ''if you are honest about the debate you have got to acknowledge there are always going to be some small number of errors.'' This chilling concession should rule out the use of capital punishment entirely. Any wrongful execution is constitutionally repugnant and erosive of the core values of justice in the United States. Mr. Gore does say that any state with a bad record of death penalty errors should declare a moratorium. But his statements about mistakes in the process seems to imply that there is some level of error that would be socially tolerable. Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush present themselves as leaders driven by moral principles. But by any moral standard, there can be no margin for error when the state takes human life.
 William M Daley, new chairman of Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign, acknowledges on his first day at campaign headquarters that one of biggest challenges facing Gore is that Gov George W Bush, according to recent polls, is getting credit from voters for the economy, issue on which Gore has been basing his hopes; Daley photo (M) William M. Daley, the new chairman of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, acknowledged today that one of the biggest challenges facing Mr. Gore was that Gov. George W. Bush was getting credit for the economy, the issue on which Mr. Gore had been basing his hopes. But, Mr. Daley said, that was a ''knee jerk'' reaction and he hoped to counter it by recruiting supporters from big business and labor to come to Nashville, where Mr. Gore's campaign is based. William M. Daley, the new chairman of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, acknowledged today that one of the biggest challenges facing Mr. Gore was that Gov. George W. Bush was getting credit for the economy, the issue on which Mr. Gore had been basing his hopes. But, Mr. Daley said, that was a ''knee jerk'' reaction and he hoped to counter it by recruiting supporters from big business and labor to come to Nashville, where Mr. Gore's campaign is based. ''He is right now,'' Mr. Daley said of Mr. Bush's receiving credit. ''I don't know if it's just kind of a gut thing, but Republicans have always historically got more credit for running the economy, and being good for the economy, even at the height of the deficit. Mr. Daley, the secretary of commerce, spoke in an interview here as he made his debut in Mr. Gore's headquarters as chairman on a day when the Gore camp had to absorb another round of bad news. A Justice Department official has recommended that an independent counsel be named to investigate Mr. Gore's role in the Democrats' questionable fund-raising activities of 1996. Two new national polls showed Mr. Gore slipping further behind Mr. Bush. And James P. Hoffa, the powerful labor leader, appeared with Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate who could siphon enough votes from Mr. Gore to cost him a few key states. A new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, taken during the start of Mr. Gore's ''prosperity and progress tour,'' which was intended to showcase the booming economy, put Mr. Bush ahead of Mr. Gore 49 percent to 41 percent. A bipartisan Battleground 2000/Voter.com poll showed Mr. Bush ahead by 12 percentage points. Mr. Daley said that part of his task would be to bring business and labor interests together and urge officials to move to Nashville to dedicate themselves to Mr. Gore's candidacy. The Wall Street Journal poll showed that voters give Mr. Gore an advantage of only a single percentage point -- statistically meaningless -- on his ability to handle the economy.
 Robert J Conrad Jr, who heads Justice Department's campaign finance unit, reportedly recommends that Atty Gen Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate Vice Pres Al Gore's political fund-raising activities during the 1996 presidential campaign, citing new questions about whether Gore has been truthful to investigators; recommendations pits Conrad against some of Reno's powerful advisers, including Lee J Radek, head of unit of department that investigates public corrruption (M) The head of the Justice Department's campaign finance unit has recommended that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising activities during the 1996 presidential campaign, government officials said today. Robert J. Conrad Jr., who heads the agency's campaign finance team, told Ms. Reno in a meeting late last week that new evidence had revived questions about whether Mr. Gore had been truthful to investigators about his fund-raising activities. Mr. Gore has been questioned five times under oath, most recently in a four-hour interview on April 18 at the vice-presidential residence. The head of the Justice Department's campaign finance unit has recommended that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising activities during the 1996 presidential campaign, government officials said today. Robert J. Conrad Jr., who heads the agency's campaign finance team, told Ms. Reno in a meeting late last week that new evidence had revived questions about whether Mr. Gore had been truthful to investigators about his fund-raising activities. Mr. Gore has been questioned five times under oath, most recently in a four-hour interview on April 18 at the vice-presidential residence. Prosecutors were dissatisfied with Mr. Gore's answers during the interview, which was conducted in a far more confrontational manner than previous sessions had been, the officials said. At times, Mr. Gore reacted angrily to the questions, which covered an array of issues related to his fund-raising. Politically, the resurgence of an issue that had seemed to be running out of steam could not come at a worse time for Mr. Gore, who has been trying to reinvigorate his presidential candidacy. The reemergence of campaign finance problems could hobble the vice president with legal trouble and provide a potent weapon for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee, who has vowed to make Mr. Gore's fund-raising a central issue. Mr. Gore, campaigning in Minnesota today, was asked by a reporter whether he knew about the special counsel's recommendation. ''You're privy to news I don't have,'' he said, seeming a bit startled by the question. James F. Neal, Mr. Gore's personal lawyer, did not return calls placed to his law office in Nashville. So far, there is no indication that Ms. Reno has reached a decision on Mr. Conrad's recommendation. In 1997 and then again in 1998, she would not appoint an independent counsel to investigate Mr. Gore, over the objections of F.B.I. Director Louis J. Freeh and several senior Justice Department officials. The resurgent inquiry is focused on several issues that the Justice Department has investigated for years. These include a fund-raising appearance by Mr. Gore at a Buddhist temple in California in 1996; fund-raising coffees for campaign donors at the White House; and whether Mr. Gore was truthful when he told investigators he was unaware that fund-raising telephone calls he made from the White House in 1995 and 1996 were intended to raise both soft money, for general campaign purposes, and hard money, for specific re-election expenses. Mr. Conrad would not discuss the matter today. In testimony before a Senate panel on Wednesday, he was asked whether he had discussed the appointment of a special counsel related to Mr. Gore or the questions that he posed to Mr. Gore in the interview. The investigation has remained a highly confidential matter in the Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Mr. Freeh, who has long urged an independent investigation of Mr. Gore, has met privately in recent weeks with lawmakers in the House and Senate to avoid being asked to appear as a witness. The event, a luncheon attended by about 100 community leaders, became one of the first important campaign finance controversies to embroil the vice president. It is unclear what Mr. Gore has told investigators about the event that has drawn renewed scrutiny. In public statements, Mr. Gore at first said the event was community outreach, not fund-raising. Later he said it was ''finance related.'' An official with knowledge of the interview today said that Mr. Gore had also been asked about more than 100 coffee sessions held at the White House to reward past donors. Mr. Gore insisted in the interview that the coffees had not been fund-raisers, an official said today. The event at the temple was not among the subjects the Justice Department was investigating in late 1997 when Ms. Reno first considered seeking an independent counsel to investigate Mr. Gore. Ms. Reno instead pondered a single question: Did 45 fund-raising phone calls that Mr. Gore had made from his White House office violate an 1883 civil service law that barred elected officials from using government offices to raise donations covered by federal election law? Over Mr. La Bella's and Mr. Freeh's strong objections, Ms. Reno concluded that Mr. Gore's actions had been lawful. ''Evidence found by the investigators shows that the vice president solicited only soft money in these calls, not hard money,'' she said. Soft money donations fall outside federal election law. The next year, campaign finance prosecutors focused on whether Mr. Gore had lied to investigators in the initial inquiry into his fund-raising phone calls. Most of Ms. Reno's advisers, including Robert S. Litt, an  influential political deputy at the department, urged her to appoint an independent counsel. But again, Ms. Reno declined to do so. Mr. Conrad's aides are continuing to investigate whether Mr. Gore lied when he insisted that he did not know the difference between regulated ''hard money'' and unrestricted ''soft money.'' Mr. Gore had repeatedly told investigators that he believed his White House telephone calls were only used to raise soft-money donations, which are not limited by campaign law. But a belatedly disclosed fund-raising memo by David M. Strauss, a deputy chief of staff to the vice president, suggested to investigators that in the 1997 inquiry, Mr. Gore might not have been truthful about what he had known about his phone calls. According to the memo and other recently released documents, the former White House chief of staff, Leon A. Panetta, and three other witnesses recalled that the hard money/soft money breakdown was discussed at a meeting where Mr. Gore was present. Ten or eleven other participants in the meeting could not recall that discussion. Mr. Panetta also recalled that the vice president seemed attentive when there was a discussion of how money would be split among party accounts. In a 1998 interview with the F.B.I., Mr. Gore said he had often been inattentive to detail at fund-raising meetings and that he sometimes missed parts of them, notes from the interview show. He told the F.B.I. that ''he drank a lot of iced tea during meetings, which could have necessitated a restroom break.'' After the vice president's April 18 interview with investigators, Mr. Gore played down the significance to reporters, saying he was not a focus of the investigation. ''I answered every question,'' he said.
 A WILLING RUNNING MATE  Most Democrats or Republicans feign modesty and decline to comment substantively if they win speculative mention as a possible vice-presidential choice. Not Housing Secretary Andrew M. Cuomo. Asked yesterday on a trip to Israel whether he would agree to be Al Gore's running mate, if asked, he shot back in a New York second: Yes. Or, Mr. Cuomo went on, he might follow in the footsteps of his father, Mario, and run for governor of New York in 2002. Meanwhile, back in Minnesota, Mr. Gore was asked how the search was progressing for a running mate. ''Don't have a short list yet,'' he replied.
 Oil and gas money has been the essential lubricant of Gov George W Bush's political career, and is now fueling his run for president; at least 25 of his top fund-raisers are connected to oil business, mostly in Texas; Bush has remained largely mute on recent spike in gasoline prices, but has blamed Clinton administration for policies that discourage oil exploration and contribute to high prices at pumps (M) Oil and gas money has been the essential lubricant of Gov. George W. Bush's political career. Oil and gas money has been the essential lubricant of Gov. George W. Bush's political career. In the current presidential contest, Governor Bush has raised 15 times more money from oil and gas interests than Vice President Al Gore; his biggest lifetime patrons are employees of the Enron Oil Company and at least 25 of his top fund-raisers, the Pioneers, are connected to the oil business. Mr. Bush has received financial support from many of the biggest names in the Texas ''oil patch'': the Hunt brothers, the Bass family, A. R. Sanchez Jr., Kenneth Lay, Roy Huffington and David and Charles Koch. The second largest source of contributions for his presidential campaign is the Houston law firm Vinson & Elkins, which prides itself on the size and reach of its oil and gas practice. Mr. Bush has remained largely mute on the recent spike in gasoline prices, even as Mr. Gore loudly accuses oil companies of price gouging, antitrust violations and collusion. Mr. Bush blames the Clinton administration for environmental and energy policies that discourage oil exploration and that have contributed to the high prices consumers, particularly in the vote-rich Midwest, are paying at the gas pumps. While he supports a new Federal Trade Commission investigation, Mr. Bush has not even hinted that oil industry greed could be at the root of the recent price increases. Mr. Bush said that the administration has shown a lack of leadership on the issue and called on President Clinton to lean harder on oil-producing countries to ''open the spigots'' to bring gasoline prices down. ''He himself came out of the oil and gas business in Midland, so his soft stance on the current oil crisis is understandable,'' said Craig McDonald of Texans for Public Justice, a watchdog group in Austin. ''Bush's financial support comes heavily from the oil industry. They are the kingmakers that put him in the governor's mansion and are the kingmakers that will try to put him in the White House because his policies coincide with their interests.'' In the current campaign, Mr. Bush has received $1.54 million from people employed in the oil and gas business and related industries. According to Federal Election Commission filings compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics, individuals from 670 oil-related interests contributed to the Bush campaign, from $250 contributions from Texas gas station owners to scores of $1,000 donations from executives of the nation's biggest oil companies, gas pipeline concerns and oil field service companies. Mr. Gore has received less than $100,000 in contributions from people associated with the oil business. No single energy-related organization provided as much as $10,000 to the Gore campaign. According to another study published earlier this year, four of Mr. Bush's top five career patrons are in the oil and gas business. The study, by the Center for Public Integrity, looked at Mr. Bush's campaigns for Congress, the governor's office and the presidency, as well as donations for renovations of the Texas governor's office and Mr. Bush's inaugural celebrations. The four concerns are Enron, the Sanchez family of Laredo, Tex., Vinson & Elkins and the Bass family of Fort Worth. Together they have given more than $1.5 million to advance Mr. Bush's political prospects. Mr. Bush drew substantial support from oil interests in his unsuccessful run for Congress from West Texas in 1978. According to federal campaign reports and local newspaper accounts, roughly half of Mr. Bush's campaign treasury came from friends and acquaintances in the Texas oil business. That year, The Midland Reporter-Telegram, in the heart of the West Texas ''oil patch,'' enthusiastically endorsed the young Mr. Bush, citing his experience in the oil fields.
 If Mr. Rostovsky tackles the spiritual realm, Julie Mehretu seems intent on creating an elaborately stratified social cosmos in a diptych titled ''Arcadia and Bushwick Burning.'' Bars of modernist color float like continents against a neutral ground. Drawn over them in ink are webs of images: topographical maps snarled with architectural forms, sooty clouds of dots and dashes like aerial views of population centers. The results suggest a conceptual version of history painting, with hand-wrought depictions of loose data shifting and weaving through cyberspace.
 State of Texas executes Gary Graham with express backing of Gov George W Bush after parole board votes 12 to 5 to reject a request for clemency and after US Supreme Court declines to review case by a 5-to-4 vote; Graham proclaims innocence in 1981 murder of Bobby Lambert and says he is being murdered by state; Bush's demeanor suggests a sensitivity not only to passions that Graham's case has inflamed but also to his own need to project an impression of approaching such responsibilities with utmost thoughtfulness and seriousness; photos (M) With Gov. George W. Bush's backing and his somberly stated belief that ''justice is being done,'' the State of Texas tonight executed Gary Graham, who had been convicted for the 1981 murder of a man outside a Houston supermarket. The execution was carried out even though 5 of the 18 members of the Bush-appointed parole board argued against it and the United States Supreme Court divided sharply over the issue, declining to review the case by a 5-to-4 vote. With Gov. George W. Bush's backing and his somberly stated belief that ''justice is being done,'' the State of Texas tonight executed Gary Graham, who had been convicted for the 1981 murder of a man outside a Houston supermarket. The execution was carried out even though 5 of the 18 members of the Bush-appointed parole board argued against it and the United States Supreme Court divided sharply over the issue, declining to review the case by a 5-to-4 vote. When the moment of Mr. Graham's execution finally arrived, Mr. Bush did not merely issue a written statement but spoke to a crowd of reporters in a solemn voice that contradicted his often light-hearted nature. His facial expression and his words matched his tone. ''This is a responsibility I take very seriously,'' Mr. Bush said, reading from a statement, ''because the final determination of innocence or guilt is among the most profound and serious decisions a person can make. I recognize that there are good people who oppose the death penalty. I have heard their message and I respect their heartfelt point of view.'' Mr. Graham, 36, died at 8:49 p.m. central time, becoming the 135th person put to death in Texas since Mr. Bush became governor five and a half years ago. That statistic, combined with Mr. Bush's prominence as the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, partly explained why the case received such scrutiny from news organizations. Earlier in the week, Mr. Bush had said that if the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles authorized Mr. Graham's execution, he had no power to grant Mr. Graham a reprieve,  an interpretation of Texas law with which some legal experts disagreed. But Mr. Bush made no mention of that tonight as he endorsed the board's decision. His demeanor suggested a sensitivity not only to the passions that Mr. Graham's case had inflamed but also to his own need to project an impression of approaching such responsibilities with the utmost thoughtfulness and seriousness. Mr. Bush's campaign advisers said they are conscious of and have discussed the importance of his tone and bearing when discussing the death penalty, but they said his decisions in each case were never subjected to political considerations and were entirely his own. And, indeed, there is little evidence that Mr. Bush's fervent advocacy of the death penalty carries any political risks. Though recent polls have shown some softening in public support of the death penalty, the surveys also show that roughly two-thirds of Americans still favor it. David R. Dow, a professor of law at the University of Houston, said the last-minute uncertainty that descended over Mr. Graham's execution reflected how sophisticated his lawyers were and how sensitive Mr. Bush and the State of Texas were to the intensity of attention to the case. The case also came as the capital punishment debate deepens, provoked by advances in DNA technology, studies that question the fairness with which the death penalty is administered and the emergence of Mr. Bush, who presides over a state that executes more inmates than any other, as a presidential candidate. Had Mr. Bush taken any kind of action to stop Mr. Graham's death, it would have been the second time this month that he had intervened to halt an execution in defiance of the board's recommendation. Before June 1, he had never done so, although he did concur in 1998 with the board's vote to commute the death sentence of Henry Lee Lucas, a confessed serial killer, to life in prison. Several political analysts said one challenge before Mr. Bush was not to come across as vulnerable to public pressures or unsteady in his convictions. Mr. Bush has repeatedly assailed Vice President Al Gore as someone who bends too readily with the political winds. ''The most important thing for him to do is remain consistent,'' said Don Sipple, a Republican strategist. Mr. Sipple said he believed it was voters' impressions of Mr. Bush's constancy that explained the high marks he received in many recent opinion polls for his leadership skills. Several analysts said public support for the death penalty was strong enough for Mr. Bush to rest assured that he was on the right side of the issue. Mr. Gore also supports the death penalty and has been reticent to challenge Mr. Bush on the brisk rate of executions in Texas. But Mr. Bush said that in this case he could not do even that. A 64-year old clause in the Texas Constitution says that the governor ''shall have the power to grant one reprieve in any capital case,'' and only one reprieve. Mr. Bush and lawyers for the state have interpreted that to mean that because Governor Richards had granted Mr. Graham the reprieve in 1993, Mr. Bush was unable to.
 Max Karpel letter says that as president of Yale Political Union he has met many 1960's alumni who were not radical but were nevertheless politically aware, at time when George W Bush was spending his time branding freshmen at fraternity house Re ''George Bush's 60's Were Real, Too'' (Op-Ed, June 22): David Frum misses the point of the recent coverage of George W. Bush's lack of campus activism at Yale. As president of the Yale Political Union in 1994, I came into contact with visiting 1960's alumni of the organization who, like Mr. Bush, were not campus radicals. But unlike Mr. Bush, they were full participants in the debates of that era. What is surprising about Mr. Bush, given the fact that he is now a leading politician, is not that he wasn't a Yippie; it's that he wasn't even your average politically aware Yalie. Re ''George Bush's 60's Were Real, Too'' (Op-Ed, June 22): David Frum misses the point of the recent coverage of George W. Bush's lack of campus activism at Yale. As president of the Yale Political Union in 1994, I came into contact with visiting 1960's alumni of the organization who, like Mr. Bush, were not campus radicals. But unlike Mr. Bush, they were full participants in the debates of that era. What is surprising about Mr. Bush, given the fact that he is now a leading politician, is not that he wasn't a Yippie; it's that he wasn't even your average politically aware Yalie. If, as Mr. Frum argues, the radicals had not really emerged yet at Yale in 1968, then why did Mr. Bush not follow the lead of William F. Buckley Jr., who had begun his crusade against liberalism in New Haven 20 years earlier? The answer seems to be that Mr. Bush was too busy branding freshmen at his fraternity house.
 President Clinton, seeking to boost political fortunes of his wife Hillary for US Senate and Vice President Al Gore for President by condemning Republican tax cut proposals, calls 'Bush-Lazio tax plan' dangerous to country's prosperity (M) President Clinton has sought to boost the political fortunes of his wife and his vice president by condemning Republican tax cut proposals -- the ''Bush-Lazio tax plan,'' in his words -- as dangerous to the country's prosperity. President Clinton has sought to boost the political fortunes of his wife and his vice president by condemning Republican tax cut proposals -- the ''Bush-Lazio tax plan,'' in his words -- as dangerous to the country's prosperity. Mr. Lazio has yet to endorse Texas Gov. George W. Bush's proposed tax cut. ''The first casualty of any Clinton campaign has historically been the truth,'' said Dan McLagan, a spokesman for Mr. Lazio. Even as he jabbed at Mr. Lazio, the president made the case that Mrs. Clinton's Senate race and Vice President Al Gore's bid for the presidency should be decided on issues, not attacks. ''I believe if you have a Bush-Lazio tax plan, and it passed, you'd all be better off the day after because all of you can afford to come here today,'' Mr. Clinton told the 25 donors gathered at a Georgetown home for seafood canneloni, veal medallions and lemon souffle. ''But you wouldn't be better off if it led to an increase in interest rates. In two years, the impact it would have on the markets, on the overall economy, on the unemployment rate: you'd be worse off. And the overall economy would be worse off, and we wouldn't have the money to do things.''
 Oil prices show no sign of retreating a day after OPEC decides to increase production, and lawmakers step up calls for investigations into 'price gouging' in gasoline market; lawmakers are especially concerned about high prices in Midwest; some officials say price of gasoline in Midwest may have finally leveled off; new supplies are coming on market, refiners have increased production of new gas and wholesale prices have fallen; Federal Trade Commission, which is investigating whether soaring prices could be result of industry collusion, expects to report its finding to Congress by third week of July; FTC is expected to begin issuing subpoenas within days, and some lawmakers want industry chief executives to be required to testify on matter; Pres Clinton, facing political firestorm over issue, says he believes there is 'no economic explanation' for high Midwest prices; Vice Pres Al Gore, presumed Democratic presidential candidate, reiterates his belief that industry collusion may be stoking problems; industry officials blame supply problems, low inventories of gasoline and June 1 switch to cleaner fuel, and they point to recent Congressional Research Service report suggesting that cleaner gas mandate and pipeline problems added 50 cents to price of gallon of gas in some parts of Midwest; graph; photo (M) President Clinton, facing a political firestorm over the issue, said he believed there was ''no economic explanation'' for the high Midwest prices. Vice President Al Gore, the presumed Democratic presidential candidate, reiterated his belief that industry collusion may be stoking the problem. The runup has become a major political issue, as Mr. Gore and officials at the Environmental Protection Agency have sought to deflect criticism that the high prices are because of the mandate for cleaner-burning reformulated gas. They have suggested some companies may be making too much money at the expense of drivers. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed Republican presidential nominee and a former oilman who has taken almost $1.5 million in political contributions from the oil and gas industry, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, has said he welcomes the investigation into possible industry collusion. But he blames the Clinton administration for not doing a better job in cajoling OPEC to increase production. Some lawmakers in Congress also took a swipe at OPEC today, saying they would introduce a bill to allow the Justice Department to look into possible antitrust violations by the cartel.
 Martin Diennor letter on choices that he, Al Gore and many other young people were forced to make during Vietnam era You remind us of how Al Gore's generation was affected by the Vietnam War. What I found particularly striking in the article was the reminder that events forced some of us to make a choice to do something we did not want to do. You remind us of how Al Gore's generation was affected by the Vietnam War. What I found particularly striking in the article was the reminder that events forced some of us to make a choice to do something we did not want to do.
 Democratic and Republican strategists acknowledge that Ralph Nader, previously dismissed as fringe third-party candidate who would fade quickly, has emerged as more politically potent than Patrick J Buchanan and could deeply complicate candidacy of Vice Pres Al Gore; of particular import is Nader's increasing support from organized labor, on display as Teamster Pres James P Hoffa appears with Nader at news conference and ridicules Gore; Nader is expected to capture Green Party nomination at its upcoming convention; photo (M) Months after they dismissed Ralph Nader as a fringe third-party candidate who would fade quickly, Democratic and Republican strategists now say that he has emerged as more politically potent than Patrick J. Buchanan and could deeply complicate the candidacy of Vice President Al Gore. Months after they dismissed Ralph Nader as a fringe third-party candidate who would fade quickly, Democratic and Republican strategists now say that he has emerged as more politically potent than Patrick J. Buchanan and could deeply complicate the candidacy of Vice President Al Gore. Even so, Mr. Nader is already forcing Mr. Gore to compete more vigorously for the active support of labor and other groups that are reliably Democratic. And many pollsters and analysts said that in a tight race with Gov. George W. Bush, a few points could make a difference -- and force Mr. Gore to reconsider his electoral calculations in important states. In a close race, Mr. Nader could tip the balance in Michigan, Ohio and other swing states of the Midwest. In California, where Mr. Gore is running comfortably ahead, a Field Poll this week showed Mr. Nader drawing 7 percent. And a Quinnipiac University poll in Connecticut this week showed he had 9 percent. Mr. Nader is also showing strength in New Mexico, Oregon and Washington. More troubling for some Democrats is that Mr. Nader, who has ridiculed Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush as sounding identical and has emphasized his record as a consumer and environmental advocate, is becoming more and more popular with organized labor. By campaigning aggressively against the China trade deal, which passed in the House last month, Mr. Nader has effectively capitalized on labor's distress with Mr. Gore for his support of the measure. In doing so, Mr. Nader has made Mr. Gore battle for a constituency that his campaign thought it could count on. In fact, pollsters say most of Mr. Nader's backers are not the swing voters that Mr. Gore needs to win over, but staunch Democrats who should already be on his side. ''The Bush people, I'm sure, are thrilled about Nader,'' said one of Mr. Gore's most senior aides. ''There is no distinction between Al Gore and George W. Bush when it comes to trade,'' Mr. Hoffa asserted after Mr. Nader met privately with the Teamsters' 24-member executive board. He added that Mr. Gore was ''wrong on trade'' and said, ''We agree wholeheartedly with what Mr. Nader has said.'' Mr. Nader won a standing ovation from the board. Imploring the audience to take him seriously, Mr. Nader said: ''People are always asking, 'Am I worried about taking votes away from Gore?' No. I'm worried about Gore taking votes away from me.'' Gore advisers said they had moved aggressively behind the scenes to try to keep Mr. Hoffa from endorsing Mr. Nader, to the point where they had directed projects through federal agencies that would use Teamsters. Those efforts may be paying off -- at least for now. ''We're not going to hurry to endorse,'' Mr. Hoffa said today. But even Gore aides said a Teamsters endorsement of the vice president seemed increasingly less likely. Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the assistant Democratic leader who is a Gore loyalist, contacted several labor leaders today, discouraging them from defecting to Mr. Nader. In an interview, he bluntly condemned Mr. Nader as a spoiler. Mr. Gore had never anticipated new headaches with labor, given that he had to struggle last fall to win the A.F.L.-C.I.O. endorsement against former Senator Bill Bradley. Now, not only have the Teamsters not rallied behind Mr. Gore, but he is also struggling for backing from the United Automobile Workers. The Teamsters have 1.4 million members; the U.A.W. has 800,000. Earlier this year, most political strategists viewed Mr. Buchanan as the biggest threat -- and a potentially big problem for Mr. Bush. He has run twice for the Republican presidential nomination, even winning the critical New Hampshire primary in 1996. And if he wins the backing of the Reform Party, whose nomination he is seeking, he would draw $12.6 million in federal money. But even if Mr. Buchanan gets that money, strategists now say Mr. Nader has a greater potential impact on the race because polls show that he takes his support almost exclusively from Mr. Gore. Mr. Buchanan, with backing both from protectionist Democrats and conservative Republicans, does not have as much potential to wound Mr. Bush. ''I would hate to be Al Gore looking at the third-party horizon this year,'' said J. David Gillespie, a political scientist at Presbyterian College in Clinton, S.C., who is an authority on third-party candidacies. ''Nader's draw in key states may be very crucial in determining the outcome of this election.'' The strategy of the Gore and Bush campaigns thus far has been to ignore Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan, and not do anything to raise their profiles. Joe Andrew, the national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, echoing some Gore advisers, insisted that he was not at all unsettled by Mr. Nader. ''I'm not worried about it,'' he said. ''It doesn't make much difference if Ralph Nader is an angel or not: people aren't going to throw their votes away.'' A strategist for Mr. Gore put it this way: ''In June, you're wasting your energy if you worry about these things. In October, it would be worrisome.''
 John C Grannis letter sees hypocrisy in Al Gore's decision to serve in Vietnam even though he recognized war's evil Your June 21 front-page article portrays Al Gore's decision to serve in Vietnam as a moral judgment. What choice did the boys back in Tennessee have, Mr. Gore reasoned. We all had a choice, no matter what our state or station. Like Mr. Gore, many of us saw the evil of the Vietnam War, but unlike him, we refused to cooperate, on moral grounds. Your June 21 front-page article portrays Al Gore's decision to serve in Vietnam as a moral judgment. What choice did the boys back in Tennessee have, Mr. Gore reasoned. We all had a choice, no matter what our state or station. Like Mr. Gore, many of us saw the evil of the Vietnam War, but unlike him, we refused to cooperate, on moral grounds. Mr. Gore chose to do what was expected of him. When a person sees the morally correct path but chooses the other, there's a word for it. It's called hypocrisy.
 Re ''George Bush's 60's Were Real, Too'' (Op-Ed, June 22): Re ''George Bush's 60's Were Real, Too'' (Op-Ed, June 22):
 William S Kessler letter says significance of George W Bush's C average at Yale, which Kessler also attended, is that Bush felt free to squander opportunity as just another amenity to which he was entitled; adds that Bush's smug complacency contributes to his cavalier stands toward those less fortunate I entered Yale as a freshman in 1967, the year that George W. Bush was a senior, but I did not know him there. As a Jewish kid from New York, I was far removed from his social circle. I entered Yale as a freshman in 1967, the year that George W. Bush was a senior, but I did not know him there. As a Jewish kid from New York, I was far removed from his social circle. The significance of Mr. Bush's C average is not lack of intelligence but that when presented with the opportunity of a Yale education, he felt free to squander it. Yale was just one of the amenities those of his background expected as a matter of course, not necessary to take seriously. The smug complacency Mr. Bush showed then has apparently continued in his cavalier stands toward those less fortunate, and is far more relevant in choosing a president than intelligence.
