 Vice President Al Gore said in Lexington, Ky., today that profit reported by oil companies earlier this year suggested that ''big oil is gouging American consumers.'' Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic candidate for president, said he was seeking to have the governors of states most affected by the higher price meet with Energy Secretary Bill Richardson and Carol Browner, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. The governors and administration officials should work together to determine whether the oil companies are fixing prices or otherwise colluding, Mr. Gore said.
 Special report, Al Gore's Journey, fifth in series of articles on lives of presidential candidates; chronicles Gore's years as undergraduate at Harvard University, where he agonized during social upheavals of 1960's over US involvement in Vietnam War that was to subsequently shape career in politics; photos (L) Al Gore arrived at Harvard in the fall of 1965 so sure of himself and his place in the world that he hadn't even bothered applying anywhere else. ''I had the idea it was the best,'' he said simply, in one of several interviews about his college years. ''I knew President Kennedy had gone there.'' By his second day on campus, the 17-year-old Mr. Gore was out knocking on doors, in a successful campaign to become president of the freshman council. Al Gore arrived at Harvard in the fall of 1965 so sure of himself and his place in the world that he hadn't even bothered applying anywhere else. ''I had the idea it was the best,'' he said simply, in one of several interviews about his college years. ''I knew President Kennedy had gone there.'' By his second day on campus, the 17-year-old Mr. Gore was out knocking on doors, in a successful campaign to become president of the freshman council. In those days, women were not allowed in men's rooms after 11 p.m., and coats and ties were still required at dinner. Yet all of this genteel tradition, and much of what Mr. Gore had in mind when he signed up for Jack Kennedy's Harvard, was on the way out even then. Vietnam was not a world away any more, and American involvement there was escalating constantly. In Al Gore's sophomore year,  Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara visited the university to give a speech and was mobbed by screaming students who climbed on his car and rocked it while he sat inside. During his junior year, protesters organized by the Students for a Democratic Society held a recruiter for Dow, the maker of napalm, in a classroom for five hours. In his last semester, demonstrators took over the main administration building, University Hall, only to be forced out the next day by local and state police swinging clubs and wearing riot helmets. And exactly four years after he had first arrived, the recently graduated, recently enlisted Mr. Gore returned to campus in short hair and an Army uniform -- an inherently provocative act in militantly anti-military Cambridge in September 1969. Students in Harvard Yard jeered at the sight of him. Certainly, both the freeze-frame of that man in the uniform, looking more surprised than he probably should have been, and the vice president's view of it, more than 30 years later, say a few things about Al Gore. There he was, going off to fight in a war he hated, after a solid year of agonizing which everyone who knew him believed could only have ended exactly as it did. This rings especially true in light of Mr. Gore's rigorous upbringing, a childhood in which adult notions of responsibility were constantly reinforced by his hard-working parents. It seems unlikely that their ultra-dependable only son, who carried their hopes and was made so responsible for their happiness, would ever have let someone else go to war in his place. Mr. Gore's senior thesis adviser at Harvard, the presidential scholar Richard Neustadt, is pretty sure he told young Al that serving would preserve the possibility of a political career, the career both his mother and father wanted for him. And Mr. Gore told friends it was, perversely, in going to war that he could probably best support the antiwar movement -- by helping his father, Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee, win re-election. The senator's stand against the war was wildly unpopular  in the Volunteer State, and if his son had stayed home, he would have handed a campaign issue to his father's opponent. Interestingly, Mr. Gore apparently believed all along that his father would lose in 1970 -- and he did. Still, the young man felt obligated to do whatever he could to help, and as he marched off to join the service seemed to feel he was sacrificing himself to two lost causes, in Vietnam and Tennessee. Yet the final decision appears to have hinged more on Mr. Gore's sense of himself as a Tennesseean -- and as the moral man his parents had constantly prodded him to be. In the end, he was one of only about a dozen in Harvard's class of '69 who served in Vietnam. When Mr. Gore returned to campus in his uniform, to say goodbye to Mr. Neustadt and others, he never dreamed that anyone could fail to see this, and would somehow miss that he was really one of them. There is much that is instantly recognizable in that picture of Al Gore at the end of his college days. He is a man who in the end probably chose the harder of two hard roads, but someone who also seems to have made that road harder than it had to be. Soon enough, Mr. Gore put the earnest student-government work of planning mixers and lodging official protests about room-cleaning behind him. He and the friends he made in Mower B, his dorm in the North Yard, pooled their record collections and listened to a lot of Dylan, Motown, Beatles, Buffalo Springfield. He played poker, house football and took up handball because his group considered squash ''too Harvard.'' Both Mr. Gore and Mr. Jones, who grew up in Texas and lives there still, recall nearly killing an elm tree near where they lived in a monthlong knife-throwing contest, ''testing our ability in that backwoods skill,'' the vice president said. While others might have been running from their roots, Mr. Gore was busy living through his, wearing bib overalls and subscribing to The Carthage Courier, the paper from the small Tennessee town where his family had their farm. He hoped it might provide inspiration for the novel he was trying to write, set in Carthage and populated with folks he had known. ''It meandered like the Caney Fork River,'' Mr. Gore said recently, spoofing his former literary aspirations. He spent hours at the typewriter, not always productively. At the end of their freshman year, Mr. Gore, Mr. Jones and a couple of other friends assembled a musical revue that they actually took on the road -- for one performance, at a Wellesley coffeehouse. ''It was kind of like the Little Rascals: 'Let's put on a show!' '' said Michael Kapetan, now a sculptor at the University of Michigan. ''I was the stand-up comic,'' Mr. Gore said, ''if you can believe that.'' And sure enough, there he is, billed as ''the highly respected professor of animal husbandry and the curative sciences, Doctor Albert A. Gore'' who ''has promised to favor us with readings from the society pages of The Carthage Courier, including news on Wilber Gridley's recent trip to Bristol.'' Mr. Gore does not remember the show as an unqualified success: ''The women of Wellesley were in between puzzled and amused,'' he said. ''Not quite the reaction we were shooting for.'' Also in college, he became a fan of Star Trek, adored the movie ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' and showed great enthusiasm for astronomy, as he still does. ''It's one of the things he loves about living at the Observatory,'' said his oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, referring to the official vice presidential residence at the United States Naval Observatory. ''At dinner parties, there's always a march to the telescope, and it always seems like he's having the most fun.'' His studies did not really engage Mr. Gore until his junior year, when he took Mr. Neustadt's course about presidential decision-making. When the class re-enacted decisions made during the Cuban missile crisis, he played President Kennedy. He got his first A's that year, after a string of C's -- and even a D in biology as a sophomore, which prompted one friend to joke that having failed evolution, he was all set for a career in Tennessee politics. When energized, though, Mr. Gore did have quite a ride academically. After taking Mr. Neustadt's course, he switched his major to government and nagged his professor into giving him a private reading course, and into overseeing his senior thesis on how television was changing the presidency. From what he saw in class, Mr. Neustadt said, Mr. Gore ''is not afraid of decisions, but not precipitous about it, either, like the early Harry Truman saying, 'How many decisions did I make today?' '' Almost as a throwaway, Mr. Neustadt added that ''as intelligences go'' among presidents of the 20th century, only ''Teddy Roosevelt might have stood higher'' than Mr. Gore -- who, by the way, received an A-minus in Mr. Neustadt's Government 154. Yet if the challenge for George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, is to prove his smarts, Mr. Gore's is precisely the opposite -- to show that he is a regular guy despite a perceived surplus of gravitas, which at least some Americans seem to find intimidating, boring, or, as he himself worries, just weird. Asked if he thinks America wants an intellectual for a president, Mr. Gore said, ''I don't think book smarts are necessarily the highest qualification to lead so much as good values, good judgment, and a willingness to fight for the right thing. These things are all cartoon images anyway -- Truman was extremely well-read, for example. But if you give people the impression you're a smartypants, that's no good for sure.'' Mr. Gore is keenly sensitive, though, to just such impressions, and he really does not like to talk about some of his more obscure preoccupations. His appreciation of science really exploded in his senior year, when Mr. Gore also got to know Roger Revelle, the oceanographer who did much of the pioneering work on the greenhouse effect and global warming -- a major focus of Mr. Gore's 1992 environmental tome, ''Earth in the Balance.'' When Mr. Revelle shared his research with the students, Mr. Gore was hooked. ''It felt like such a privilege to be able to hear about the readouts from some of those measurements in a group of no more than a dozen undergraduates,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Here was this teacher presenting something not years old but fresh out of the lab, with profound implications for our future!'' ''He was just as influential as any of the others, but more in personal terms,'' Mr. Gore said. For the course, Mr. Gore prepared a ''psychobiography'' of his father and learned, for example, that his father's older brother Reginald, who had been disabled in World War I, had been the one expected to succeed. ''I gained a sense of perspective on him that I'd needed,'' he said, talking about his father. Mr. Gore had already found an important friend in Martin Peretz, who taught him in a seminar his freshman year, ''Problems of Post-Industrial Society.'' Along with an introduction to Marx and Freud, Mr. Gore got a booster who later bought The New Republic and has tirelessly plugged his former pupil's presidential prospects through the years. They also bonded during his senior year, at a time when Mr. Peretz, like Mr. Gore, was increasingly disenchanted with the tactics of the left. Yet Mr. Gore himself says that everything he learned in the classrooms of Harvard was dwarfed by the emotional education he got from Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson in those first years after they met at his senior prom at St. Albans in Washington. A year younger than Mr. Gore, Tipper Aitcheson, who grew up in Washington's Virginia suburbs, joined him in Boston his sophomore year, studying at Garland Junior College and then Boston University. Mr. Gore says he knew almost right away, even at the age of 17, that he wanted to spend the rest of his life with this woman. That was one thing, at least, that he knew when he arrived freshman year and was even more sure of on graduation day. So much else, though, seemed up for grabs. In Mr. Gore's junior year, said Mr. Tyson, who roomed with him that year, ''came the rev-o-lu-tion. The war came into our living room with the body-bag count every day. Every day, religiously, our gurus were Walter Cronkite and Eric Sevareid.'' Mr. Tyson, who is black, quit the football team because he no longer wanted to be a ''hired gladiator'' for white alumni; he said he and Mr. Gore talked themselves to sleep in their bunk beds many nights that year, endlessly discussing race and the war. Mr. Gore read ''Soul on Ice'' by Eldridge Cleaver and ''The Autobiography of Malcolm X'' and they discussed the books, too. ''I was driving with Tipper from Boston to Washington, and it happened when we were on the road,'' Mr. Gore said. ''It was devastating. When we arrived, my mother was downtown at an auction house and needed a ride home because the rioting had started. I don't think I ever saw her scared, but as I drove up, stores on either side were having glass fronts crushed in and there was looting. She walked rather calmly but quickly as I drove up.'' The first night the roommates were together again, Mr. Tyson said, he and Mr. Gore both cried for their country and stayed up until 4 a.m. talking. ''He was so upset because it had happened in Tennessee. I just wanted to curse,'' Mr. Tyson said. ''It was very, very sad, and we were sick from watching our nation burn up. You didn't want to believe what you were seeing and what had happened. How were we going to stay together as a people?'' Mr. Gore spent some of that tense summer in Memphis, taking a course in Tennessee history at Memphis State, probably on some level in preparation for a career in politics, though at the time he felt completely disillusioned. Unsure what he wanted to do, he was considering journalism. That summer, too, Mr. Gore helped his father write a short speech for the Democratic Convention in Chicago, where he stayed with his parents while others his age were fighting with police in Grant Park. Inside the convention hall, both Gores shared the demonstrators' bitterness: ''Four years ago our party and the nominee of our party promised the people that American boys would not be sent to fight in a land war in Asia,'' Senator Gore told the convention, to huge applause from supporters of Eugene McCarthy, the antiwar candidate, who had been denied the nomination in favor of Vice President Hubert Humphrey. ''They voted for our distinguished leader, President Lyndon B. Johnson, but they got the policies of Senator Goldwater.'' Yet, back at school in the fall, Mr. Gore and most of his friends continued to shy away from various protest groups. Mr. Gore recalls that he while he agreed with their antiwar sentiments, he found students who were protesting the presence of R.O.T.C. on campus wrongheaded and even kind of juvenile. He thought taking anger about the war out on the university was plain illogical. ''It seemed silly to me to target the administration of a private university,'' he said recently. And one thing he has in common with his opponent, Mr. Bush, who experienced the 1960's very differently, is that he was never seriously tempted by anti-establishment politics. Each stuck close to his father's view of the war, though those views were of course quite different. Mr. Gore not only did not hate the establishment, he revered it. He had been raised by a New Dealer who believed in nothing so much as the power of government to change people's lives for the better. When the government disappointed him -- ''when America uncharacteristically lost its way,'' as he puts it now -- he felt deeply hurt, and declared that he wanted nothing to do with his father's line of work. In Mr. Gore's senior year, when police moved in and beat a number of the students occupying University Hall, Mr. Jones remembers his friend's reaction as ''the same reaction all Harvard people had, that suddenly all this talk about the fascist threat was real. On that day, we joined the ranks of paranoids who have people after them. But in Cambridge in the late '60's, a refusal to join fully in the revolution was itself a rebellion. Mr. Peretz said Mr. Gore ''called attention to himself by the moderation of his views. It took a kind of defiance to say, 'Let's not get carried away.' '' Mr. Peretz's principal memory of his former student on June 12, 1969 -- the day Mr. Gore graduated, with honors -- was that he seemed quite embarrassed by his father's bragging about him. As part of a planned protest, a number of Mr. Gore's classmates raised their fists and walked out halfway through the ceremonies. Mr. Gore stayed in his seat. But then, Mr. Gore did end up staging a one-man protest of sorts when he showed up in his uniform in Harvard Yard a few months later. That day, he was angry at the self-righteousness of kids who thought all decisions about the war were easy. And finally, in spite of himself, Al Gore was demonstrating after all. Al Gore's Journey This is the fifth in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future installments will examine George W. Bush's relationship with his father and the candidates' experiences in the military.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush addresses educators at De Anza College in heart of Silicon Valley and warns American schoolchildren are not being adequately prepared for demands of jobs in high technology; proposes spending additional $2.3 billion over five years in federal funds to improve math and science education in public schools; photo (M) In an area often regarded as the cradle of the digital revolution, Gov. George W. Bush warned today that American schoolchildren were not being adequately prepared for the demands of jobs in high technology, and he proposed spending an additional $2.3 billion over five years in federal funds to improve math and science education in public schools. ''I know we can do better,'' Mr. Bush told educators at De Anza College here in the heart of the Silicon Valley. The Texas governor frequently cited tests of children in 21 countries, including the United States, as yardsticks of just how much room for improvement there was. In an area often regarded as the cradle of the digital revolution, Gov. George W. Bush warned today that American schoolchildren were not being adequately prepared for the demands of jobs in high technology, and he proposed spending an additional $2.3 billion over five years in federal funds to improve math and science education in public schools. ''I know we can do better,'' Mr. Bush told educators at De Anza College here in the heart of the Silicon Valley. The Texas governor frequently cited tests of children in 21 countries, including the United States, as yardsticks of just how much room for improvement there was. ''This is America,'' Mr. Bush said. ''There's no reason for us to be next to last in math. There's no reason for us to be last in physics. We're the greatest country in the world. We ought to be first.'' Beyond those exhortations to greatness, however, Mr. Bush talked little about the proposals he was making, which were spelled out instead in documents distributed by his aides. These plans were the latest in a series of education initiatives that Mr. Bush has made over the last three months, and they reflected his focus on education as an issue with which he can appeal to moderate voters. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, called for the federal government to spend an additional $1 billion over five years on the establishment of a Math and Science Partnership Fund to encourage universities and colleges to interact with public schools in ways that enhanced math and science instruction for children in kindergarten through the 12th grade. Mr. Bush proposed an additional $1 billion over five years to increase the value of the federal Pell grants that are given to low-income students to defray the cost of college education. Under the governor's plan, young people who have taken college-level math or science courses in high school can qualify for a grant that would be worth an additional $1,000. The average Pell grant, Mr. Bush's aides said, is worth about $3,000. Finally, Mr. Bush called for an additional $345 million over five years to encourage college graduates who majored in science or math to spend at least five years teaching in public schools in needy areas. Under current federal programs, graduates who do this can have $5,000 of their student loans forgiven or paid by the federal government. Mr. Bush would expand this amount to $17,500. But the governor was not merely articulating new policy today; he was spending time in a state that has tilted heavily Democratic over the last few years, but that he does not want to cede to Vice President Al Gore in the general election. California has more electoral votes, 54, than any other state, and Mr. Bush's trip here this week, which began on Monday and is scheduled to end on Wednesday, was his fourth swing through the state since the primary here on March 7. A statewide poll conducted by the Field organization and made public today showed Mr. Bush trailing Mr. Gore by 11 points, 46 percent to 35 percent, but several previous polls have portrayed a tighter race. Several times this week, Mr. Bush insisted that he could compete successfully in California by appealing to Hispanic voters, promoting his education plans and convincing people in the Silicon Valley that his economic and trade policies would benefit them. Although Mr. Bush would describe himself as a fiscal conservative, he has proposed spending billions of dollars in new federal money for education since the campaign began. Mr. Gore has proposed spending an even larger amount, and one of the educators with whom Mr. Bush met here today seemed to suggest that Mr. Bush could be more generous. In a decidedly unscripted moment, Barbara Illowsky, a math professor at De Anza College, told Mr. Bush that it would be terrific if he ''were able to raise as much money for education'' as he had for his presidential campaign and the Republican Party.
 News analysis on national spotlight on Texas Gov George W Bush as his state prepares to execute convicted murderer Gary Graham; Bush's challenge is to demonstrate, through tone of voice and set of jaw, that he feels full weight of responsibility (M) As Gov. George W. Bush confronts yet another closely scrutinized death penalty case this week, the immediate decision before him is one that has become remarkably familiar over the course of 134 executions in Texas during his five and a half years in office: whether or not to use his limited power to halt the next one. But now that Mr. Bush is running for president and the eyes of an entire nation are upon him as never before, he faces a second, amplified challenge. As Gov. George W. Bush confronts yet another closely scrutinized death penalty case this week, the immediate decision before him is one that has become remarkably familiar over the course of 134 executions in Texas during his five and a half years in office: whether or not to use his limited power to halt the next one. But now that Mr. Bush is running for president and the eyes of an entire nation are upon him as never before, he faces a second, amplified challenge. Because of the stakes involved, the emotions it stirs and the welling questions about the fairness of its administration, the death penalty has become one of the tests of Mr. Bush's seriousness, a quality he arguably comes by less easily than his levity or spunk. Mr. Bush and his aides have said that because of the circumstances of this case specifically and the boundaries of the Texas governor's powers  generally, he may have little or no discretion over Mr. Graham's fate once the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles renders its ruling on the matter this week. If the board authorizes execution, the most the governor can typically do is grant a one-time, 30-day reprieve. And Mr. Bush's ability to do even that in Mr. Graham's case is in question, since  Gov. Ann W. Richards granted such a reprieve to Mr. Graham in 1993. But whatever the limits on Mr. Bush's discretion, they do not alter the burden on his public comments and demeanor when the moment of decision comes. The capacity to do so is something that many Americans want in a president, said Professor Wayne, who, along with other political analysts, noted that there had been a few occasions when Mr. Bush failed to exhibit it. A profile of Mr. Bush in Talk magazine last year described a scene, which the governor and his aides have said was mischaracterized, in which he mocked the last-minute clemency pleas of Karla Faye Tucker, a convicted killer whom Texas ultimately executed. And there was a moment during a Republican presidential debate in early March when Mr. Bush laughed, perhaps somewhat nervously, when asked about a Texas lawyer who fell asleep during a trial that ended with  a death sentence for his client. Those examples are extreme. But there have been many other times when Mr. Bush, who seldom holds any private introspection up to public light, has responded to questions about capital punishment with strikingly terse answers conspicuously lifted from a well-worn script. Mr. Bush and his aides seem to be at least partly conscious of that and eager to cast his ruminations on death penalty cases as prolonged and profound. Earlier this month, for the first time since entering office, Mr. Bush granted a death-row inmate a 30-day reprieve, in defiance of the Board of Pardons and Paroles. The issue in the case was the possibility that further DNA testing could clarify the facts presented at trial, and Mr. Bush's decision allowed him to show that he was neither oblivious nor aloof to a central, scientific reason for the changing dynamics of the death penalty debate. On Monday, aboard the campaign plane that brought him out to the West Coast to begin a week of campaigning that he knew would be dominated by the latest scheduled execution in Texas, Mr. Bush was more voluble on the death penalty than usual. ''I harbor no ill will,'' Mr. Bush told reporters. ''I understand it's a very emotional issue for people. It's an issue where fine people disagree.'' Mr. Bush had clearly gone and done some research. He had just as clearly come to the conclusion that it was a good idea to let people know that.
 Paul Krugman Reckonings column on baby-boom generation as 'pig in the python' which poses narrow financial problem of paying for Social Security, and broader problem of US age distribution that will soon resemble that of Florida; says George W Bush's plan is all about meaningless contrast between investment returns; credits Al Gore with acknowledging that he would tap general budget to extend life of Social Security system (M) Yet the salesmanship surrounding George W. Bush's Social Security plan is all about the meaningless contrast between the returns that an unburdened individual can get on investments and the implicit return that a very-much-burdened Social Security system can offer. And Al Gore's new plan for subsidized retirement accounts also isn't about the real problems; it's a response to that salesmanship. That said, Mr. Gore's plan could have been worse. It won't break the budget; it probably will encourage somewhat more private saving. And, like Social Security itself, it will be progressive -- that is, it will tend to narrow disparities in wealth. You also have to give Mr. Gore some points for honesty. The details of his plan are fully spelled out; he has also come clean about how he will extend the life of the Social Security system -- namely, by transferring money over from the general budget. By contrast, Mr. Bush has said nothing about how much he plans to reduce benefits in return for allowing workers to invest their contributions elsewhere, let alone how he will deal with the overhang of obligations from the past. All he offers are magic asterisks: ''*details to be provided later.'' My guess is that if and when Mr. Bush finally does provide the details, the size of the proposed benefit cuts will start a political firestorm, forcing him to use general revenue to rescue Social Security after all. But that won't happen until after the election. And where will the money come from? Remember that Mr. Bush is also proposing huge tax cuts. Aside from eliminating a surplus that might have been used to help Social Security, those cuts will encourage the nation as a whole to consume more and save less, exactly the opposite of what an aging society should be doing.
 Dewmocratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore reiterates case for government-subsidized savings accounts in appearance before group of Democrats in Washington; says plan would hgelp families build wealth without putting guaranteed Social Security benefits at risk in stock market; contrast approach with that of Republican rival Gov George W Bush, who advocates setting up personal investment accounts within Social Security system by maintaining that his proposal will encourage lower- and middle-income people to save by adding program to supplement Social Security; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore set his case today for government-subsidized savings accounts, saying his plan would help families build wealth for retirement and other uses without putting their guaranteed Social Security benefits at risk in the stock market. Seeking to contrast his approach to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to create personal investment accounts within the Social Security system, Mr. Gore said his plan would encourage lower- and middle-income people to save by adding a program to supplement Social Security. Vice President Al Gore set his case today for government-subsidized savings accounts, saying his plan would help families build wealth for retirement and other uses without putting their guaranteed Social Security benefits at risk in the stock market. Seeking to contrast his approach to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to create personal investment accounts within the Social Security system, Mr. Gore said his plan would encourage lower- and middle-income people to save by adding a program to supplement Social Security. In a speech, the tone of which could have been heard either as robust populism or class warfare, Mr. Gore said his plan was intended not just for people ''who think comfortably about their savings over Scotch in the club looking out at the golf links, but also the ones who carefully try to make it all add up to the dream over a pressured half-hour break on the factory floor.'' In political terms, it gave Mr. Gore an opportunity to present a positive alternative to Mr. Bush's proposal to allow workers to invest a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes in the stock market. And in economic terms it addressed one of the nation's biggest weaknesses, the low rate of personal savings. Mr. Gore changed plans immediately after the speech, postponing until Wednesday a trip to Des Moines and instead flying to Washington in case his vote was needed in the Senate to break a tie over hate-crimes legislation backed by the Clinton administration. In the end, Mr. Gore's vote was not needed. Mr. Gore's savings plan is built around providing matching funds, through tax credits, for people who put money away in a type of savings account that would be modeled after an Individual Retirement Account. The plan, which would become effective gradually over 10 years, would give more substantial credits to people at the low end of the income spectrum, and would phase out for people at higher income levels. The Gore campaign said the plan would cost about $200 billion over 10 years, making it one of the largest single initiatives proposed by the vice president this year. The Bush campaign said Mr. Gore's proposal followed Mr. Bush's lead in acknowledging the attractiveness of allowing workers to invest for retirement, but was otherwise flawed. ''Low-income workers living paycheck to paycheck cannot afford it, and it doesn't stop Social Security from going broke,'' said Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman. Mr. Gore continued his attack on Mr. Bush's investment-based approach, saying it could drive the budget back into deficit, undermine the nation's prosperity and penalize ''the elderly people who happen to be on the losing end of a roll of the dice.'' In emphasizing his proposal's appeal to lower- and middle-income residents, Mr. Gore drew an implicit comparison to Mr. Bush's plan. Mr. Bush's approach is built around a large tax cut whose benefits would go largely to people who pay the most taxes, the wealthy, and his Social Security plan, which seeks to appeal to what Republicans see as a large new investor class that encompasses many middle-income people. Mr. Gore's plan has its roots in a proposal first offered by President Clinton two years ago. Under the Clinton plan, low- and moderate-income savers would not only have received matching funds from the government, but they would also have received an upfront payment to get their savings accounts going. The Gore plan, which would be voluntary, would not offer any upfront payment, and it is unclear how much new savings the program would stimulate, especially among low-income households. Mr. Gore is expected to announce on Wednesday his support for modest reductions in the federal estate tax to help farmers and small-business owners.
 No one, of course, is actually suggesting a causal relationship. No one believes that students in Bushwick score lower than students on the Upper East Side because the per-pupil spending is 9 percent higher in Bushwick ($8,964 versus $8,229).
 Editorial says recent developments in case of Texas death-row inmate Gary Graham reinforce qualms about his murder conviction, and duty of Gov George W Bush and state pardons board to prevent injustice Recent developments in the case of Gary Graham, a death row inmate in Texas who is scheduled to die by lethal injection tomorrow afternoon, reinforce qualms about his murder conviction -- and the duty of Gov. George W. Bush and the state pardons board to prevent injustice. Recent developments in the case of Gary Graham, a death row inmate in Texas who is scheduled to die by lethal injection tomorrow afternoon, reinforce qualms about his murder conviction -- and the duty of Gov. George W. Bush and the state pardons board to prevent injustice. In other words, there is a strong likelihood the outcome would have been different had Mr. Graham been afforded a fair trial. With the clock ticking toward the execution date, the jurors' statements have to weigh heavily on the consciences of Mr. Bush and the 18 members of the pardons board. Together, they hold his life in their hands.
 Mr. Westin said ABC News had also invited Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to face each other sometime after the conventions in an hourlong televised discussion, without a moderator, and that the initial reaction from the campaigns had been positive. He added that the network also wanted to produce hourlong biographical specials in prime time of the two.  The project's fate was uncertain, he said, because the network might be required under the fairness doctrine to also devote that amount to third-party candidates.
 But Vice President Al Gore, who flew back from a campaign event to preside and cast a tie-breaking vote if necessary, said that if the House did not pass the measure on its own, the administration would ''of course'' insist that it be included in a major spending bill before Congress could adjourn. Whatever the fate of the legislation, today's vote propelled the issue into the political campaign. At the presidential level, Mr. Gore's enthusiasm contrasted to the attitude of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. On March 22, 1999, Mr. Bush said he opposed including sexual orientation in a hate-crimes bill the Texas Legislature was considering. When that bill died without a vote, supporters of it blamed him and said his lack of support was dictated by presidential campaign considerations. Tonight Mr. Gore embraced the bill eagerly, saying, ''Because hate crimes are an affront to all Americans, this vote is a sign of hope for all Americans.'' He said the next task was to get the House to vote on the measure. But he was asked about the reluctance of Republican leaders, like Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader, who said, ''I don't see that happening.''
 Paul Smith letter on June 19 article holds example of George W Bush's 'practical intelligence' also reveals much about his priorities In an anecdote meant to illustrate George W. Bush's ''practical intelligence'' (front page, June 19), we're told that he was able to name all 55 fellow fraternity pledges during a hazing. So why wasn't he able to name a handful of world leaders during the famed ''ambush interview''? In an anecdote meant to illustrate George W. Bush's ''practical intelligence'' (front page, June 19), we're told that he was able to name all 55 fellow fraternity pledges during a hazing. So why wasn't he able to name a handful of world leaders during the famed ''ambush interview''? Doesn't this tell us more about Mr. Bush's priorities than it does his abilities?
 Barneys New York senior executives Catherine Nguyen, Emilia Fabricant, Lisa Gorevitz and Julie Levy are resigning and will be moving to Eve.com, Internet retailer specializing in beauty products (S) Among those departing Barneys are Catherine Nguyen, who had been vice president and a divisional merchandise manager, and Emilia Fabricant, a senior vice president. The other executives who left were Lisa Gorevitz and Julie Levy.
 ''We do cards about Hillary and Bill and George Bush and Bob Dole,'' he said. ''But the Hillary cards are going even stronger than ever. The 'fact is' card is our best seller on our Web site. Hillary is getting 40,000 hits a week.''
 There is also a growing, bipartisan chorus from lawmakers on Capitol Hill urging postponement of a final decision on deployment to the next administration. The two presumptive presidential candidates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, have both expressed support for a system and not put pressure on Mr. Clinton to make any binding decisions. Administration and defense officials said the next missile test remains important but has become less significant as the administration tries to find a course somewhere between stirring a diplomatic crisis by moving ahead with the system and a potential political crisis for Mr. Gore by deciding not to.
 Gore Creek babbles along noisily, just beyond soaring pine trees that seem to reach halfway up the mountains in the distance. Gore Creek babbles along noisily, just beyond soaring pine trees that seem to reach halfway up the mountains in the distance.
 Joseph Chuman letter on June 14 article questions Vice Pres Al Gore's support for capital punishment in light of his high regard for late Justice Thurgood Marshall, death penalty opponent In the same interview in which Vice President Al Gore reaffirms his commitment to the death penalty, he proclaims Thurgood Marshall his favorite Supreme Court justice (news article, June 14). In the same interview in which Vice President Al Gore reaffirms his commitment to the death penalty, he proclaims Thurgood Marshall his favorite Supreme Court justice (news article, June 14).
 Gore Retirement Savings Plan  Vice President Al Gore offered his plan for government-subsidized savings accounts, saying they would help families build wealth for retirement and other uses without putting guaranteed Social Security benefits at risk in the stock market. Bush Plan for Math and Science  Gov. George W. Bush proposed spending an additional $2.3 billion over five years in federal funds to improve math and science education in public schools.
 Campaign Briefing: George W Bush's presidential campaign continues to shatter fund-raising records, topping $90-million mark; AFL-CIO warns that 'truth squad' will appear at events to talk about problems in Bush's state of Texas; John Hagelin, physicist who founded Natural Law Party, challenges Patrick Buchanan for Reform Party presidential nomination and right to spend party's $12.6 million in federal campaign money; Bush vows to compete all out for California's 54 electoral votes, although new Golden State Poll gives Gore 11-point lead in state; Democrats unveil ads aimed at black and Hispanic voters (S) BUSH TOPS $90 MILLION MARK -- Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign continues to shatter fund-raising records, topping the $90 million mark when receipts for May are included. But most of the money has already been spent and the Texas governor continues to beat the bushes for more. Campaign officials announced yesterday that Mr. Bush raised $6 million in May and spent $4.9 million, leaving him with $7.1 million in the bank. Vice President Al Gore reported that he had raised only $587,802 in May, and had spent $1.3 million. He was left with $8.2 million, out of $37 million raised over all during the campaign. Mr. Gore expects to qualify for $15 million in federal matching funds, bringing his total preconvention fund to the $40.5 million spending cap placed on candidates who accept federal money. Mr. Bush, who is not accepting federal money, expects to spend nearly twice as much before the Republican National Convention, which starts on July 31. After the conventions, candidates must stop fund-raising and will be given $67.6 million in federal funds to spend on the general election. BUSH TOPS $90 MILLION MARK -- Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign continues to shatter fund-raising records, topping the $90 million mark when receipts for May are included. But most of the money has already been spent and the Texas governor continues to beat the bushes for more. Campaign officials announced yesterday that Mr. Bush raised $6 million in May and spent $4.9 million, leaving him with $7.1 million in the bank. Vice President Al Gore reported that he had raised only $587,802 in May, and had spent $1.3 million. He was left with $8.2 million, out of $37 million raised over all during the campaign. Mr. Gore expects to qualify for $15 million in federal matching funds, bringing his total preconvention fund to the $40.5 million spending cap placed on candidates who accept federal money. Mr. Bush, who is not accepting federal money, expects to spend nearly twice as much before the Republican National Convention, which starts on July 31. After the conventions, candidates must stop fund-raising and will be given $67.6 million in federal funds to spend on the general election. LABOR ZEROS IN ON BUSH -- The A.F.L.-C.I.O. has issued a warning to Gov. George W. Bush: ''The Texas Truth Squad is coming.'' The truth squad, composed of workers from Texas, will appear at labor-sponsored meetings around the country and will try to sully Mr. Bush's reputation by talking about problems in Texas that include education, health care and the treatment of farm workers. The union leaflet says the truth squad will note that Texas ranks the lowest among all states in the percentage of people who have health insurance and near the bottom in College Board scores. John J. Sweeney, president of the labor federation, will be the master of ceremonies at the first truth squad event, to be held in Philadelphia on June 29. Union officials say similar events will be held in Albuquerque, Chicago, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Los Angeles, Louisville, Ky., and Miami. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. has endorsed Vice President Al Gore. GORE LEADS IN CALIFORNIA POLL -- Gov. George W. Bush says he intends to compete all out with Vice President Al Gore in California, which, with 54 electoral votes, is the mother lode of presidential politics. But a new Golden State Poll has Mr. Gore leading Mr. Bush by the biggest margin ever, 11 points. The poll, made public yesterday by the Field organization, one of California's most respected survey groups, has Mr. Gore ahead, 46 percent to 35 percent, despite frequent appearances in the state by Mr. Bush and a strong showing by Ralph Nader, the Green Party contender. Mr. Nader was supported by 7 percent of those questioned, with about half saying they would otherwise back Mr. Gore. Patrick J. Buchanan, the Reform Party contender, drew 2 percent. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore were locked in a statistical tie in California until early this year, but the vice president opened a seven-point edge in February and steadily widened it since then. He holds commanding leads among voters in California's two principal population centers, Los Angeles County and the San Francisco Bay Area. Mr. Bush holds a slim lead in heavily Republican Southern California, outside Los Angeles, and a 12-point lead in Northern California, outside the Bay Area. The poll, conducted from June 9 to 18, surveyed 642 people whom it considered likely to vote, and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. AD CAMPAIGN AIMS AT MINORITIES -- Democratic Party officials announced yesterday the start  of a radio and television advertising campaign intended to appeal specifically to African-American and Hispanic voters. Vice President Al Gore's health care proposals, including a patients' bill of rights plan, are the focus of advertisements intended for African-Americans. The commercials for Hispanic voters, which are in Spanish, touch on education and preserving Social Security and other issues. ''Al Gore and the Democrats,'' the announcer says in Spanish. ''We can count on them.'' The African-American advertisements will be broadcast in 17 states, while the advertisements for Hispanics will be shown only in Florida, Illinois, New Mexico and Wisconsin.
 Daily schedules for Presidential contenders George W Bush and Al Gore
 Dr. Munoz is the chairman of the local Republican committee, and he was politely noncommittal in his assessment of Ms. Bitritto's chances of election. But he conceded that Mr. Corzine has helped revive Democratic fortunes here, and pointed to the results of the June 6 party primary, in which Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas were on the ballot. ''Usually the Republicans outvote the Democrats by three or four to one,'' said Dr. Munoz, an assistant dean at the University for Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark. ''But in this primary, it was Bush 1,255 votes, Gore 1,235. For a city like Summit, with far more Republicans than Democrats, to have basically as many voters going for Gore as for Bush really says a lot about Corzine's local impact.''
 Article spotlights powerful Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, obscure state agency whose job is to review clemency petitions of inmates on by far nation's busiest death row; board, which has not held public hearing on capital case since 1992, has been criticized for working in secret, seldom explaining its life-and-death decisions, and for not giving thorough review to death row cases it is responsible for evaluating; faces latest high-profile decision in case of convicted murderer Gary Graham; case has drawn national attention largely because of accounts of poor work by his lawyer; Graham faces execution on June 22; while Texas Gov George Bush has made point of distancing himself from board's decisions in capital cases, arguing that decision to grant clemency does not rest with him but with board, he has appointed all its members to six-year terms; has also selected chairman and designated six members who set policy and guidelines, all subject to approval by State Senate; since 1995, sixty-eight death row inmates have asked board for clemency; only once has board granted it; board members comment; photos (M) Some are active Republicans, their offices decorated with stuffed elephants or pictures of Gov. George W. Bush. Many have some sort of experience in law enforcement. These include a former Secret Service agent, a former prosecutor and several former parole workers. But there is also a psychologist, a rancher and a former schoolteacher. These men and women are members of the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, the obscure state agency whose job is to review the clemency petitions of inmates in what is by far the nation's busiest death row. When Gov. Bush is asked about the fairness of the death penalty in Texas, he often says that the power to grant clemency to death row inmates rests not with him, but with this 18-member board. Under state law he can commute a death penalty only if the board recommends it. Some are active Republicans, their offices decorated with stuffed elephants or pictures of Gov. George W. Bush. Many have some sort of experience in law enforcement. These include a former Secret Service agent, a former prosecutor and several former parole workers. But there is also a psychologist, a rancher and a former schoolteacher. These men and women are members of the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, the obscure state agency whose job is to review the clemency petitions of inmates in what is by far the nation's busiest death row. When Gov. Bush is asked about the fairness of the death penalty in Texas, he often says that the power to grant clemency to death row inmates rests not with him, but with this 18-member board. Under state law he can commute a death penalty only if the board recommends it. But while Mr. Bush has made a point of distancing himself from the board's decisions in capital cases, as governor he has appointed all of its members to their six-year terms. He has also selected the chairman and designated the six members who set policy and guidelines, all subject to approval by the State Senate. Michael Jones, a spokesman for the governor's office, said Mr. Bush did not personally interview any of the candidates for the paroles board, noting that the governor controlled  3,000 appointments. He said candidates usually apply to the governor's appointment office, which asks a variety of questions, inquiring about a person's views on crime and punishment. But Mr. Jones says none of the candidates are asked their views about the death penalty, nor about their political party affiliation. Mr. Bush said the board acted independently, but some lawyers here believe that governors have ways of making their feelings known to a board made up of people who are beholden to them for their $80,000-a-year jobs. ''You can be sure there are ways of communicating with the board and letting them know what the governor wants,'' said Neil McCabe, a law professor at South Texas College of Law. Mr. McCabe and others pointed to the case of Henry Lee Lucas, the only one in which the board granted clemency. Ten days before the vote, Mr. Bush said he and the board would have to give careful consideration to the case. ''There's no communication between us and Governor Bush on how to vote,'' said Linda Garcia, the former prosecutor on the board. ''There just flat isn't.'' Mr. Bush has said that when he reviews scheduled executions, he considers two questions: whether the inmate is innocent, and whether the inmate received full access to the courts. While there are no clear guidelines on how the board's clemency decisions in capital cases are made, several board members who discussed their review of capital cases in interviews with The New York Times in April said they also focused on those questions. At the time the case was pending, legislation had been introduced in Texas that would require the board to consider clemency appeals in public meetings. Mr. Bush resisted the changes. He said public deliberations might create ''a chance for people to rant and rail, a chance for people to emotionalize the process beyond the questions that need to be asked.'' The bill died in the legislative session.
