 Correction: June 24 excerpts from Vice Pres Al Gore's interview with FBI on campaign fund-raising should have explained that DSCC stands for Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Excerpts yesterday from Vice President Al Gore's interview with the F.B.I. on campaign fund-raising did not explain the meaning of the initials D.S.C.C. The initials stand for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which works to elect Democrats to the United States Senate. Excerpts yesterday from Vice President Al Gore's interview with the F.B.I. on campaign fund-raising did not explain the meaning of the initials D.S.C.C. The initials stand for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which works to elect Democrats to the United States Senate.
 Gov Paul E Patton, Kentucky's Democratic governor, complains about Gov George W Bush's frequent visits to his state to solicit votes; Bush hopes to carry Kentucky (S) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas keeps showing up, raising money for himself and the Kentucky and national Republican parties and campaigning for himself and state and Congressional Republican candidates. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas keeps showing up, raising money for himself and the Kentucky and national Republican parties and campaigning for himself and state and Congressional Republican candidates. Mr. Bush says he intends to carry Kentucky. He is intent on helping Kentucky Republicans win three hotly contested Congressional races. So last weekend when Mr. Bush showed up in Kentucky for the third time in five weeks -- he raised some $1.7 million while talking up himself and other Republicans -- Governor Patton groused enough already and accused him of using ''strong-arm tactics'' to wring money and votes out of Kentuckians. Mr. Bush was more pointed, sending the governor this message:
 President Clinton spoke before the Empire State Pride Agenda in Manhattan in October, his presence ultimately a reminder of how unremarkable it has become for a sitting president to appear before a gay lobbying group. Four years after Bob Dole refused to accept a contribution from a gay Republican organization, gay leaders sat down for a high-profile meeting with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican candidate for president. The State of Vermont legalized gay civil unions, and even the C.I.A. has established a caucus for gay employees.
 A portion of the money went to Hillary Rodham Clinton, whose New York Senate campaign received $200,000 from a fund-raiser at which Mr. Clinton was the host on Wednesday night at a private home in Washington. The Democratic National Committee, which is using its money for issue advertisements promoting Vice President Al Gore's candidacy, received well over $1 million from fund-raisers Mr. Clinton attended in Phoenix and San Diego on Thursday and Los Angeles on Friday. Mr. Gore, who assisted with the effort back in 1996, still faces questions from Justice Department investigators about his stop at the Hsi Lai Buddhist temple, a visit the vice president has insisted was finance-related but not a true fund-raiser. It is the memory of 1996 that, in part, keeps Mr. Clinton going at full throttle. Aides say he remembers how much time he spent on fund-raising as a presidential candidate when he should have been out shaking hands and talking policy. By doing some of the heavy lifting himself this time, the aides say, Mr. Clinton hopes he can free Mr. Gore and other Democratic candidates from the onerous task of raising money. ''He feels fund-raising took too much of his time in '96,'' said Jake Siewert, a former Clinton-Gore campaign worker who is now the president's deputy press secretary. ''He wants Gore to be able to collect votes instead of money.'' Despite different audiences, Mr. Clinton's spiel is virtually identical at every stop: The current prosperity may not last and should not be squandered with tax cuts. Mr. Gore, the president says, is better positioned to keep the good times rolling.
 Hispanic voters describe themselves as 'soccer moms' of 2000 elections, saying they have never been courted so aggressively by presidential candidates; both Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush often use Spanish in speaking to Latino crowds; photo (M) ''Yo quiero mucho,'' Vice President Al Gore roared in a campaign speech here on Thursday night before the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, assuring its members that he loved them very much. For many Hispanic Americans, especially those eager to vote in this year's presidential election, Mr. Gore and his probable Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, have turned the campaign into a virtual love-fest. Describing themselves as the ''soccer moms'' of the 2000 elections, Hispanic voters say they have never been courted so aggressively by presidential candidates, giving Hispanics electoral leverage they never had before. ''Yo quiero mucho,'' Vice President Al Gore roared in a campaign speech here on Thursday night before the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, assuring its members that he loved them very much. For many Hispanic Americans, especially those eager to vote in this year's presidential election, Mr. Gore and his probable Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, have turned the campaign into a virtual love-fest. Describing themselves as the ''soccer moms'' of the 2000 elections, Hispanic voters say they have never been courted so aggressively by presidential candidates, giving Hispanics electoral leverage they never had before. Judging by their campaign efforts this year, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore recognize the importance of winning the Hispanic vote. That is not necessarily a new strategy for Democrats, but it is for Republicans. And many Republican Party leaders say that with Mr. Bush, whose state has a significant Latino population, they have the right candidate to expand their base, even though aides said a scheduling conflict prevented him from attending the Naleo conference. While Hispanic voters have traditionally supported Democratic candidates, they have shown a new open-mindedness in recent elections toward Republicans. By some estimates, Mr. Bush won as much as 47 percent of the Hispanic vote in his re-election as governor in 1998. The same year, Tony Garza, a Republican, won election as Texas Railroad Commissioner, a powerful position  overseeing oil, gas and public utilities. Like the vice president, Mr. Bush often uses Spanish in speaking to Latino crowds, boasting that his policies in Texas have been good for Hispanics. Also, he often reminds Latino voters of his sister-in-law's heritage: Columba Bush, who is married to his brother, Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, was born in Mexico, and their 24-year-old son, George P. Bush, who speaks fluent Spanish, has become an active campaigner for his uncle. ''Bush is uniquely positioned with a proven record of winning Hispanic votes,'' said Michael Madrid, a Republican political consultant who led the seminar on stump speeches. He said that Mr. Bush's attractiveness to Hispanic voters ''is as much the messenger as the message.'' Republicans still appear to have some distance to cover before they capture a majority of the Hispanic vote in any big state. As Mr. Vargas pointed out, only in the last few years have Republicans paid much attention to Hispanic voters, compared with President Clinton and Mr. Gore, who made them a priority in the last two elections. President Bush won only 19 percent of the Hispanic vote in 1992, Mr. Madrid said, and Senator Bob Dole fared worse four years later, with 13 percent. ''It's not been for lack of trying,'' Gov. Bill Owens of Colorado said on Friday, addressing problems Republicans have had connecting with Hispanics. ''We had it under President Reagan, but for all the assets Bob Dole had, he was not a warm-and-fuzzy guy. He didn't have the ability to connect. George Bush does. He'll be very competitive with Hispanics this year.'' And here, Mr. Vargas said, Mr. Bush's absence ''sends a message that speaks for itself.'' Mr. Bush was represented at a luncheon on Friday by Mr. Owens and one of his Colorado cabinet members, Larry E. Trujillo, who recently switched from Democrat to Republican.
 SOME 13 million Americans suffer from thyroid disorders, most of them women, including Barbara Bush, Tipper Gore and the Olympic track star Gail Devers. But more than half don't know it. SOME 13 million Americans suffer from thyroid disorders, most of them women, including Barbara Bush, Tipper Gore and the Olympic track star Gail Devers. But more than half don't know it.
 Members of Grove Street Tenants Together, tenant association in Bushwick section of Brooklyn, NYC, are videotaping rats in attempt to persuade city to clean up vacant lots where they say outsiders dump garbage; residents also play boomboxes at night and teenagers arm themselves with baseball bats to keep rats at bay; photo (M) As animal-rights advocates protested recently in Manhattan against the killing of rats on the CBS show  ''Survivor,'' Bushwick residents were filming their own rat movie. As animal-rights advocates protested recently in Manhattan against the killing of rats on the CBS show  ''Survivor,'' Bushwick residents were filming their own rat movie. Rats have always lurked in Bushwick, but residents say they have multiplied alarmingly in the last year. Often, screams in the night are heard from startled pedestrians.
 Former Dell Computer chief financial officer Thomas J Meredith raises more than $800,000 from Democrats at his Austin, Tex, home, with help from Pres Clinton; fellow fund-raiser Roy Spence call Meredith's willingness to raise money for party of Texas Gov George W Bush's rival 'a brave thing'; Meredith replies, 'When you got a billion dollars, you can be brave.' (M) Rooting for Al Gore and the Democrats in Texas these days can be as dangerous as rooting for the 49ers at a Dallas Cowboys home game. Especially when your boss is Michael Dell, an ardent Republican. Rooting for Al Gore and the Democrats in Texas these days can be as dangerous as rooting for the 49ers at a Dallas Cowboys home game. Especially when your boss is Michael Dell, an ardent Republican. Reflecting on Mr. Meredith's willingness to raise money for the party of George W. Bush's rival, Mr. Spence recalls telling him, ''That's a brave thing.''
 Witness the way both Al Gore and George W. Bush opposed the Clinton administration's decision to send Elian Gonzalez back to Cuba with his father, defying opinion polls in the thick of the primary campaign.
 If such a ''health exception'' to the treaty were recognized, the door would be open to treat the forgotten epidemics of malaria, sleeping sickness and elephantiasis as emergencies. This may be possible because of the new forces that have entered the fray. The new director general of the World Health Organization, Gro Harlem Brundtland, has reinvigorated an agency previously known for its sluggishness. Doctors Without Borders, a group already critical of the drug industry, won the 1999 Nobel Peace Prize, effectively spinning a halo around its every utterance. Act Up, a protest organization, suddenly took up Africa's cause and began hounding Vice President Al Gore over his ties to the industry.
 PRINCESS DIANA and President George Bush notwithstanding, land mines and Saddam Hussein have proved beneficial to the environment. ''Iraqi land mines in the Kuwaiti desert kept people out and allowed a resurgence of animal and plant life in the 1990's,'' McNeill writes. Heinrich Himmler's SS was ecologically correct, too, with plans to establish an enormous wildlife preserve in Europe. The Poles, however, opposed the SS's choice of a site: Poland. An early conservationist, Peter the Great, introduced laws on wildlife conservation, forest preservation, overfishing, soil conservation and water pollution between 1689 and 1725. Catherine the Great, despite her fondness for horses, later rescinded most of these laws. Admirers of Eastern religions will learn that in the 1980's the Ganges was choked by several million tons of ashes per month -- cremated remains of the 30 million Hindus per year who sought post-mortem salvation in the sacred river. German U-boats helped restore marine life in the North Atlantic during World War II by scaring fishermen back into port. McNeill says that humans have done a good job of preserving several species -- those we find delicious.
 WHEN Al Gore's college transcript found its way into the press recently, it seemed destined to ignite a firestorm. Now the world knew: the prep school boy who applied only to Harvard, the wonky vice president, the learned president-in-waiting, had actually been a C student for a time at Harvard. He even got a D in biology. But nobody in Mr. Gore's camp acted terribly agitated by the revelations. And before long, the whispers started: could the campaign itself have leaked the transcript? WHEN Al Gore's college transcript found its way into the press recently, it seemed destined to ignite a firestorm. Now the world knew: the prep school boy who applied only to Harvard, the wonky vice president, the learned president-in-waiting, had actually been a C student for a time at Harvard. He even got a D in biology. But nobody in Mr. Gore's camp acted terribly agitated by the revelations. And before long, the whispers started: could the campaign itself have leaked the transcript? The campaign denies the accusation, but it's a peculiarly American phenomenon that a candidate might advertise his academic stumbles. In fact, just as a recurring theme in this presidential race has been whether Gov. George W. Bush has the intellect to be a successful president, so some Gore advisers worry that their candidate may come off, as President Harry Truman would put it, as too much of ''a smarty.'' ''We now expect a much more personable person in the White House,'' said Fred Greenstein, a professor of history at Princeton University. ''We are much more open to a normal, laid-back, colloquial style. George Washington was a figure who never smiled, and by modern standards would make Al Gore look like the life of the party.'' In this environment, Mr. Gore has found that his command of policy, and his willingness to display it, can be as much a political liability as an asset. Mr. Bush still must persuade voters that he has a sufficient grasp of policy -- or, to put it bluntly, that he is not a dumbbell -- but polls show he is drawing higher and higher marks for leadership. That leaves Mr. Gore with the arguably tougher job of proving that he is not a condescending smarty-pants. In fact, Mr. Bush seems to have had success convincing Americans that you don't have to like reading books to be intelligent. An ABC News/Washington Post poll released this weekend found that 37 percent of the public thinks Mr. Gore is more intelligent, while a statistically indistinguishable 34 percent give the nod to Mr. Bush. In that spirit, Mr. Gore spent a day last week with Governor Ventura -- his third visit with the governor in four months. This is a former professional wrestler -- known as the Body -- who had a television commercial in his 1998 race that featured him assuming the position of Rodin's ''Thinker,'' clad only in a pair of shorts.
 Now they are back in support of the newest album, ''The Blues to the Bush,'' on Musicmaker.com, which uses Internet technology to allow fans to select the songs they want and the order in which they appear. The album is made up of live songs played during the fall of 1999 at the House of Blues in Chicago and Shepherd's Bush Empire in London. It includes such classics as ''Anyway, Anyhow, Anywhere,'' ''Baba O'Riley,'' ''Pure and Easy,'' which never made it to an album previously, and ''After the Fire,'' which has never been recorded by the band before.
 Problem of Americans who lack health insurance has been debated endlessly for decade, yet ranks of the uninsured keep growing, now standing at 44.3 million, or 16 percent of population; Clinton administration tried and failed to solve problem with sweeping health care initiative in 1993-94, and issue promises to loom large in this year's presidential campaign; several reasons why reform defies best efforts of policymakers detailed; initiatives of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, and their potential pitfalls, described; charts profile the uninsured (M) Whatever Congress does or fails to do, health care will be a significant issue in this year's presidential campaign. It is a defining issue for many Democrats, and Bill Bradley pushed it to center stage in his unsuccessful primary challenge to Vice President Al Gore. Gov. George W. Bush, the likely Republican nominee for president, has also begun to address the issue, with a proposal for tax credits to help people buy insurance. AL GORE Rathan than remaking the health care system, Mr. Gore would build on existing programs; mindful of the 1993-94 debacle, he has said, ''We can't overhaul the system in one fell swoop.'' He would guarante access to insurance for all children by expanding eligibility for a health program that Congress created in 1997. And he would allow parents of eligible children to enroll in this program. (Most uninsured children come from families in which the parents are uninsured.) Aides to Mr. Gore say his proposals would cover 11 million to 15 million people and would cost the federal government $146 billion over 10 years (about one-third more than health care initiatives proposed this year by President Clinton). POSSIBLE FLAWS Critics say it is unrealistic for Mr. Gore to use Medicaid and the Children's Health Insurance Program as a foundation for the future. Many people already eligible for these programs are not enrolled. About one-fourth of the uninsured are not even eligible for Medicaid. GEORGE W. BUSH Governor Bush, most Republicans and some Democrats support new tax breaks to help people buy health insurance. Mr. Bush has proposed a tax credit to help individuals and families who do not receive employer-sponsored coverage and are not eligible for public programs. The government would allow a credit up to $1,000 a year for an individual and $2,000 for a family to cover up to 90 percent of the cost of health insurance.
 Editorial contends now is not the time, amid presidential campaign, to appoint special prosecutor to investigate Vice Pres Gore's alleged fund-raising abuses, though it reiterates that such an investigation ought to have been undertaken years ago Because of her brazen dereliction of duty as attorney general, Janet Reno has now stirred up a political mess for herself and Vice President Al Gore and created an electoral quandary for the public. It turns out that yet another top official in the Justice Department has concluded that Ms. Reno should name a special counsel to investigate Democratic campaign fund-raising irregularities in 1996, especially the activities and statements of Mr. Gore. Had Ms. Reno agreed to such an investigation years ago, as the law clearly required, the public would have answers about the legality of Democratic fund-raising in 1996. Such an inquiry might have exonerated the vice president, just as Robert Ray has closed the Travel Office inquiry with no charges against Hillary Rodham Clinton. With Mr. Gore newly entangled by charges in several fund-raising areas, Ms. Reno has created an excruciating choice between orderly legal process and an orderly presidential campaign. One option would be for her to reverse course and immediately appoint a respected lawyer outside the department to look into the latest allegations involving Mr. Gore. We have long favored special prosecutors to look into all the campaign irregularities, including these. Because of her brazen dereliction of duty as attorney general, Janet Reno has now stirred up a political mess for herself and Vice President Al Gore and created an electoral quandary for the public. It turns out that yet another top official in the Justice Department has concluded that Ms. Reno should name a special counsel to investigate Democratic campaign fund-raising irregularities in 1996, especially the activities and statements of Mr. Gore. Had Ms. Reno agreed to such an investigation years ago, as the law clearly required, the public would have answers about the legality of Democratic fund-raising in 1996. Such an inquiry might have exonerated the vice president, just as Robert Ray has closed the Travel Office inquiry with no charges against Hillary Rodham Clinton. With Mr. Gore newly entangled by charges in several fund-raising areas, Ms. Reno has created an excruciating choice between orderly legal process and an orderly presidential campaign. One option would be for her to reverse course and immediately appoint a respected lawyer outside the department to look into the latest allegations involving Mr. Gore. We have long favored special prosecutors to look into all the campaign irregularities, including these. But at this late date, even with a fast-moving investigation, that would mean that virtually the entire campaign would be conducted in an atmosphere of disruption. We conclude that as a practical matter, if all that would be investigated is the vice president's veracity in his most recent sworn statements, it would be best for the department to share any contradictory information with the public, and let the voters decide. It is a cliche to speak of the court of public opinion, but in a presidential year, that is a lofty tribunal, indeed. And Gov. George W. Bush is a prosecutor who will not give Mr. Gore a free ride. This awkward situation exists because Ms. Reno has mishandled this matter from the beginning. She ignored the recommendations to appoint an independent counsel from Louis Freeh, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Charles LaBella, her chief prosecutor on campaign finance. According to the latest news accounts, Robert Conrad Jr., the head of the Justice Department's campaign finance team, told Ms. Reno more than a week ago that new evidence suggested Mr. Gore might have been less than truthful in denying that he knew anything about fund-raising irregularities. Mr. Gore made a smart move Friday in releasing the transcript of his interview with Mr. Conrad, in which he denied again that he knew that the Buddhist temple event was a fund-raiser. If the new evidence cited by Mr. Conrad is simply Mr. Gore's most recent statements, it is unlikely that a special prosecutor could get a perjury conviction on that basis. The debate over Mr. Gore's veracity can be resolved through the public's examination of his words during the campaign. There is, finally, some irony in the new allegations coming out at a time when Mr. Ray, the successor to Kenneth Starr as the Whitewater prosecutor, has concluded that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute the first lady on the firings of seven employees in the White House Travel Office. The independent counsel did, however, realistically underscore the strong indications that Mrs. Clinton had understated her role in dismissals. The White House has complained about Mr. Ray's comments, but the public has a right to know about Mrs. Clinton's efforts to disguise her role in an unseemly episode. Even so, that case is closed, and Mrs. Clinton has the opportunity to move beyond it. Whether Mr. Gore can do the same should be decided by the voters in November.
 Democrats were livid over a rival of Vice President Al Gore in the race for president. ''He's on an ego trip,'' said Senator Harry Reid, a Nevada Democrat. ''He has no respect for the process.'' The senator was not speaking of  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee, but rather of Ralph Nader, whose Green Party bid is making enough headway in some states to stir anxieties among Democrats. Democrats were livid over a rival of Vice President Al Gore in the race for president. ''He's on an ego trip,'' said Senator Harry Reid, a Nevada Democrat. ''He has no respect for the process.'' The senator was not speaking of  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee, but rather of Ralph Nader, whose Green Party bid is making enough headway in some states to stir anxieties among Democrats. If the election remains as close as polls indicate, Mr. Nader, the longtime consumer advocate, could be a spoiler. ''The Bush people, I'm sure, are thrilled about Nader,'' said a Gore lieutenant. Mr. Nader's potential formidability was underscored on Thursday, when he appeared in Washington with James P. Hoffa, the Teamsters president, who told reporters that on trade issues critical to labor, ''there is no distinction between Al Gore and George W. Bush.'' Potential obstacles cropped up elsewhere for Mr. Gore. The head of the Justice Department's campaign finance unit recommended that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to examine the vice president's fund-raising activities in 1996, when he attended a Buddhist Temple event that raised $65,000 in donations that were later deemed illegal. In what prosecutors characterized as a testy encounter, Mr. Gore was questioned about that and other activities in an interview on April 18. Mr. Gore's campaign released a transcript of the interview, hoping to blunt the issue's impact. Mr. Bush had his own confrontation with the legal system, albeit one with a more mournful dimension. Despite emotional protests, a flurry of last-minute court challenges and a divided Texas parole board, the governor declined to stand in the way of the execution of Gary Graham, who had been convicted in a 1981 murder in Houston. ''After considering all the facts, I'm confident that justice is being done,'' Mr. Bush said shortly before Mr. Graham was given a lethal injection. It was the 135th execution of Governor Bush's term in office.
 Horovitz's denunciation of Netanyahu forms the hot center of this book, and it is something to behold, a striking reminder that in Israel, politics is life and death and everything in between. ''Perhaps it doesn't much matter, in the existential scheme of things, whether America chooses a Bush or a Clinton, a Gore or a Bush, but it sure matters here,'' Horovitz writes. ''One man, yes, one man, in hardly any time at all, turned back the course of Israeli history -- shut down the bridge-building with the Palestinians, froze the warming relations with the moderate Arab world, left Jordan and Egypt embarrassed about having made peace with us.''
 I moved to Texas in the mid-70's, picking up a stiff dose of the woozy progressive country of Jerry Jeff Walker and Ray Wylie Hubbard, the rockabilly of Joe Ely and the prairie heartache of Willie Nelson, and then to Atlanta, where learning a little about Nashville seemed a part of my job, covering the South for The New York Times. It was the time of country's biggest commercial breakthrough, with Garth Brooks selling more records than anyone in America. For a while Nashville seemed to capture, for better or worse, the moment -- the Reagan-Bush-era triumph of heartland culture over coastal culture -- much as Motown captured its moment in the 1960's. Working on a book about how much the country had been influenced by the South, I hung out in Nashville for a week or so and then drove across Mississippi, from the casinos of the Delta to the casinos of the Gulf Coast, living mostly on bottled water and Sun chips.
 Amy Janet Rhodes, a daughter of Hiroko Yajima Rhodes and Samuel Rhodes of Englewood, N.J., was married last evening to Daniel Shea Froehlich, a son of Lynn Bush and David Froehlich, both of Doylestown, Pa. Judge Shira Scheindlin of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated in the Snuff Mill at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx. Amy Janet Rhodes, a daughter of Hiroko Yajima Rhodes and Samuel Rhodes of Englewood, N.J., was married last evening to Daniel Shea Froehlich, a son of Lynn Bush and David Froehlich, both of Doylestown, Pa. Judge Shira Scheindlin of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated in the Snuff Mill at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
 I'm concentrating on pole beans this summer because they look so pretty on trellises, where you can see their various-colored blossoms, and they have a real beany taste, which makes bush beans pale by comparison. Bush beans also give up the ghost after a few pickings, after which you have to pull them up and start another crop in another part of the garden. I'm getting too lazy to do anything I can avoid -- so pole beans seem the far better choice.
 Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush have begun pitching competing approaches to retirement savings now that debating long-term health of Social Security is no longer taboo; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore, the Democrat, wants the government to provide a subsidy of as much as $3 for each $1 that a worker kicks in to his or her retirement kitty; this proposed new entitlement program is intended to favor the relative have-nots. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the tax-cutting Republican, will probably endorse a plan under which the kitty will be fattened by redirecting taxes that now help finance Social Security. Vice President Al Gore, the Democrat, wants the government to provide a subsidy of as much as $3 for each $1 that a worker kicks in to his or her retirement kitty; this proposed new entitlement program is intended to favor the relative have-nots. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the tax-cutting Republican, will probably endorse a plan under which the kitty will be fattened by redirecting taxes that now help finance Social Security. Mr. Bush was first to publicly sketch out a plan. But Mr. Gore, who used to attack the idea of investing Social Security money in stocks, has laid out his proposal in much greater detail. Now that the debate has been joined in earnest, some investment advisers have begun tentatively sizing up the competing plans, neither of which is yet concrete enough to reward close financial scrutiny. Indeed, Mr. Bush has yet to provide the most crucial single number: the portion of the 12.4 percent Social Security tax, half of which is paid by employers, that he would divert into private investment accounts. That, he contends, is a job for legislators. Despite the vagueness, though, one preliminary finding has emerged: Assuming that cash can be spared to take advantage of the government's matching offer, for most people Mr. Gore offers more. ''The Gore plan would be better,'' at least in terms of the greatest benefit for the greatest number, said Thomas P. Ochsenschlager, a specialist in personal taxation in the Arlington, Va., office of Grant Thornton, the accounting firm. He pointed to the way it would give a couple earning $30,000 a year and able to save $1,000 in the plan an extra $3,000 in matching money, and to how it would leave existing Social Security benefits unchanged. BUT the Gore plan becomes much less attractive as incomes rise, with the matching money dwindling to zero for households earning more than $100,000. Other advisers, looking beyond the raw figures, take a dimmer view. ''My clients would be hard-pressed to see that they would benefit from the Gore plan,'' said Carol I. Johnson, a financial planner at Voellinger, Simpson & Associates, an accounting firm in Belleville, Ill. She said this group, 30 percent of whom have household incomes of less than $100,000, are more interested in ensuring the solvency of Social Security, which is neither ''fixed'' nor undermined by the Gore plan, than they are in a new entitlement program. Under Mr. Gore's proposal, which would be voluntary and phased in over 10 years, the government's match would take the form of a tax credit -- a dollar-for-dollar reduction in income tax. The credit would be refundable, meaning that if it exceeded your income tax liability, the Treasury would write you a check for the difference. Mr. Bush is much bolder, proposing to modify the Social Security system itself, an initiative that he will bill as addressing impending shortfalls in the system's finances but critics say could instead put the system in greater jeopardy. Mr. Bush has said he wants to let workers divert an unspecified share of the Social Security taxes that they and their employers pay into self-managed personal accounts. In return, the workers would agree to accept a smaller guaranteed retirement benefit from Social Security, which would be deprived of the diverted revenue. A wide variety of specific proposals could fit into what Mr. Bush calls his ''framework.'' But one plan that is being promoted by a close Bush adviser, Martin S. Feldstein of Harvard University, is a suitable proxy. Dr. Feldstein would have the government deposit 2 percent of each individual's income into a privately managed portfolio, three-fifths invested in stocks and two-fifths in corporate bonds, a mix that would have yielded a 6 percent annual return, adjusted for inflation, over the last 50 years. WHILE financial planners say it is not yet possible to compare the plans with any rigor, they tend to prefer that of Mr. Bush, perhaps because it is skewed to mainly benefit the well-to-do who are their main clients. Steve Garrett, manager of financial planning services at A. G. Edwards, the St. Louis-based brokerage firm, said he doubted whether lower-income families could muster even the modest amount of cash needed to qualify for Mr. Gore's credits. Many workers taking part in the Gore plan would do so with money otherwise destined for 401(k) plans, which would throw the balance of lower-paid and higher-paid workers in such plans out of kilter and severely limit employers' ability to offer them, according to Dan Halpin, a benefits specialist with Grant Thornton. Paul A. Levis of Summit Financial Consultants in Yonkers said that even the Bush-Feldstein plan, with its 40 percent bond requirement, would be too timidly invested for his taste. Referring to his daughter, Ashlie, who recently graduated from college, he asked, ''Why not give her the ability to put 100 percent'' in stock mutual funds? Then there was Mary B. Hevener, a payroll tax expert for Weil, Gotshal & Manges, who said she was ''hard-pressed to say which one is worse,'' a generous-to-the-poor Gore plan that seems to invite wholesale cheating or a Bush plan that she said risks aggravating, rather than reducing, the threat posed to the Social Security System by the aging of the baby boom generation. ''The richer and older you are, the more you're going to go toward Bush,'' Ms. Hevener said, but ''the crooks are going to like Gore better.''
 Photo of Vice Pres Al Gore after raising more than $3 million in two days in San Francisco, heading for Miami for more fund-raising events
 But just as testing in politics tends to eliminate the McCains and leave us with the Bushes and the Gores, movies may get less interesting the more they are tested. ''There's a kind of homogenization built in to the film testing system,'' said Mike Medavoy, chairman of Phoenix Pictures. ''No one at the studios is willing to take chances anymore -- anticipating how they will test. And just because an audience may not like something that disturbs them or makes them uncomfortable doesn't mean it is not effective moviemaking.''
