 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who signed the state's brief in support of the school district, called the ruling ''disappointing.'' In a statement put out by his office in Austin, Mr. Bush said: ''I support the constitutionally guaranteed right of all students to express their faith freely and participate in voluntary, student-led prayer.''
 Ever since Richard Nixon proposed it in 1968, policy makers have talked about having the federal government quit the business of enriching uranium for nuclear power plants. It took decades, but the Clinton administration finally completed the job two years ago, with Vice President Al Gore claiming it as a victory for reinventing government. It may, however, have come at the worst possible time. Ever since Richard Nixon proposed it in 1968, policy makers have talked about having the federal government quit the business of enriching uranium for nuclear power plants. It took decades, but the Clinton administration finally completed the job two years ago, with Vice President Al Gore claiming it as a victory for reinventing government. It may, however, have come at the worst possible time. Some problems were clearly inherited. In 1993, Mr. Gore and Boris N. Yeltsin, then president of Russia, struck a deal for the Russians to take high-enriched uranium from bombs and dilute it for use in American power reactors.
 ''It's turning our presidential debates into a beer commercial,'' Mr. Nader said in a telephone interview. ''And these companies are really sponsoring an exclusive to our campaign commercial for Bush and Gore.''
 The Smith & Wesson accord, heralded in March as a landmark in the gun control effort, has already shown signs of faltering. Fewer cities than expected agreed to drop lawsuits against the company, and no other manufacturers have yet agreed to the conditions. Some companies have indicated an intention to wait until after the presidential election, in the hope that George W. Bush, who is considered gun-friendly, will win.
 KABAT-Elvin A. Ph.D. The Faculty and Staff of Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons mourn the loss of our distinguished friend and colleague, Dr. Elvin Kabat. Dr. Kabat's long career with Columbia University began as an Assistant Professor of Bacteriology in 1946. An immunochemist, biochemist and educator, he served Columbia for more than half a century, becoming Higgins Professor Emeritus in 1985. One of the founders of the field of immunochemistry, Dr. Kabat received the National Medal of Science, the nation's highest award for scientific achievement, from President Bush in 1991. His accomplishments are illustrated in his vast list of publications, which total more than 400 and have been distributed throughout the world. Dr. Kabat was universally admired and venerated by generations of students, colleagues and staff. He will be greatly missed and his memory cherished. We extend our deepest sympathies to his wife, Sally, and his sons. Thomas Q. Morris, M.D. Interim Dean for Clinical and Educational Affairs, Columbia Univ. College of Physicians & Surgeons David I. Hirsh, PhD, Interim Dean for Research, Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons. KABAT-Elvin A. Ph.D. The Faculty and Staff of Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons mourn the loss of our distinguished friend and colleague, Dr. Elvin Kabat. Dr. Kabat's long career with Columbia University began as an Assistant Professor of Bacteriology in 1946. An immunochemist, biochemist and educator, he served Columbia for more than half a century, becoming Higgins Professor Emeritus in 1985. One of the founders of the field of immunochemistry, Dr. Kabat received the National Medal of Science, the nation's highest award for scientific achievement, from President Bush in 1991. His accomplishments are illustrated in his vast list of publications, which total more than 400 and have been distributed throughout the world. Dr. Kabat was universally admired and venerated by generations of students, colleagues and staff. He will be greatly missed and his memory cherished. We extend our deepest sympathies to his wife, Sally, and his sons. Thomas Q. Morris, M.D. Interim Dean for Clinical and Educational Affairs, Columbia Univ. College of Physicians & Surgeons David I. Hirsh, PhD, Interim Dean for Research, Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons.
 Correction of June 16 Man in the News profile of Commerce Sec William M Daley new chief of Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign
 The anti-abortion advocates also urged Gov. George W. Bush, the expected nominee, to name a running mate who opposed abortion. ''If Governor Bush selects a pro-choice running mate, it will be a very serious strategic mistake,'' said Peggy Lehner, president of Dayton Right to Life. Mr. Thompson and the chairman of the Republican National Committee, Jim Nicholson, reiterated to reporters that, in accord with Mr. Bush's wishes, they did not expect the platform's language on abortion to change. The platform calls for an end to legalized abortion and the appointment of judges who respect ''the sanctity of innocent human life.'' Republicans who support abortion rights are struggling, once again, to change that language. Mr. Nicholson, citing Mr. Bush's deep popularity in the party and his ability to unify Republicans, said he did not expect a fight over abortion on the floor of the convention. Aside from that, one of the major themes of the day was the need for change and fresh ideas. Mr. Thompson said he expected extensive revisions to the platform to deal with rapidly changing issues -- including electronic commerce, biotechnology and women's health -- and to reflect the focus of the Bush campaign on issues like education.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush uses part of Western campaign swing to discuss what modern technology can do for public education; visits Washington State and California; collects $3.5 million in soft money campaign donations from Silicon Valley entrepreneurs; says Clinton administration's efforts to wire classrooms to Internet has given local school districts too little flexibility in their use of funds, creating system hidebound by regulations; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush used part of a Western campaign swing today to discuss what modern technology could do for public education. But there was also a lesson in what that technology -- or at least its wealthy purveyors -- could do for Mr. Bush and fellow Republicans. At a dinner tonight at the home of John T. Chambers, the chief executive of Cisco Systems, Mr. Bush collected what campaign officials estimated to be more than $3.5 million from Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. Much of it was ''soft money,'' largely unregulated donations to political parties, and all of it was to be divided between the Republican Party in California and the Republican National Committee. Gov. George W. Bush used part of a Western campaign swing today to discuss what modern technology could do for public education. But there was also a lesson in what that technology -- or at least its wealthy purveyors -- could do for Mr. Bush and fellow Republicans. At a dinner tonight at the home of John T. Chambers, the chief executive of Cisco Systems, Mr. Bush collected what campaign officials estimated to be more than $3.5 million from Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. Much of it was ''soft money,'' largely unregulated donations to political parties, and all of it was to be divided between the Republican Party in California and the Republican National Committee. ''I don't relish these big fund-raising events,'' Mr. Bush said beforehand, as his campaign plane flew west from Austin, Tex. But he was set to grin and bear several of them in a campaign week expected to be among his most lucrative. Mr. Bush's schedule included a dinner in Los Angeles on Tuesday expected to raise $2 million for the state and national parties and a gathering in Houston on Wednesday night expected to raise at least $4 million for the national committee. One of Mr. Bush's other purposes as he traveled to Vancouver, Wash., and then to Palo Alto was to promote some new proposals he said were intended to make sure that technology brought into public schools was truly helping students learn. Speaking at an elementary school in Vancouver, Mr. Bush said the Clinton administration's efforts to wire classrooms to the Internet -- it is spending about $3 billion annually on the project -- had given local school districts too little flexibility in their use of the funds, creating a system ''hidebound by regulations.'' ''The goal ought not to be how many classrooms are wired,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The goal is how are we effectively teaching children.'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Vice President Al Gore, countered that in addition to the $3 billion, there was roughly $500 million more now in the federal budget over which states and local districts had ample discretion and could be applied to provide teacher training, software purchases and other steps to make best use of schools' Internet access. ''It's been very successful,'' Mr. Hattaway said, adding that Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, has set a goal for his administration to assure that every American student was computer-literate by the eighth grade. Mr. Bush has proposed allowing workers to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes in the stock market. Mr. Gore, who has called that idea risky, is expected to announce a plan on Tuesday to help lower- and middle-income Americans invest in the market, augmenting their Social Security benefits. Mr. Bush today called this a validation of his own approach. ''My opponent changes a lot,'' he said. ''At first the stock market was 'roulette' and 'risky.' And now that the heat's on, he changes his position.'' Mr. Hattaway said Mr. Bush was missing the point. ''Gore's plan does not involve Social Security funds,'' Mr. Hattaway said. ''He is proposing a new savings plan separate from Social Security that would protect the guaranteed benefit of Social Security while letting people build up a nest egg.'' Under the Gore program, the federal government would provide as much as a 3-to-1 match, up to $1,500 a year, for money that lower- and middle-income Americans put into tax-free retirement accounts, he said. Mr. Bush was also reminded repeatedly today about the scheduled execution on Thursday of Gary Graham, a convicted killer in Texas. Scores of death-penalty protesters stood in front of a hotel here where Mr. Bush held a small fund-raiser before the Chambers dinner, and his remarks at the event were interrupted by two protesters who had gained entry to the banquet room.
 A ROLE FOR BRADLEY -- Democratic Party officials say Vice President Al Gore and former Senator Bill Bradley, his onetime rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, have worked out matters to the point that Mr. Bradley can expect a prominent speaking role at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. Asked over the weekend if Mr. Bradley would get a ''prime time'' role, the convention manager, Terry McAuliffe, a close Gore ally, told CNN, ''I think he will.'' Mr. McAuliffe also said President Clinton would have a prominent speaking role at the convention, most likely on opening night. But ultimately, Mr. McAuliffe said, ''this whole convention is about Al Gore, his vision for the future, what he is going to do as president.'' Convention planners also expect Hillary Rodham Clinton to address the convention. A ROLE FOR BRADLEY -- Democratic Party officials say Vice President Al Gore and former Senator Bill Bradley, his onetime rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, have worked out matters to the point that Mr. Bradley can expect a prominent speaking role at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. Asked over the weekend if Mr. Bradley would get a ''prime time'' role, the convention manager, Terry McAuliffe, a close Gore ally, told CNN, ''I think he will.'' Mr. McAuliffe also said President Clinton would have a prominent speaking role at the convention, most likely on opening night. But ultimately, Mr. McAuliffe said, ''this whole convention is about Al Gore, his vision for the future, what he is going to do as president.'' Convention planners also expect Hillary Rodham Clinton to address the convention. CLINTON IN TEXAS -- President Clinton ventured onto Gov. George W. Bush's Texas turf yesterday for the third time this year to raise money for Democratic candidates. Stopping in Houston and Austin, Mr. Clinton raised $1 million to help elect Democrats to the Senate and encourage Hispanic voters to turn out on Election Day. Mr. Clinton argued that there are sharp differences between the governor and Vice President Al Gore, who he said had the better plan to keep the national economy growing. The president also took Senate Republicans to task for stalling confirmation of some of his judicial nominees. He cited the Senate's failure to vote on Enrique Moreno, who was nominated for the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. ''From humble beginnings in El Paso, he established, first of all, an utterly brilliant academic career,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''I might add, more brilliant than that of virtually everyone who'd be voting on his confirmation.'' GORE ON GAS PRICES -- As gasoline prices in the Midwest escalate, so does the concern of Vice President Al Gore, who, as part of the Clinton administration, could be held politically accountable. He suggested yesterday that the big oil companies might be fixing prices. ''The big oil companies' profits have gone up 500 percent in the first part of this year, just the time when these prices are going sky high in the Midwest,'' Mr. Gore said in an interview with ABC News. ''I think that justifies a much broader investigation into possible collusion, price gouging and antitrust violations.'' Later in the day, he focused on the economy. At a fund-raising dinner in Washington for the Democratic National Committee, Mr. Gore said the nation's economic turnaround had been brought about by Clinton policies. Fifty-five people paid $10,000 each to join him and Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, who had endorsed Mr. Gore's rival, former Senator Bill Bradley, in the primaries. Mr. Kerrey called Mr. Gore ''the most qualified person in my lifetime'' to be running for president.
 Editorial says Vice Pres Al Gore's proposed pension retirement plan extracts best part of Republican candidate Gov George W Bush's proposal, leaving Bush to defend unpopular parts; says, unlike Bush's plan, it would boost private wealth without putting any basic Social Security benefits at risk (M) Vice President Al Gore has learned from his boss. With Clintonesque strokes he has put together a retirement plan that extracts the best part of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal, leaving the governor to defend the unpopular parts, such as the likely need to cut promised Social Security benefits. Mr. Bush proposes to create private savings accounts by diverting part of the Social Security payroll tax. Mr. Gore is expected to announce today that he would help families set up individual retirement accounts without touching Social Security money. But his plan, unlike Mr. Bush's, would raise national saving, help low- and moderate-income families more than high-income families and pose no threat to basic Social Security benefits. Vice President Al Gore has learned from his boss. With Clintonesque strokes he has put together a retirement plan that extracts the best part of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal, leaving the governor to defend the unpopular parts, such as the likely need to cut promised Social Security benefits. Mr. Bush proposes to create private savings accounts by diverting part of the Social Security payroll tax. Mr. Gore is expected to announce today that he would help families set up individual retirement accounts without touching Social Security money. But his plan, unlike Mr. Bush's, would raise national saving, help low- and moderate-income families more than high-income families and pose no threat to basic Social Security benefits. The Gore plan would work like 401(k) savings plans except that the government, not employers, would provide the matching funds. A married couple making $30,000 could contribute up to $1,000 a year and receive an extra $3,000 in tax credits -- a 3-for-1 match. The tax credit would be refundable so that even a family with no income tax liability would receive the full $3,000. The federal grant phases out so that a couple making $100,000 would receive only a $1,000 credit if it made a $3,000 deposit, a 1-for-3 match. The account would not be taxed until withdrawals during retirement, though families could withdraw money earlier for catastrophic medical expenses or college tuition or to buy a first home. Early withdrawals are designed to persuade low-income families to participate. Republicans accused Mr. Gore of hypocritically proposing a concept -- investing personal retirement money in stocks -- that he labeled ''risky'' when proposed by Mr. Bush. The criticism is misplaced. Investing basic retirement money in stocks can be imprudent. But investing additional money in stocks and bonds once the family's basic Social Security retirement benefit is preserved poses nowhere near the same type of risk. The tax code already includes deductions for 401(k) and other types of retirement accounts. In general, wealthy families participate more frequently than others. Mr. Gore's proposal, because it relies on refundable credits rather than deductions and provides a larger match for the savings of low-income families, would be steeply progressive. Progressivity is key to promoting savings. The economics profession is divided on whether 401(k) and other tax-subsidized accounts actually raise savings, the lifeblood of investment and growth, or merely shift existing savings out of ordinary savings accounts into tax-favored accounts. But even William Gale of the Brookings Institution, whose research raises doubts whether existing tax breaks raise savings, predicts that Mr. Gore's plan will work. It is focused on low-income families that save very little now and will almost certainly have to save more to put money into Mr. Gore's program. Like Mr. Bush's plan, Mr. Gore's would help families build wealth that they could leave for their heirs. But unlike Mr. Bush's plan, Mr. Gore would boost private wealth without putting any basic Social Security retirement benefits at risk.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column comments on proposals by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush for Social Security in their presidential campaigns (M) Due to the extraordinary degree of interest in the current presidential campaign, we are going to answer a few of the burning questions that have been raised about the Gore/ Bush proposals for Social Security. Due to the extraordinary degree of interest in the current presidential campaign, we are going to answer a few of the burning questions that have been raised about the Gore/ Bush proposals for Social Security. Social Security is not due to become insolvent until Al Gore and George Bush are around 90. We have pending crises with earlier due dates, but both men seem particularly attached to this one. Don't Gore and Bush seem like the same person to you? For all his talk about trust funds and ''retirement savings plus,'' Al Gore is basically a Democrat who wants to spend more money on domestic programs. George Bush can organize his schedule so he will never be seen with another rich white person until November, but he's still a Republican who wants to cut taxes and spend more money on defense. Plus one has funny ears and says ''I don't appreciate'' for ''I don't like,'' and the other has a bald spot and talks as if he were dictating a letter. Tiger Woods is not a part of the presidential campaign. But he was on the Ryder Cup team that George W. Bush inspired with a reading of Col. William Travis's ''victory or death'' letter from the Alamo. Has Al Gore ever helped us win the Ryder Cup? No, explain the Bush ''Star Wars'' program. That has more of a summer-movie feel to it. Today we are talking retirement. You may have read, for instance, that Mr. Bush wants to let people invest part of their Social Security money in the stock market. When Al Gore was young, did he ever think he'd be old enough to collect Social Security? Al Gore always was and always will be 55, which will start to become a real advantage once he's 70. His Social Security plan involves using most of the surplus to pay down the national debt. Then as the debt gets smaller we'd take the money we save on interest payments and squirrel it away to help pay for Social Security and Medicare benefits when the baby boomers retire.
 Gov. George W. Bush, who filed a brief supporting the pregame prayers, expressed disappointment yesterday with the decision. So did three members of the court -- Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas -- whose dissent described the majority opinion as bristling ''with hostility to all things religious in public life.''
