 David Frum Op-Ed article holds there was nothing odd about George W Bush's noninvolvement in student militancy of 1960's because radical ferment of era was work of relative minority; holds minority was smaller at Bush's Yale than at Vice Pres Al Gore's Harvard; photo (M) In the spring of 1968, the same season in which George W. Bush graduated from Yale, the university's blue-collar workers went on strike. Similar strikes would shut down the school's dining halls later on, but not this time, thanks to students who crossed the picket lines to keep the kitchens cooking. Remember those students the next time somebody suggests that there was something odd about George W. Bush's noninvolvement in the student militancy of the 1960's. The 60's were indeed a time of radical ferment. But that ferment was the work of a relative minority, larger at Al Gore's Harvard, smaller at George Bush's Yale. Richard Nixon and George Wallace together won almost 60 percent of the vote in 1968. Astute Democrats likewise knew which way the wind was blowing: Jimmy Carter, the lone Democrat to reach the White House in the two decades between the presidencies of Lyndon Johnson and Bill Clinton, defended Lieut. William Calley when he was tried for the My Lai massacre, calling him a scapegoat. As governor of Georgia, Mr. Carter even asked motorists to drive with their headlights on in daylight hours to show sympathy. In the spring of 1968, the same season in which George W. Bush graduated from Yale, the university's blue-collar workers went on strike. Similar strikes would shut down the school's dining halls later on, but not this time, thanks to students who crossed the picket lines to keep the kitchens cooking. Remember those students the next time somebody suggests that there was something odd about George W. Bush's noninvolvement in the student militancy of the 1960's. The 60's were indeed a time of radical ferment. But that ferment was the work of a relative minority, larger at Al Gore's Harvard, smaller at George Bush's Yale. Richard Nixon and George Wallace together won almost 60 percent of the vote in 1968. Astute Democrats likewise knew which way the wind was blowing: Jimmy Carter, the lone Democrat to reach the White House in the two decades between the presidencies of Lyndon Johnson and Bill Clinton, defended Lieut. William Calley when he was tried for the My Lai massacre, calling him a scapegoat. As governor of Georgia, Mr. Carter even asked motorists to drive with their headlights on in daylight hours to show sympathy. So George W. Bush, Yale '68, is not clueless when he tells interviewers that he didn't see much of the radicalism of the 1960's. He is accurately representing the experience of his micro-generation. And what kind of assumption is that? The 1960's radicals were wrong about cutting off American arms and aid to South Vietnam, wrong about the larger struggle with the Soviet Union, wrong about the harmlessness of drugs, wrong about eliminating freshman composition from the college curriculum. Even Mr. Bush's rival for the presidency understands that, which may explain why he begins his Internet campaign biography with the arresting sentence, ''Al Gore served in the U.S. Army in Vietnam.''
 Gore Effort Casts Bush As Beholden to Big Oil  The Gore campaign has begun an effort to paint Gov. George W. Bush, a onetime oil company executive, as a tool of oil interests that are relentlessly gouging consumers. The campaign is worried that voters will blame the Clinton administration -- and Vice President Al Gore -- for the recent surge in gasoline prices. Death Penalty Stance Affirmed  Gov. George W. Bush said he understood and sympathized with the emotions of death penalty opponents but that his support was firm, and would remain so, even if he felt it was hurting him politically. Gore Effort Casts Bush As Beholden to Big Oil  The Gore campaign has begun an effort to paint Gov. George W. Bush, a onetime oil company executive, as a tool of oil interests that are relentlessly gouging consumers. The campaign is worried that voters will blame the Clinton administration -- and Vice President Al Gore -- for the recent surge in gasoline prices. Death Penalty Stance Affirmed  Gov. George W. Bush said he understood and sympathized with the emotions of death penalty opponents but that his support was firm, and would remain so, even if he felt it was hurting him politically.
 Richard Tafel, executive director of the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay political organization based in Washington, said a remarkable shift has occurred in that candidates across the country now reach out to a group they had previously shunned. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas met with gay political representatives last year in what Mr. Tafel termed an unprecedented meeting for a presumptive Republican presidential nominee. The New York chapter of the Log Cabin Republicans exulted last month over acceptance of its first delegation to a state-nominating convention and has posted a picture on its Web site of its chapter leader shaking hands with William D. Powers, the state Republican chairman.
 Debate over Social Security poses risks for presidential campaigns of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; both campaigns have largely avoided discussing any potentially painful measures to ensure system remains solvent as population ages; Bush has focused on rewards of private investment accounts within system, while Gore has called for new retirement benefits inside and outside Social Security; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore stopped here today to talk about Social Security, and used charts and statistics to lead a friendly audience to a predictable conclusion: that his approach to retirement security was more prudent and a better deal than the plan advocated by Gov. George W. Bush. Vice President Al Gore stopped here today to talk about Social Security, and used charts and statistics to lead a friendly audience to a predictable conclusion: that his approach to retirement security was more prudent and a better deal than the plan advocated by Gov. George W. Bush. There are risks for both parties. It is still not clear that Mr. Bush's decision to push for private investment accounts within Social Security, the biggest change in the retirement program since its inception, will not blow up in his face, as some Democrats have predicted. But it is not clear either that deriding Mr. Bush's plan will help Mr. Gore turn out older voters who could tip the scales in swing states, or that he can avoid seeming out of step with younger voters for whom stock investing is an opportunity rather than a ''risky scheme.'' The rival presidential campaigns have largely avoided discussing any of the potentially painful measures that might have to be taken to ensure that Social Security remains solvent as the population ages. Mr. Bush has focused instead on the rewards of investing, while Mr. Gore has stressed that the fast-growing federal budget surplus makes it possible to add new retirement benefits inside and outside of Social Security. Indeed, part of the problem for the campaigns is that voters do not seem to have fully sorted out where they stand. A New York Times poll last month found that 47 percent of voters felt Mr. Gore would do a better job of dealing with Social Security, compared with 39 percent for Mr. Bush. But when asked about private investment accounts, the centerpiece of Mr. Bush's plan, 51 percent said it was a good idea and 45 percent said it was a bad idea. The differences of opinion are most marked across generational lines. Among 30-to-44-year-olds, Mr. Bush's personal accounts plan was favored by 66 percent and opposed by 30 percent. Among people 65 and over, 27 percent favored private accounts, and 67 percent thought they were a bad idea. Partly in recognition of the appeal of investing to younger people, Mr. Gore rolled out a proposal this week to create savings and investment accounts outside of the Social Security system. The plan calls for the government to match deposits on a sliding scale, with most of the government subsidies going to low- and middle-income people. In making the proposal, Mr. Gore sought to reframe the debate as being not over whether investing amounts to casino economics, which he had occasionally seemed to suggest, but over whether it has a place within Social Security, a program built on a guaranteed government benefit unaffected by the ups and downs of Wall Street. ''I don't think that Gore's scare-tactic approach played very well,'' said Robert L. Bixby, executive director of the Concord Coalition, a fiscal policy research organization. ''I'm being hopeful here, but maybe the climate has changed enough that you can have a substantive debate on the issue.'' Mr. Gore has seemed intent in the last two days on addressing the issue not so much along generational lines as along class lines. Republicans see Mr. Bush's Social Security proposal as a way to cement their party's appeal to what they view as an emerging investor class, made up of people across income levels who have grown comfortable making choices about how to handle their money. Mr. Gore, by contrast, is increasingly pitching his proposal at working people struggling to take advantage of the good economy, and is implicitly casting Mr. Bush's approach to Social Security and economic policy as one designed for the wealthy. ''We have to put an end to the days when savings are a scramble, if not an unaffordable luxury,'' Mr. Gore said before leaving Des Moines for Minnesota and a meeting with Gov. Jesse Ventura, whose popularity with independent voters has led the Gore camp to cultivate him throughout the campaign. ''This is the choice in this election: Are you for working people?'' Mr. Gore asked the crowd of supporters at a carpenters union hall here. In another indication of how the wealth amassed by many people in the last decade is upsetting traditional political calculations, Mr. Gore also set out his own plan today for reducing the federal estate tax. Democrats had long opposed reductions in the estate tax as a giveaway to the rich. But 65 Democrats joined the Republican majority in the House to pass legislation earlier this month to repeal the tax, and the party has found itself on the defensive over the issue. Democrats, including Mr. Gore, have become increasingly sensitive to pressure from farmers and small-business owners, who say the tax endangers their ability to pass their holdings along to another generation. Mr. Gore's plan, which his campaign said would cost $7 billion over 10 years, is similar to a plan backed by House Democratic leaders and would focus its benefits on family farms and small businesses. Rather than repealing the tax entirely, as would the House Republican bill, Mr. Gore's plan would increase the value of a farm or small business that would be exempt from estate taxation. With some minimal estate planning, a married couple running a farm or business could eventually exempt $5 million of their estate under Mr. Gore's plan; such planning currently allows the couple an exemption of $2.6 million.
 The department said in a statement that Ms. Kanchanalak made the illegal donations to gain access for herself and Thai business executives to President Clinton and administration officials. Public records showed that Ms. Kanchanalak attended at least 26 White House events after Mr. Clinton's election in 1992. Mr. Clinton was present at 10 of those events, and Vice President Al Gore attended 2. On three other occasions, Ms. Kanchanalak met with officials of the National Security Council, the White House agency that coordinates foreign policy.
 BUSH RESPONDS TO SENATORS  Five moderate Republican senators who support abortion rights sent a letter on April 12 to Gov. George W. Bush, the party's presumptive presidential nominee, asking him to ''take the lead'' in changing the Republican platform's anti-abortion plank. They also invited Mr. Bush to lunch. On Tuesday, they got a response -- to the lunch invitation. One senator, Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, said he still sought a ''more specific response'' on abortion and remained hopeful he would get it. Mr. Bush and platform leaders have said they intend to leave the plank -- which calls for an end to legalized abortion and the appointment of judges who ''respect the sanctity of innocent human life'' -- as it is. As for the lunch, Mr. Bush indicated he would try to make one if his schedule permitted, Mr. Specter said. BUSH RESPONDS TO SENATORS  Five moderate Republican senators who support abortion rights sent a letter on April 12 to Gov. George W. Bush, the party's presumptive presidential nominee, asking him to ''take the lead'' in changing the Republican platform's anti-abortion plank. They also invited Mr. Bush to lunch. On Tuesday, they got a response -- to the lunch invitation. One senator, Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, said he still sought a ''more specific response'' on abortion and remained hopeful he would get it. Mr. Bush and platform leaders have said they intend to leave the plank -- which calls for an end to legalized abortion and the appointment of judges who ''respect the sanctity of innocent human life'' -- as it is. As for the lunch, Mr. Bush indicated he would try to make one if his schedule permitted, Mr. Specter said. NEW PROPOSAL ON COMPUTER EDUCATION  Gov. George W. Bush yesterday proposed another $80 million annually in federal grants to not-for-profit education centers in low-income neighborhoods that help teach children and adults to use computers. ''The great challenge facing America is whether all people will have access to new technologies,'' he said. The setting in which he introduced his plan, a Hispanic neighborhood in Los Angeles, was arguably more significant than its details. Mr. Bush has frequently appeared with minorities to bolster his claim of being a new kind of Republican and is aggressively courting the Hispanic vote. Later in the day, he flew to Houston to speak to the annual convention of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists. Last year, Mr. Bush provoked complaints from minority journalists at a conference in Seattle when he declined an invitation to address them. BUSH SURGES IN CONNECTICUT  Gov. George W. Bush has erased the nine-point advantage Vice President Al Gore had among Connecticut voters in April, a new poll released yesterday by Quinnipiac University showed. The two presidential candidates are now in a virtual tie, with Mr. Gore at 43 percent and Mr. Bush at 42 percent, well within the poll's margin of sampling error of 2.7 percentage points.
 Editorial opposes planned Texas execution of Gary Graham in face of doubts about his murder conviction; urges Board of Pardons and Paroles and Gov George W Bush to act We seldom comment two days in a row on the same subject, but the case of Gary Graham, who is scheduled to die by lethal injection at 6 p.m. today in Texas, merits concentrated attention. It has demonstrated to the nation the serious deficiencies in a capital punishment system that Gov. George W. Bush defended again yesterday as ''fair and just.'' Mr. Graham's situation has also exposed the timidity of both Governor Bush and his Democratic presidential opponent, Al Gore, in addressing the risks of wrongful execution of inmates who have been deprived of fair trials. We seldom comment two days in a row on the same subject, but the case of Gary Graham, who is scheduled to die by lethal injection at 6 p.m. today in Texas, merits concentrated attention. It has demonstrated to the nation the serious deficiencies in a capital punishment system that Gov. George W. Bush defended again yesterday as ''fair and just.'' Mr. Graham's situation has also exposed the timidity of both Governor Bush and his Democratic presidential opponent, Al Gore, in addressing the risks of wrongful execution of inmates who have been deprived of fair trials. It is not asking too much to insist on a fair hearing, especially when a life is at risk. Perhaps at the 11th hour Governor Bush can demonstrate the leadership that has been missing so far in this case.
 Teamsters president James P Hoffa is set to appear at news conference with possible Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader, in new turn in labor's rocky links to Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign; Hoffa reportedly is not prepared to endorse Nader, but will urge he and Patrick J Buchanan be included in any debates because they are likely to raise issues Teamsters care about; AFL-CIO president John J Sweeney is set to meet with United Auto Workers head Stephen P Yokich to press him to endorse Gore (M) The labor movement's rocky relationship with the Gore campaign  takes a new turn today when James P. Hoffa, the Teamsters president, appears alongside Ralph Nader at a news conference and is expected to shower praise on him. Teamster officials said yesterday that Mr. Hoffa was not prepared to  endorse Mr. Nader for president but would urge that any presidential debates include him and Patrick J. Buchanan rather than being limited to Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Democratic and Republican nominees. The labor movement's rocky relationship with the Gore campaign  takes a new turn today when James P. Hoffa, the Teamsters president, appears alongside Ralph Nader at a news conference and is expected to shower praise on him. Teamster officials said yesterday that Mr. Hoffa was not prepared to  endorse Mr. Nader for president but would urge that any presidential debates include him and Patrick J. Buchanan rather than being limited to Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Democratic and Republican nominees. But beyond that, the Hoffa-Nader appearance today, in Washington, will be a pointed reminder to Mr. Gore that large segments of organized labor remain bitterly unhappy with him over his support for the China trade deal, which cleared a huge hurdle with passage in the House last month. Ever since the Clinton administration began pushing normalized trade relations with China, Mr. Gore has been trying to placate labor leaders and their rank and file, whose support is considered crucial in November. But though he won the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last fall, the Teamsters, with 1.4 million members, and the United Automobile Workers, with 800,000, have so far withheld their backing, largely because of their anger over the trade bill, which the unions fear will speed an exodus of American manufacturing jobs to China. Like the Teamsters, the auto workers have expressed interest in Mr. Nader's campaign. Last month, shortly before the House approved the China trade bill, Stephen P. Yokich, the U.A.W. president, announced that his union would explore Mr. Nader and other alternatives to the nominees of the two major parties. He denounced Mr. Gore and President Clinton, saying they had  ''once again sided with multinational corporations against workers here and abroad.'' John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., flew to Detroit to have lunch with Mr. Yokich yesterday, largely to discuss the endorsement that the auto workers have withheld from Mr. Gore, labor officials said. Mr. Sweeney, one of Mr. Gore's most powerful backers, has also been one of the most enthusiastic, saying that while labor disagrees with the vice president over the China deal, they are aligned on most issues. Even so, Mr. Gore's efforts to mend fences with labor suffered a setback last week when he named Commerce Secretary William M. Daley chairman of his campaign. Many union leaders saw the appointment as a slap in the face because Mr. Daley was the Clinton administration's chief strategist in the Capitol Hill fight over the trade bill. Mr. Yokich is facing considerable heat from within the U.A.W. about the reluctance to endorse Mr. Gore. Douglas Fraser, a former president of the union, sharply criticized Mr. Yokich's position in a speech last week before an association representing thousands of retired union  members. ''The U.A.W. should endorse Gore,'' Mr. Fraser said in an interview. ''The reason is there is no viable alternative. Nader is not an alternative. Politics is not playing a game. Nader's done some constructive things, but the simple fact is he has zero chance of being elected president. The politics of the situation is every vote Nader gets is a vote he takes away from Al Gore, not George Bush. He shouldn't be playing around, because he has absolutely no chance, no matter what his virtues are.'' Paul Krell, the U.A.W.'s spokesman, said: ''We haven't closed the door on Gore. We've just opened the door to Nader.''
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column, citing examples of what he calls zany extremism of hard-right Texas Republican Party, says Gov George W Bush was wise to avoid attending party convention (M) Gov. George W. Bush chose to stay away from the state convention of the Texas Republican Party last week. If you were trying to sell yourself to American voters as a sane, moderately conservative candidate for president, you'd have stayed away, too. The rest of the nation is not nearly ready for the zany extremism of the Republican Party in Mr. Bush's home state. The convention was held in Houston, and here are just a few of the items in the platform adopted by the delegates: Gov. George W. Bush chose to stay away from the state convention of the Texas Republican Party last week. If you were trying to sell yourself to American voters as a sane, moderately conservative candidate for president, you'd have stayed away, too. The rest of the nation is not nearly ready for the zany extremism of the Republican Party in Mr. Bush's home state. The convention was held in Houston, and here are just a few of the items in the platform adopted by the delegates: Mr. Bush thought it would be prudent to steer clear of Houston while the convention was under way. He spent his time traveling and raising campaign cash in New England, Ohio, Kentucky and Florida. It may be odd for a governor to skip the convention of his own state party but Republican politicians in Texas seemed to understand that the potential for embarrassment was great, and it was probably better for Mr. Bush to keep his distance. Governor Bush's wife, Laura, spoke at the convention, and Mr. Bush told the delegates, in a videotaped statement: ''I really don't like missing my first Texas state Republican convention since 1990.'' ''Let me put it this way,'' said the spokesman. ''Those interested in Governor Bush's positions and platforms should listen to Governor Bush on the campaign trail, or listen to him at the National Republican Convention this summer. He is running on his own positions and agenda items, on issues like improving education, economic opportunity and national defense. ''The state party platform, which the governor was not involved in drafting, was created by approximately 8,000 delegates and should be viewed as a broad statement of philosophy. But, again, for those interested in the Bush agenda, they should pay attention to Governor Bush.''
 The abuses of the Section 527 groups have spread this year, blowing another hole in campaign fund-raising laws. Those laws were largely obviated when the Justice Department allowed elected officials and party organizations to use ''soft money'' to circumvent longstanding limits on donations. But at least the parties disclosed the donors. This year Representative Tom DeLay and others have set up what they say are independent units that run ads attacking candidates but do not have to make their donors known. The most notorious example occurred in March, when secret donors who later turned out to be supporters of Gov. George W. Bush ran attack ads against Senator John McCain.
 Tillie Fowler of Florida, vice chairwoman of the House Republican Conference, said: ''Unlike the Clinton-Gore plan, we give all seniors and the disabled the right to choose an affordable prescription drug benefit that fits their needs. Americans can choose a Cadillac plan, or they can opt for a more affordable Honda plan.''
 Bruce R Glickman letter disputes June 20 editorial comparing Social Security and other retirement plans proposed by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush (S) I disagree with your June 20 editorial comparing the Bush and Gore Social Security plans. I disagree with your June 20 editorial comparing the Bush and Gore Social Security plans. A basic difference between the two plans is that the Gore plan would cost more in taxes and the Bush plan would take existing money and redirect it. Al Gore's plan does not deal with the flaw in the system and is a form of welfare that may not be needed in later years. Many wealthy people started out from humble origins. The Bush plan is infinitely better.
 Michael Katz letter, commenting on June 19 article on Vice Pres Al Gore proposal for special retirement accounts, says Social Security is better bargain for taxpayers (S) Vice President Al Gore's Social Security proposal is preferable to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal because the Gore plan would not divert needed payroll-tax revenue from the Social Security Trust Fund (front page, June 19). Vice President Al Gore's Social Security proposal is preferable to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal because the Gore plan would not divert needed payroll-tax revenue from the Social Security Trust Fund (front page, June 19).
 In the case of the convicted murderer Gary Graham, which has riveted national attention, presidential politics was added to the stakes as opponents argued that Gov. George W. Bush should exert influence for a grant of clemency. Behind the pressure on Mr. Bush is a dangerous attack on the foundations of our judicial system: on the reliability of eyewitness testimony and the weight it should be given, and on juries' decisions on the credibility of witnesses. In the case of the convicted murderer Gary Graham, which has riveted national attention, presidential politics was added to the stakes as opponents argued that Gov. George W. Bush should exert influence for a grant of clemency. Behind the pressure on Mr. Bush is a dangerous attack on the foundations of our judicial system: on the reliability of eyewitness testimony and the weight it should be given, and on juries' decisions on the credibility of witnesses.
 Andrew G Biggs letter comments on June 20 editorial comparing Social Security and other retirement plans proposed by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush (S) As you point out, Vice President Al Gore's plan for new voluntary investment accounts for low-income workers would work like 401(k) savings plans except that the government, not employers, would provide the matching funds. It is important, then, to note that just 39 percent of workers earning under $15,000 participate in 401(k) programs with employer matches, according to a 1998 National Tax Journal study. The biggest reason is lack of disposable income: a 1998 survey by the Employee Benefit Research Institute found that 40 percent of workers said they could not afford to save even an extra $20 per week for retirement. Hence, it is unreasonable to expect high participation rates for Mr. Gore's program.
 Thomas P Solferino letter comments on June 20 editorial comparing Social Security and other retirement plans proposed by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush (S) Unlike Vice President Al Gore's Social Security plan, Gov. George W. Bush's plan addresses the problem where it lies, within the Social Security system. By giving future recipients the choice to invest part of their contribution into individual retirement accounts, Mr. Bush is putting the ''trust'' back into the system. Mr. Bush's plan creates no new tax or entitlement, and working people will know that their money is actually earning interest (or if invested in equities, adding value). The best way to shore up Social Security is to decrease future retirees' dependency on benefits without the threat of increased spending. In this regard, Mr. Bush's plan is superior.
 Gov George W Bush, in Los Angeles completing Western campaign swing, says he understands and sympathizes with death penalty opponents, but continues to firmly support capital punishment, even if stand hurts him politically; says he cannot halt execution of convicted murder Gary Graham, unless Texas Pardons and Paroles Board votes to do so; photo (M) The day before a scheduled execution in Texas that has come under intense scrutiny, Gov. George W. Bush said he understood and sympathized with the strong emotions of people who opposed the death penalty, calling it ''a subject that needs to be debated in America.'' The day before a scheduled execution in Texas that has come under intense scrutiny, Gov. George W. Bush said he understood and sympathized with the strong emotions of people who opposed the death penalty, calling it ''a subject that needs to be debated in America.'' ''I understand it's a high-profile case, and I know there is a lot of emotion swirling around this case,'' Mr. Bush told reporters this morning in Los Angeles, where he wrapped up a campaign swing through Western states before returning to Texas early this evening. ''The death penalty is not an easy subject for a lot of folks.'' But, he said, it was part of Texas law, and it was his duty as governor, ''to uphold the laws of the land,'' a phrase he used several times. ''If it costs me politically,'' Mr. Bush said, ''it costs me politically.'' There is little reason to believe it will -- or has -- and it is possible that the opposite is true. But Mr. Bush nonetheless seemed to be selecting his words and controlling his expression today with care. Gone was his usual buoyancy; in its place was a subdued manner and whispery voice that alternately suggested seriousness and weariness with the questions about the death penalty. As both the likely Republican presidential nominee and the governor of a state that executes more inmates than any other, Mr. Bush has become a lightning rod for protests against capital punishment and a focal point in the intensifying national re-examination of whether people sentenced to die have received fair trials. Several times over the last three days, demonstrators implored Mr. Bush to stop the execution of Mr. Graham. In response to reporters' questions at a news conference today, Mr. Bush struck a more ruminative note than he often had when discussing the death penalty publicly. He said he did not think that news organizations were paying too much attention to executions in Texas. ''The death penalty is a subject that needs to be debated in America, and cases come along that spark the debate, '' Mr. Bush said. ''I also keep in mind the victims,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And the reason I support the death penalty is I believe it saves lives. That's why I support it. It so happens the people of my state support it as well.'' Mr. Graham received such a reprieve from Gov. Ann Richards in 1993, and Mr. Bush said today that his interpretation of the law was that he could not grant Mr. Graham another one. He said he would be in a position to make a decision about Mr. Graham's fate only if the board voted to halt the execution. The board's vote is expected on Thursday several hours before Mr. Graham is slated to be put to death. Mr. Bush said he was talking daily with the state's lawyers about Mr. Graham's case and was doing what he always did: assessing whether there was convincing evidence of Mr. Graham's guilt and whether Mr. Graham had full access to courts.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign, worried that voters will blame Gore and Clinton administration for gasoline price surge, seeks to paint Gov George W Bush, former oil company executive, as tool of oil interests it says are gouging consumers; Sen Tom Harkin, speaking for Gore campaign, charges Bush gets 'all his money' from oil companies; says he wants oil executives to testify before Congress; Bush and Congressional Republicans blame price rise on Clinton administration; Bush, who had been reluctant to discuss issue publicly, joins Gore in endorsing Federal Trade Commission probe (M) Worried that voters will blame the Clinton administration -- and Vice President Al Gore -- for the recent surge in gasoline prices, the Gore campaign has begun an effort to paint Gov. George W. Bush, a onetime oil company executive, as a tool of the oil interests it says are relentlessly gouging consumers. Speaking today for the Gore campaign, Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, said Mr. Bush was ''getting all his money'' from the oil companies, a reference to the industry's substantial financial contributions to Mr. Bush's presidential campaign. Worried that voters will blame the Clinton administration -- and Vice President Al Gore -- for the recent surge in gasoline prices, the Gore campaign has begun an effort to paint Gov. George W. Bush, a onetime oil company executive, as a tool of the oil interests it says are relentlessly gouging consumers. Speaking today for the Gore campaign, Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, said Mr. Bush was ''getting all his money'' from the oil companies, a reference to the industry's substantial financial contributions to Mr. Bush's presidential campaign. For his part, Mr. Bush and Republicans on Capitol Hill blame the gas-price increase on the Clinton administration, saying the administration has had no coherent domestic energy policy and, in imposing regulations to meet clean air standards, had allowed prices to drift as high as $2.39 a gallon in the Midwest. Mr. Bush also said the administration had failed to persuade the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to ''open the spigots'' to increase the supply. Mr. Bush, who has been reluctant to discuss the issue publicly, broke his silence today and joined Mr. Gore in endorsing the investigation by the Federal Trade Commission that was announced on Tuesday. Mr. Bush's comment could undercut Mr. Gore's efforts to portray the governor as part of the problem. In any case, the issue has jumped to the top of the agenda in presidential politics as Americans begin their summer vacations and both sides are trying to exploit it. Gore officials see the emergence of this issue as an opportunity to link Mr. Bush directly in the public mind with the oil companies and portray Mr. Gore as on the side of working families. This has been a longtime goal of the Gore campaign, but it has not succeeded so far. Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said: ''It all comes down to who people think is on their side. People believe, and rightly so, that the oil companies are in large part responsible for the price of gasoline. They don't believe the government is responsible for the price of gas. So what average people are deciding is, 'Who do I want in the government when gas prices skyrocket?' We think the answer is clear: Vice President Gore is on their side, Governor Bush isn't.'' Mr. Gore himself has ratcheted up his language on the price increases, last week saying in selective interviews with Midwest television stations that he wanted an investigation into possible collusion. Today, he said at the opening of a Social Security speech in Iowa, one of the states most affected, that he was concerned about the ''conduct of the oil companies'' and that they may have been price gouging. Mr. Gore noted that OPEC had indicated today that it would increase oil production, a move that would presumably put downward pressure on gasoline prices in the United States. But he said the issue deserved thorough investigation by the Federal Trade Commission. ''I hope that it will be thorough and hard-hitting,'' Mr. Gore said of the investigation. ''If there's evidence of what I suspect there's evidence of, it ought to be dealt with quickly and harshly. I think it's time to put our feet on the brakes of what may well be big oil's price gouging.'' Senator Harkin, speaking on behalf of the Gore campaign on a conference call with reporters, accused the oil companies of ''outright thievery.'' He went on to castigate Mr. Bush for his ''silence'' on the matter, saying, ''What can you expect of someone who once claimed, and I quote, 'There's no such thing as being too closely aligned to the oil business in West Texas'?'' The quotation from Mr. Bush was made in a 1978 Congressional campaign. Acknowledging that the quotation was more than 20 years old, Mr. Harkin said: ''The point is, the test of character and leadership is when you're willing to take on your friends when it's in the nation's best interest.'' Mr. Bush signed an emergency tax bill in 1999 that gave state tax breaks to oil and gas companies. The Dallas Morning News reported that the bill saved Richard Rainwater, a former Bush business partner, $1 million. At least 14 of Mr. Bush's ''Pioneers,'' his largest financial contributors, have ties to the oil industry. Mr. Bush's campaign has received $1.5 million from energy interests as of April 30, while Mr. Gore had received less than $125,000 as of the same date. But the Gore strategy of opening up fire on the oil front carries some dangers for the Gore campaign. For one thing, rising prices -- and being reminded of them -- could undermine consumer confidence in the economy at a time when Mr. Gore is boasting about the economy on his ''progress and prosperity tour.'' Republicans also said that Mr. Gore has obsessively lobbied for so-called ''clean-air fuel,'' the kind that is now at the center of the Midwestern price increases, without worrying about the consequences. ''He is the one who pushed this whole idea of a different type of gasoline,'' said Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois. But Gore officials say the environmental standards leading to the reformulation of gasoline have added only four to eight cents a gallon to the cost of fuel and would not account for such a drastic price increase. In his 1992 environmental treatise, ''Earth in the Balance,'' Mr. Gore himself proposed the idea of higher fuel taxes on oil companies to help reduce pollution; as part of that, he suggested a corresponding cut in corporate income and payroll taxes.
 ''World demand will go up by 1.5 million barrels a day in the third quarter compared to the second quarter,'' Mr. Ross predicted here today. ''So we are not going to get the supply to increase stock-building. This is not going to make Al Gore or the U.S. government very happy.''
