 Article describes scene at BFI Recycling plant in Bushwick, Brooklyn, one of about 10 recycling plants serving New York City; plant is owned by Browning-Ferris Industries, huge waste collection company that recently won 20-year contract to handle most of city's garbage when Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island closes next year; photo (M) Mr. Munez rescues the recyclables that New York City residents collect. At 65, he is probably the oldest and almost certainly the most enthusiastic sorter at his recycling plant in Bushwick, Brooklyn. It is a cavernous, cacophonous building, the size of two city blocks, filled with 20-foot-high stacks of compressed metal and plastic and paper blocks. Mr. Munez rescues the recyclables that New York City residents collect. At 65, he is probably the oldest and almost certainly the most enthusiastic sorter at his recycling plant in Bushwick, Brooklyn. It is a cavernous, cacophonous building, the size of two city blocks, filled with 20-foot-high stacks of compressed metal and plastic and paper blocks. The BFI recycling plant in Bushwick is one of about 10 recycling plants serving the city. Some items can be salvaged mechanically: a strong six-foot-wide magnet lifts out some metal cans, and glass is smashed into fine particles in a rotating cylinder and sifted through holes in it. But most of the recyclables must be removed and sorted the old-fashioned way -- by hand. Like the Browning-Ferris center, most of the recycling plants are owned by big waste companies, and the few that are not will probably wind up being absorbed. Mr. Kruk said he came to the Bushwick plant when Browning-Ferris bought the little recycling plant he and a friend had started in Brooklyn. While the city pays recycling plants to take some things, like glass and plastic, the plants pay for others, like paper. Of the 13,000 tons of garbage that the city collects from New York City households every day, 2,400 tons are recyclables, including 1,300 tons of paper. A high percentage of it is dumped at the Browning-Ferris plant in Bushwick: 825 tons, including 300 tons of paper.
 The campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, said the new figures vindicated his contention that the nation can afford the large tax cut he has proposed and still have money to create private investment accounts within Social Security, improve education and health care, build a national missile defense system and reduce the debt. Vice President Al Gore's campaign said the new figures highlighted the benefits of fiscal responsibility and the contrast between his emphasis on shoring up Social Security and Medicare and Mr. Bush's push for a tax cut that would give most of its benefits to the wealthy. In offering to swap a tax reduction for his prescription drug plan, Mr. Clinton was to some extent insulating Mr. Gore and Democrats in Congress from criticism by Republicans, who accuse them of opposing popular tax cuts.
 BUSH EXTENDS LEAD  Gov. George W. Bush is widening his lead over Vice President Al Gore in the presidential race, a new survey suggests. Mr. Bush was chosen by 52 percent of voters and Mr. Gore by 39 percent in a weekend telephone survey, according to a CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll released Monday. The same poll taken the week of June 5 showed Mr. Bush with 48 percent, and Mr. Gore with 44 percent, with the same margin of error of plus or minus five percentage points. That means differences of less than five points are not statistically significant. In the same poll late last month, Mr. Bush had 49 percent to Mr. Gore's 42 percent.
 To that end, I propose that we follow Vice President Gore's recommendation and lock away that portion of the surplus that comes from the Medicare taxes people pay. Medicare payroll taxes should not be used to finance tax cuts or other spending. They should be saved for Medicare and Medicare alone. There is already broad bipartisan support for saving the Social Security surplus for debt reduction. It's time to do the same for Medicare, by taking Medicare off budget.
 Bush Would Split I.N.S.  Gov. George W. Bush proposed the splitting of the Immigration and Naturalization Service into two separate agencies, one to deal with law enforcement and the other to provide services to immigrants. In a separate speech at a C.O.R.E. gathering in Manhattan, he called for financing mentoring programs for children whose parents are in prison.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush campaigns in New York City, where he presents himself as 'different kind of Republican;' describes immigrant-friendly approach to bureaucratic Immigration and Naturalization Service; addresses Congress of Racial Equality, making broad appeal to black voters; will dedicate week to making appeal across party lines to groups that traditionally lean Democratic; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush continued yesterday to present himself as a ''different kind of Republican,'' describing an immigrant-friendly approach to the bureaucratic Immigration and Naturalization Service and making a broad appeal to black voters in an address in Manhattan. Mr. Bush lauded racial harmony in a dinner speech before the Congress of Racial Equality at the Hilton Hotel in Midtown. He said he wanted to finance mentoring programs for children whose parents were in prison and to rally ''the vast armies of compassion.'' Among those on the dais were Wayne LaPierre, executive vice president of the National Rifle Association; Bob Grant, the conservative radio talk-show host; Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; and descendants of Thomas Jefferson and his wife, Martha, and others thought to be descended from Jefferson and his slave Sally Hemings. Gov. George W. Bush continued yesterday to present himself as a ''different kind of Republican,'' describing an immigrant-friendly approach to the bureaucratic Immigration and Naturalization Service and making a broad appeal to black voters in an address in Manhattan. Mr. Bush lauded racial harmony in a dinner speech before the Congress of Racial Equality at the Hilton Hotel in Midtown. He said he wanted to finance mentoring programs for children whose parents were in prison and to rally ''the vast armies of compassion.'' Among those on the dais were Wayne LaPierre, executive vice president of the National Rifle Association; Bob Grant, the conservative radio talk-show host; Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; and descendants of Thomas Jefferson and his wife, Martha, and others thought to be descended from Jefferson and his slave Sally Hemings. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman, said Mr. Bush was dedicating himself this week to making a broad appeal across party lines to groups that traditionally lean Democratic. Today he plans to discuss welfare-to-work programs in Michigan, and the next day he plans to speak in Ohio about removing barriers to those with disabilities. Addressing the League of United Latin American Citizens yesterday at a conference in Washington, Mr. Bush spoke in brief generalities, saying that as president he would ''reform the I.N.S.'' and that he wanted a ''more humane'' approach to immigration. His aides said later that while Mr. Bush would propose his own legislation, he favored the approach of Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan, and Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. Their bill is viewed by pro-immigration groups as more helpful to immigrants than the House bill proposed by Representatives Lamar Smith of Texas and Harold Rogers of Kentucky, both Republicans. Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said the governor was not endorsing any particular legislation but added, ''There are no differences between the governor's bill and Senator Abraham's bill.'' Although Mr. Bush's language was vague and his view seems to differ little from that of the Clinton administration, the point was to distinguish himself from the stricter Republican immigration politics of yore. The Bush campaign has been working to change the reputation the party gained in 1994 when some prominent Republicans, including Pete Wilson, then the governor of California, backed a California ballot proposition that would deny medical and education services to children of illegal immigrants. Mr. Bush did not comment directly on the proposition, which voters overwhelmingly endorsed, saying he did not want to tell another state what to do, but he said he would educate all children. Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum, a Washington advocacy group for immigrants, said in an interview that Mr. Bush's proposal to split the immigration service was ''not exactly a profile in courage,'' since almost everyone supported it. Mr. Sharry said it was more interesting that Mr. Bush had not mentioned other issues of importance to Latino voters and especially immigrants, like the H-1B visa bill, which would increase the number of visas for high-tech workers from abroad. Mr. Bush supports increasing the number of visas, but Republicans -- and Democrats, particularly those from organized labor -- are divided over whether this is a good idea. Vice President Al Gore is to address the League of United Latin American Citizens on Friday. Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman, said Mr. Gore wanted to streamline the immigration agency. ''Bush would start from square 1,'' Mr. Hattaway said, ''and we don't think that's necessary.'' Commenting more broadly on Mr. Bush's approach, Mr. Hattaway said: ''Bush is clearly trying to make himself out to be a different kind of Republican by appearing friendly to immigrants. But under his leadership in Texas, Hispanics are not doing as well as other residents.''
 ''This administration has no energy policy; Mrs. Clinton has no energy policy,'' Mr. Lazio said in Buffalo, echoing the sentiments of Gov. George W. Bush, who seized on the gas price issue last week. Vice President Al Gore, who has attributed the price spike to gouging by big oil companies, plans on Tuesday to outline his own energy policy, stressing the use of alternative fuels.
 CANADA: U.S. ENVOY'S NEW JOB  Raymond A. J. Chretien, Canada's Ambassador to Washington since 1994, has been chosen as Ambassador to France. The switch comes less than a month after the press interpreted a speech by Mr. Chretien as an implicit endorsement of Vice President Gore in the American presidential race. Aides to the ambassador said he was merely assessing the two American candidates' familiarity with Canada. Mr. Chretien, a career diplomat, is a nephew of Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
