 Re ''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed'' (front page, June 23): Re ''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed'' (front page, June 23):
 Robert J Conrad Jr, who heads Justice Department's campaign finance task force and has recommended that Atty Gen Janet Reno appoint an independent counsel to investigate Vice Pres Al Gore's involvement in fund-raising for 1996 presidential campaign, is praised by those who knew him in United States attorney's office in Charlotte, NC, where he worked from 1992 to 1999; Democrats question his impartiality, however, noting that he contributed $250 in 1996 to re-election campaign of Sen Jesse Helms (M) Barely six months later, Mr. Conrad handed her a political hot potato by recommending that she appoint an independent counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's involvement in fund-raising for the 1996 presidential campaign. Barely six months later, Mr. Conrad handed her a political hot potato by recommending that she appoint an independent counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's involvement in fund-raising for the 1996 presidential campaign.
 Transcript of interview conducted on April 18 shows Vice Pres Al Gore engaged in caustic exchange with senior Justice Department prosecutor, denying he was told by aides that 1996 luncheon at Buddhist temple was fund-raising event; shows Gore was confronted with questions about wide array of campaign finance issues by skeptical and at times incredulous prosecutor Robert J Conrad Jr, head of department's campaign finance unit who has since recommended that Atty Gen Janet Reno appoint special counsel to investigate truthfulness of his statements; Gore's answers seem to conflict with conclusions reached by 1997 Senate panel that investigated campaign finance issues; transcript is released by Gore in apparent effort to blunt potential damage to presidential campaign of revived Justice Department inquiry; Gore admits making mistakes in fund-raising but says he has always cooperated fully; questions timing of disclosure of new inquiry; presumptive Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush seizes on issue; calls for new tone and new administration in Washington; photos (M) In a caustic exchange with a senior Justice Department prosecutor two months ago, Vice President Al Gore denied being told by aides that a 1996 luncheon at a Buddhist temple was a fund-raising event, according to a transcript of the interview that the vice president's lawyers released today. ''I sure as hell don't recall having -- I sure as hell did not have any conversations with anyone saying this is a fund-raising event,'' Mr. Gore said. In a caustic exchange with a senior Justice Department prosecutor two months ago, Vice President Al Gore denied being told by aides that a 1996 luncheon at a Buddhist temple was a fund-raising event, according to a transcript of the interview that the vice president's lawyers released today. ''I sure as hell don't recall having -- I sure as hell did not have any conversations with anyone saying this is a fund-raising event,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Gore's angry denial was contained in a 123-page transcript of a four-hour interview in which the head of the Justice Department's campaign finance unit questioned Mr. Gore at the vice presidential mansion April 18 about his fund-raising activities before the 1996 election. The vice president released the interview transcript this afternoon, scrambling to blunt the potential damage of the revived Justice Department inquiry of his truthfulness in answering questions about his efforts to raise money. Still, it risked prolonging an issue that has dogged Mr. Gore's presidential campaign and threatens to bring renewed comparisons to the scandals of the Clinton administration. ''I have always cooperated fully,'' Mr. Gore told reporters aboard Air Force II this afternoon, as he flew from Denver to Palo Alto, Calif. Later, Mr. Gore said, ''I think the truth is my friend in this. The truth, the full truth and nothing but the truth.'' In the interview, Mr. Gore was confronted with questions about a wide array of campaign finance issues, posed by a clearly skeptical and at times incredulous prosecutor, Robert J. Conrad Jr., the head of the campaign finance task force. Besides the Buddhist temple luncheon, Mr. Gore was asked whether the White House coffees were fund-raising events and what he knew about missing e-mail messages from his office. Mr. Gore's decision to release the transcript came a day after the Justice Department confirmed that Mr. Conrad had recommended last week that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate the truthfulness of Mr. Gore's statements about his fund-raising. But the vice president today questioned the timing of the disclosure of the new inquiry. ''Here we are four months before an election that takes place every four years,'' Mr. Gore said. ''You can read into that what you want to.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, today seized on the renewed inquiry into Mr. Gore's fund-raising. ''I reiterate my call for a new tone in Washington which is going to require a new administration in Washington,'' Mr. Bush said. ''People are sick and tired of all this stuff and the best way to start anew is with a new administration.'' Mr. Gore has clearly made the political calculation that the public will regard the transcript, filled with questions about events that occurred as long ago as 1989, as old news. Mr. Gore's answers during the April 18 interview at times appeared to conflict with conclusions reached by a 1997 inquiry by a Senate panel that investigated campaign finance issues. When it was first issued, Mr. Gore dismissed the Senate report as ''a highly partisan document.'' At one point in the April 18 interview, Mr. Gore insisted that the 103 coffee sessions with campaign donors held at the White House in 1995 and 1996 were not ''fund-raising tools'' used to raise money for the Democratic Party. During the questioning, Mr. Gore recalled that he had remembered ''only one that I attended briefly.'' But the Senate panel found he had played host at 23 of the sessions and attended 8 with President Clinton. Confronted with the contradictory information, Mr. Gore said, ''That seems inaccurate to me.'' As a legal matter, the apparent conflicts with Mr. Gore's statements may fall short of sufficient grounds to show that he perjured himself, law enforcement officials said today. That is one reason, the officials said, that Ms. Reno has so far shown no sign that she is prepared to refer the case to an outside prosecutor. Ms. Reno, after searing internal battles in 1997 and 1998, refused to seek an independent counsel to investigate Mr. Gore's fund-raising efforts over the objections of some senior advisers. During the four-hour interview, Mr. Conrad led the questioning of Mr. Gore, assisted by two F.B.I. agents. Mr. Conrad devoted most of the time to Mr. Gore's understanding of the true purpose of the Buddhist temple event, a subject Mr. Gore had not been asked about in four previous interviews with investigators from the campaign finance unit. Mr. Conrad repeatedly showed Mr. Gore numerous memorandums, all of which had been made public years ago, from aides suggesting that it was known that the event was intended to raise money. ''Yes,'' Mr. Gore replied. ''I did not know this was a fund-raiser,'' Mr. Gore answered. Later in the interview, Mr. Gore inadvertently referred to the temple event as a ''fund-raiser.'' The vice president's personal lawyer, James F. Neal, quickly advised Mr. Gore that he had misspoken. Mr. Gore then replied, ''Well, that's right. That is more accurate. Let me, let me amend that. That was first time it was alleged to be, to have been a fund-raiser.'' Mr. Gore was asked repeatedly in late 1996 and 1997 about whether he knew the event was a fund-raiser, and, Mr. Conrad said, responded with differing statements. From the start, and again in the April 18 interview, Mr. Gore insisted that he did not learn that the luncheon was used to raise money until several months after it had occurred. In between, he said in numerous interviews with reporters that he had believed the luncheon to be a ''community outreach event.'' ''There was no solicitation of money,'' Mr. Gore said in the April 18 interview. ''I did not see any money or checks change hands. I never heard it discussed. Nor do I believe it took place, incidentally.'' Today at the Justice Department, Ms. Reno acknowledged that prosecutors had embarked on a renewed investigation of Mr. Gore's statements under oath about his political fund-raising practices during the 1996 presidential race.
 Re ''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed'' (front page, June 23): Re ''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed'' (front page, June 23):
 At issue is the effort to stop a new breed of shadowy slush funds, created by elected officials and interest groups under Section 527 of the tax code, from raising and spending undisclosed sums for ad campaigns in elections. These groups have sprung up this year and, circumventing campaign disclosure laws, run anonymous attack ads like the one that smeared Senator John McCain during the primaries. That ad turned out to be paid for by supporters of Gov. George W. Bush, but others have spread across the airwaves with no one knowing who was paying for them. At issue is the effort to stop a new breed of shadowy slush funds, created by elected officials and interest groups under Section 527 of the tax code, from raising and spending undisclosed sums for ad campaigns in elections. These groups have sprung up this year and, circumventing campaign disclosure laws, run anonymous attack ads like the one that smeared Senator John McCain during the primaries. That ad turned out to be paid for by supporters of Gov. George W. Bush, but others have spread across the airwaves with no one knowing who was paying for them.
 While all of the city's 32 community school districts posted gains on the citywide reading test this year, only 24 of those districts saw their math scores improve. District 32 in Bushwick, Brooklyn, showed the most improvement, with the number of students who met the standards increasing by 2.8 percentage points. Still, 72 percent of the students in Bushwick, one of the city's poorest neighborhoods, failed to meet the math standards.
 Mr. Tamraz had previously had a secret relationship with the agency, and when he ran into resistance from officials at the National Security Council at the White House, he told Mr. Fowler that the agency might be able to pry open the White House doors so he could meet with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Tamraz gave Mr. Fowler ''Bob's'' name, since he was then a senior manager in the agency's Central Eurasian Division.
 Gov George W Bush challenges Vice Pres Al Gore's record and positions on several fronts and suggests thayt he is partly responsible for--and a proponent of--high gasoline prices; cites Gore's 1992 book on the environment, Earth in the Balance; seeks to deflect attention from highly publicized, bitterly controversial execution of Gary Graham at Texas state prison in Huntsville; photo (M) On the morning after a highly publicized, bitterly controversial execution in Texas, Gov. George W. Bush quickly tried to change the subject today, challenging Vice President Al Gore's record and positions on several fronts, from Social Security to the longstanding investigations into the fund-raising practices of Democrats in 1996. But Mr. Bush was most eager today to cast Mr. Gore as someone who was partly responsible for -- and a proponent of -- high gasoline prices. On the morning after a highly publicized, bitterly controversial execution in Texas, Gov. George W. Bush quickly tried to change the subject today, challenging Vice President Al Gore's record and positions on several fronts, from Social Security to the longstanding investigations into the fund-raising practices of Democrats in 1996. But Mr. Bush was most eager today to cast Mr. Gore as someone who was partly responsible for -- and a proponent of -- high gasoline prices. Carrying with him a copy of ''Earth in the Balance,'' Mr. Gore's  1992 book on the environment, Mr. Bush twice read aloud a passage describing ''higher taxes on fossil fuels'' as ''one of the logical first steps in changing our policies in a manner consistent with a more responsible approach to the environment.'' ''Want to talk about energy?'' Mr. Bush said this morning to the reporters on his campaign plane, who had spent the last several days grilling Mr. Bush about capital punishment. Then, opening the book, he said, ''Page 173.'' Mr. Bush was on his way to Alabama from Texas, and his attention to the book suggested that he wanted to move on from the subject that had dominated news coverage of his campaign, the execution Thursday night of a convicted killer named Gary Graham. Mr. Graham was put to death by lethal injection at the state prison in Huntsville at 8:49 p.m. central time after many legal experts said he had received a deeply flawed trial and 5 of 17 members of a state parole board voted Thursday afternoon to commute his sentence to life in prison. A half-hour before that, Mr. Bush read a statement to reporters in which he expressed his confidence that ''justice is being done.'' In response to questions from reporters on his campaign plane, Mr. Bush said he was not aware of the details of Mr. Graham's final minutes. When the governor was asked if he understood how other people, looking at the facts in Mr. Graham's case, could come to a different conclusion than he had, Mr. Bush said: ''Yes, I do. Good people can disagree.'' Referring to all the prominent people, like the actor Danny Glover and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who rallied to Mr. Graham's cause, Mr. Bush said: ''I don't resent it in the least. I think it's part of the American process.'' Mr. Bush's assertion today that Mr. Gore supported higher gasoline prices came as he and Mr. Gore jockeyed for position on a campaign issue that is suddenly looming large. And it deflected attention from reports of the enormous sums of campaign money that Mr. Bush had received over the years from the gas and oil industry. Mr. Gore has suggested that Mr. Bush's coziness with the energy industry would make him reluctant to intervene on behalf of consumers. ''There seems to be an effort out of Washington to blame me for rising energy prices,'' Mr. Bush said at a news conference here around midday. ''The American people aren't going to buy that. The Clinton-Gore administration has been there for seven years and we're more dependent now than ever before on foreign oil sources. And I'm amazed that they're trying to shift the blame.'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said that the Clinton administration had consistently explored ways to reduce dependency on foreign oil. He also questioned Mr. Bush's ties to the oil industry, noting that Mr. Bush wanted to give companies access to oil reserves in pristine patches of Alaskan wilderness that Mr. Gore wants to protect. And Mr. Hattaway said that what Mr. Gore was proposing in ''Earth in the Balance'' was not higher prices at the gasoline pump, but special taxes -- to go into an environmental trust fund -- on companies that harvested and produced fuels that cause pollution. Mr. Hattaway said that Mr. Gore's plan included details that would protect consumers from higher gasoline prices. He said Mr. Bush was clearly feeling ''the heat over gas prices and his failure to take on his friends in the oil and gas industry.''
 This has allowed the Clinton administration to remain largely above the fray because there has not been a federal execution in nearly 40 years. Although Vice President Al Gore favors the death penalty, he has not faced the tough questioning that Gov. George W. Bush has, and Mr. Gore has said little other than that he does not see the need for a federal moratorium. This has allowed the Clinton administration to remain largely above the fray because there has not been a federal execution in nearly 40 years. Although Vice President Al Gore favors the death penalty, he has not faced the tough questioning that Gov. George W. Bush has, and Mr. Gore has said little other than that he does not see the need for a federal moratorium. He wants to know why the death penalty was sought in Mr. Garza's case, and he believes race was a factor. Of the 27 defendants against whom the Bush administration sought the death penalty for drug-related killings, including Mr. Garza who was convicted after Mr. Bush left office, 23 were African-American or Hispanic, Mr. Wiercioch said. In an interview last week, Mr.  Gore said, ''The question of racial disparity is right now being investigated thoroughly within the Justice Department.''
 Gore Says Aides Failed To Explain Fund-Raiser  In a caustic exchange with a senior Justice Department prosecutor two months ago, Vice President Al Gore denied being told by aides that a 1996 luncheon at a Buddhist temple was a fund-raising event, according to a transcript of the interview that Mr. Gore's lawyers made public. Mr. Gore was campaigning in the West, with a schedule that was heavy with fund-raising events. Bush Seeks to Change Subject  Gov. George W. Bush sought to shift attention away from the execution of Gary Graham in Texas on Thursday night and toward Vice President Al Gore's views and record on a range of issues, especially fossil fuels and gasoline prices. Editorials: Let the voters rule on Mr. Gore; questions for Jeanine Pirro; Steven R. Weisman on North Korea.  Columns: Anthony Lewis.
 Solo homers by Trot Nixon in the first and Everett in the second put Boston ahead, but Toronto tied the game in the second on Fullmer's homer and Homer Bush's run-scoring single.
 Harrison, best known for its championship-caliber golf courses, has had more than its share of prominent residents, including Gov. Herbert A. Lehman, Amelia Earhart, John Barrymore and Whitelaw Reid, publisher of The New York Tribune. Tisches, Loebs and Bushes have made Harrison their home, and Martha Mitchell pitched camp in Suite 543 at the Westchester Country Club in the midst of Watergate.
 Re ''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed'' (front page, June 23): As an opponent of the death penalty, I am appalled, not appeased, by the statement offered by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas when the moment of Gary Graham's execution arrived: Re ''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed'' (front page, June 23): As an opponent of the death penalty, I am appalled, not appeased, by the statement offered by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas when the moment of Gary Graham's execution arrived: Rather, it is the dignity and sanctity of every life, the fear and trembling we should feel at the prospect of taking even a single life, whether by murder or state-sanctioned penalty, and, finally, the absolute lack of comprehension Mr. Bush has shown for the meaning of the term he has chosen as his own mantle: compassionate.
 For years the United States has taken the lead in negotiating with North Korea, offering a combination of threats and incentives to get it to stop building nuclear weapons. Now after negotiating a deal on nuclear and missile restraint with Pyongyang, the Clinton administration must defend its approach against charges of naivete by hawkish Republicans, including advisers to Gov. George W. Bush.
 Vice Pres Al Gore headlines fund-raising events in California within hours of ordering his lawyers to release transcript of his interview about his 1996 fund-raising activities; concerns about Gore's overzealous money-raising, coming in the midst of a fund-raising swing, put an especially fine point on Gore's description of himself as an imperfect messenger for overhauling campaign finance system; photo (M) Within hours of ordering his lawyers to release the transcript of his interview  into his 1996 fund-raising activities, Vice President Al Gore was back to business as usual today -- trolling for money. In an affluent Silicon Valley neighborhood, Mr. Gore raised $500,000 over lunch. In Denver on Thursday, Mr. Gore headlined two events that raised a total of $1.1 million. Today, after the Silicon Valley lunch, he attended a dinner on the San Francisco waterfront where the singers David Crosby and Steven Stills serenaded several hundred people. Within hours of ordering his lawyers to release the transcript of his interview  into his 1996 fund-raising activities, Vice President Al Gore was back to business as usual today -- trolling for money. In an affluent Silicon Valley neighborhood, Mr. Gore raised $500,000 over lunch. In Denver on Thursday, Mr. Gore headlined two events that raised a total of $1.1 million. Today, after the Silicon Valley lunch, he attended a dinner on the San Francisco waterfront where the singers David Crosby and Steven Stills serenaded several hundred people. The fund-raising events were broken up by the news on Thursday that, based on an April 18 deposition of Mr. Gore, a Justice Department official was asking Attorney General Janet Reno for an investigation into the vice president's money-raising activities in 1996. On Thursday night, Gore advisers read the transcripts of the deposition and on Friday, released copies to news organizations. Concerns about Mr. Gore's overzealous money-raising, coming in the midst of a fund-raising swing, put an especially fine point on what Mr. Gore likes to call the ''irony'' of his situation. Here is how Mr. Gore, who has tried to deflect criticism of his links to the fund-raising problems by calling himself ''an imperfect messenger'' for overhauling the campaign finance system, dealt with this uncomfortable topic at lunch today: There was a soft murmur of assent. And then, perhaps in a nod to the issue that had dominated today's news reports, Mr. Gore briefly made a pitch for tossing out the entire campaign finance system that has caused him so much grief. ''It's an irony to talk about this issue at a fund-raising event, I realize,'' Mr. Gore told the dozen or so people who had paid $25,000 each to lunch on grilled salmon and vegetables. ''But the first bill I will present to Congress will be the McCain-Feingold campaign finance bill.'' Mr. Gore has struggled to focus attention on the upside of the Clinton administration: the economic expansion and his ideas for using the nation's growing budget surplus to improve education, health care and the environment. This forms the basis of his ''prosperity and progress tour'' and the underpinning of his candidacy. In the transcript released today, Mr. Gore gives a startling similar answer to the now-infamous answer given by President Clinton as he quibbled over the meaning of the word ''is.'' When Mr. Gore was asked what role the coffees would play in raising money, he said: ''Let me define the term 'raising,' '' adding, ''If you mean by it, would they be events at which money was raised, the answer is no.'' For the last year, Mr. Gore has been working furiously to separate himself from an administration that has been accused repeatedly of not telling the truth even as his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has offered himself as an alternative.  And Mr. Bush clearly hoped that the call for an investigation into Mr. Gore's truthfulness would signal to voters that a Gore administration would not be that much different from Bill Clinton's. ''If America is tired of scandals and investigations, let's elect somebody different, other than the people of the Clinton/Gore administration,'' Mr. Bush said in Alabama today. At the time, the Gore campaign was employing a durable Clinton tactic made familiar during the Monica S. Lewinsky investigation -- pre-emptively releasing hundreds of pages of documents in an effort to defuse the controversy and dispatch it quickly. Mr. Gore and his advisers moved in an uncharacteristically aggressive fashion to dispel any suggestion of wrongdoing and, employing another Clinton tactic, suggested that the re-emergence of the issue was, if not a vast right-wing conspiracy, at least an orchestrated smear by the Bush campaign. ''I think the timing of this whole thing speaks for itself,'' Mr. Gore told reporters. Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for Mr. Gore and a veteran of the Clinton White House damage-control operation, said the release of documents was the best way for the Gore campaign to fight what he described as ''Republican dirty tricks.'' Mr. Fabiani said the Republicans, through Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, had leaked the information because ''Bush was having a bad day.'' Mr. Fabiani noted that the governor had been presiding over an execution and pointed to reports that Mr. Bush's financial ties to the oil industry would render him useless in the battle against high gasoline prices. Rachel Gorlin, a Democratic consultant, said the Gore campaign was probably smart to release the transcripts. ''The Clinton lesson is to show that it's worth it to engage in the discussion, partly because the public doesn't care that much and partly because this gives Gore standing'' to make his case and challenge the Republicans, Ms. Gorlin said. ''The thinking is, let's take the hit now and move on, that they won't find anything they can use in the fall and by then it will be old news anyway.'' Allies of Mr. Gore saw another possible advantage in releasing the transcripts. Although Mr. Gore uses the word ''hell,'' apparently reinforcing reports that he was angry and confrontational during the deposition, Mr. Fabiani suggested that this showed passion, a quality that he has been accused of lacking. Spokesmen for the Bush campaign and for Mr. Specter said there was no collusion between them.
 The intense scrutiny given to some high-profile death penalty cases like Gary Graham's (''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed,'' front page, June 23) raises the strong possibility of wrongful convictions in a significant percentage of other cases, generally of poor, minority defendants. The intense scrutiny given to some high-profile death penalty cases like Gary Graham's (''With Bush Assent, Inmate Is Executed,'' front page, June 23) raises the strong possibility of wrongful convictions in a significant percentage of other cases, generally of poor, minority defendants.
 GORE SAYS HE'S HIS OWN MAN  Vice President Al Gore is not running for a third Clinton term. So he told Barbara Walters in an interview that ran last night on the ABC News program ''20/20.'' Asked what President Clinton's role in his presidential campaign would be, Mr. Gore said, ''It's not a Clinton third term.'' Of the notion that he ''flip-flops'' on various matters, including abortion and gun control, Mr. Gore said: ''Don't you want somebody who learns from experience? I mean, I have. And I think that if you, if you don't learn from experience, you're really not paying attention.'' Asked for his strengths and weaknesses, he said that his strength was ''working hard, having my heart in the right place'' and that his weakness was ''sometimes I turn too much to my head'' in thinking through problems rather than allowing himself ''to feel the emotional dimension.'' GORE SAYS HE'S HIS OWN MAN  Vice President Al Gore is not running for a third Clinton term. So he told Barbara Walters in an interview that ran last night on the ABC News program ''20/20.'' Asked what President Clinton's role in his presidential campaign would be, Mr. Gore said, ''It's not a Clinton third term.'' Of the notion that he ''flip-flops'' on various matters, including abortion and gun control, Mr. Gore said: ''Don't you want somebody who learns from experience? I mean, I have. And I think that if you, if you don't learn from experience, you're really not paying attention.'' Asked for his strengths and weaknesses, he said that his strength was ''working hard, having my heart in the right place'' and that his weakness was ''sometimes I turn too much to my head'' in thinking through problems rather than allowing himself ''to feel the emotional dimension.'' G.O.P. LAUNCHES MORE WEB SITES  Several new Web sites  allow voters to participate in the Republican convention from home. One such site, www.gopconvention.com,  allows people to register as ''dot-com delegates'' and participate in the convention through online ''floor passes'' and streaming video of convention proceedings.  Another site, www.2000gop.com, has an interactive electoral college as well as Internet polling: ''Can Bush win? Click here to decide!'' At www.votedaq.com, armchair political activists can bet on their favorites through a virtual stock market made up of political candidates. Each candidate is turned into a stock and voters can buy and sell shares -- candidates' prices rise and fall along with their political fate. Who's hot? Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president. His shares rose 16.24 percent this week in heavy trading. PENNSYLVANIA ELECTION DISPUTED  The Democratic candidate in a closely watched legislative election held on Tuesday in Pennsylvania is claiming victory. But Republicans are calling for an investigation, saying voter fraud may have occurred. Control of the state's House of Representatives was the dominant issue in the contest because the legislature will begin redrawing state and federal election districts next year. Going into the election, to fill a vacant Scranton-area seat, Republicans held a 101-to-99 edge in the Pennsylvania House, and both parties had sent in their big guns to help their candidates. Vice President Al Gore campaigned for the Democrat, Jim Wansacz, and President Clinton did some broadcast ads for him; Gov. Tom Ridge came in to help the Republican, Tom Parry. In the final vote tally, Mr. Wansacz beat Mr. Parry, 8,569 to 7,619.
 Excerpts from Vice Pres Al Gore's April 18 interview with FBI about political fund-raising during the 1996 presidential campaign; concern his trip to Taiwan, invitations to coffee at the White House and a visit to a Buddhist temple Following are excerpts from Vice President Al Gore's April 18 interview with the F.B.I. about political fund-raising during the 1996 presidential campaign. Among other topics, Mr. Gore discussed a trip to Taiwan, the purpose of invitations to coffee at the White House and a visit to a Buddhist temple. At one point his lawyer, James F. Neal, joined the discussion. The transcript was released by the Gore campaign. Following are excerpts from Vice President Al Gore's April 18 interview with the F.B.I. about political fund-raising during the 1996 presidential campaign. Among other topics, Mr. Gore discussed a trip to Taiwan, the purpose of invitations to coffee at the White House and a visit to a Buddhist temple. At one point his lawyer, James F. Neal, joined the discussion. The transcript was released by the Gore campaign. But I would be shocked if any of my colleagues who participated in the meetings I was at, or any other meetings at the White House that I was not at, thought of those coffees in that way. . . .  Q.: There's an interesting book about your life on the bookshelves these days called ''Inventing Al Gore,'' by an author named Bill Turque. Are you familiar with that work?  A.: I haven't read it, but I'm certainly familiar with it.  Q.: In that book, that author indicates that you had attended 23 White House coffees and joined the president at 8. Would that be an accurate statement.  A.: I don't know.  Q.: But certainly more than one?  A.: I wouldn't necessarily take him as a source.  Q.: I'm not taking him as a source. What I'm saying is, would that perhaps refresh your recollection as to the number of coffees that you attended?  A.: That seems inaccurate to me. Far from the only inaccurate thing that has been quoted to to me from that particular book. But yes, that seems, that seems inaccurate to me.  Q.: He refers to you as earning the reputation as solicitor-in-chief. Have you ever heard that title before?  A.: I heard that title for the first time in a newspaper article by Bob Woodward, and it struck me as quite odd when he put that in the newspaper article, because I had never heard it prior to that time. I believe it to be completely unfair and inaccurate.  Q.: Do you believe it to be related in any way to the White House coffees?  A.: Oh, I know it's completely unrelated to the White House coffees. . . .  Q.: Well, let me turn your attention to the Hsi Lai Temple.  A.: All right.  Q.: Before I do, I wanted to read you a couple of comments that you have made publicly with respect to that event. On Oct. 22, 1996, you told NPR's Nina Totenberg that you thought that event was a ''community outreach.'' Then on Jan. 14, you told NBC's  Katie Couric that you did not know it was a fund-raiser, but, but ''I knew it was a political event and I knew that finance people were going to be present.'' Having said those two fairly different things, knowing that you're under oath today, can you tell me what you knew about the Hsi Lai Temple event and when you knew it?  A.: Yes, I'll be glad to. At the time I went there I felt that it was a visit that was arranged pursuant to the desire I had expressed in the meeting with Hsing Yun to visit his temple. I knew that the individuals who were his followers included Maria Hsia and John Huang. I felt that this visit was something they would be very pleased with because it showed honor to their community and to their place of worship, and that it was a source of community pride to them. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN  Correction:  June 25, 2000, Sunday  Excerpts yesterday from Vice President Al Gore's interview with the F.B.I. on campaign fund-raising did not explain the meaning of the initials D.S.C.C. The initials stand for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which works to elect Democrats to the United States Senate. Excerpts yesterday from Vice President Al Gore's interview with the F.B.I. on campaign fund-raising did not explain the meaning of the initials D.S.C.C. The initials stand for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which works to elect Democrats to the United States Senate.
