 Gore to Propose Incentives For Clean-Energy Products  Vice President Al Gore will propose economic incentives to encourage cleaner technologies intended to reduce the nation's dependency on foreign oil. Mr. Gore's aides said he would call for billions of dollars in tax breaks and other federal subsidies to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products, like solar houses, and to encourage companies to develop sources of energy that do not burn oil.
 The wild card in all of this is the presidential race. House Republicans are buoyed by the latest poll numbers showing Gov. George W. Bush of Texas ahead of Vice President Al Gore.
 Re ''Price of Gasoline Emerges as Issue in Bush-Gore Race'' (front page, June 22): Re ''Price of Gasoline Emerges as Issue in Bush-Gore Race'' (front page, June 22):
 Repeated security failings at the laboratory have prompted Energy Secretary Bill Richardson to try to impose tougher measures, but he has acknowledged that he is fighting an attitude among laboratory scientists of indifference and outright hostility to security regulations. The disappearance of the hard drives -- coming so soon after the Wen Ho Lee case -- has also prompted Congressional leaders to call for Mr. Richardson's resignation, and seemed to end any chances he had of becoming Vice President Al Gore's running mate on the Democratic ticket.
 Ronald Reagan couldn't get rid of the estate tax. George Bush couldn't kill it. But an unlikely alliance of Congressional Republicans, conservative Democrats and a small but significant number of very liberal Democrats, including members of the Black Caucus in the House, is building a potentially veto-proof majority for this breathtaking windfall for the wealthy.
 Give both George Bush and Al Gore credit for daring to touch what used to be called ''the third rail of American politics.'' Their differing approaches offer voters a clear political choice unrelated to personality. Bush's plan calls for taking one-sixth of the present payroll tax and allowing workers to invest it in mutual funds in individual accounts. The intent is to get a return on that investment that is higher than the present rate; that equity growth would supplement the Social Security benefit decades from now. Gore found he could not get away with labeling that ''a risky scheme'' because more than half of Americans are now stock market investors and know that in the long run, broad indexes do better than risk-free bonds. That drove him to come up with his own plan to supplement Social Security with an individual savings account for low-income workers. Gore would have government encourage them to save a little each year by adding matching funds, similar to the corporate match of 401(k) plans. For the lowest-income worker, government would add three dollars for every one saved. As you would expect, economists for both candidates are busily trashing the other guy's plan. Bush's conservative team derides the Gore plan as another government handout to redistribute income, while Gore's liberal advocates downmouth the Bush proposal as a dire threat to future Social Security benefits. Far be it from me to appear even-handed, but if the economy continues to generate trillions in surpluses - that is, if the good times roll on and on as far as the eye can squint - there is merit in both approaches. Let Bush's middle-class workers get the benefit of long-range stock growth, and let Gore's working poor have their sayings enhanced; that way, everybody's nest egg would be tax-deferred to allow the buildup of different degrees of financial security for all.
 News analysis of political ramifications of disclosure that Robert J Conrad Jr, chief of Justice Deprt's finance unit, has recommended that Atty Gen Janet Reno refer Vice Pres Al Gore's political fund-raising in 1996 presidential campaign to outside prosecutor; recommendation holds omminous implications for Gore's presidential candidacy and thrusts Reno into another painful, politically combustible decision about vice president, even as senior government legal officials have discounted likelihood that she will make such an appointment (M) In the coming weeks, Attorney General Janet Reno must decide whether to name a special counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising in the 1996 presidential campaign. The issue has haunted Ms. Reno, threatening her chances of leaving a legacy of nonpolitical stewardship of the Justice Department. She has struggled to bring an end to the fund-raising case, having twice refused to submit Mr. Gore to the scrutiny of an independent counsel. But the issue arose again last week when Justice Department officials said the chief of her campaign finance unit, Robert J. Conrad Jr., had recommended that she refer Mr. Gore's case to an outside prosecutor. In the coming weeks, Attorney General Janet Reno must decide whether to name a special counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising in the 1996 presidential campaign. The issue has haunted Ms. Reno, threatening her chances of leaving a legacy of nonpolitical stewardship of the Justice Department. She has struggled to bring an end to the fund-raising case, having twice refused to submit Mr. Gore to the scrutiny of an independent counsel. But the issue arose again last week when Justice Department officials said the chief of her campaign finance unit, Robert J. Conrad Jr., had recommended that she refer Mr. Gore's case to an outside prosecutor. The recommendation held ominous implications for Mr. Gore's presidential candidacy and thrust Ms. Reno into another painful, politically combustible decision about the vice president, even as senior government legal officials have discounted the likelihood that she will make such an appointment. To begin with, Mr. Gore would not be subject to the independent counsel law, which expired in mid-1999. Since then, under regulations adopted by the Justice Department, Ms. Reno has the sole discretion to appoint a special counsel, but only if she finds that the department has a conflict of interest or if she decides that an outside inquiry is in the best interests of justice. Ms. Reno, the officials said, is studying the recommendation to name a special counsel, but she seems unlikely to move forward -- barring new and specific evidence that shows Mr. Gore broke the law by lying in an April 18 interview with a Justice Department investigator about his 1996 fund-raising activities. Beyond the specifics of Mr. Gore's statements in the interview, Ms. Reno's reluctance to make the appointment has a far broader context than the facts and the law relating to Mr. Gore. Her thinking about cases involving high officials has been shaped by the bruising experience of her seven years in office. But she has steadfastly refused to apply it to Mr. Clinton or Mr. Gore when allegations of fund-raising improprieties swirled around them after the 1996 election -- a stance that legal experts have said was based on the technicalities of the independent counsel law. Her interpretation led Republicans to accuse her of misusing the law to protect the president and vice president. In 1997, she determined that no inquiry was needed to examine the legality of Mr. Gore's fund-raising phone calls from his West Wing office, based on her conclusion that Mr. Gore's calls were meant to solicit only contributions for general Democratic Party purposes, and that he did not realize a portion was allocated to pay specific expenses of the Clinton-Gore campaign. Mr. Gore's fund-raising was again under scrutiny in 1998 when investigators unearthed memorandums and witness statements that raised questions about whether Mr. Gore had been truthful when he told investigators that he did not realize the donations he solicited in his phone calls were used for the Clinton-Gore campaign. Ms. Reno's advisers were badly split on how the law applied to this case, and several aides said the statute required an independent counsel to determine whether Mr. Gore's statements were true. Ms. Reno overruled them, acting on advice from other career prosecutors who said the discrepancies involving Mr. Gore's statements were minimal. But legal officials said Ms. Reno's aides were doubtful that the Gore interview would prove persuasive in changing her mind about an outside inquiry, because it did not show direct evidence of wrongdoing. Rather, the officials said, Mr. Conrad's recommendation to Ms. Reno was based on a broader conclusion that further investigation by an outside counsel was warranted based on what prosecutors viewed as Mr. Gore's overall contentious elusiveness and misstatements. The interview covered a number of specific topics, among them Mr. Gore's appearance at a Buddhist temple in California in April 1996, White House coffees for supporters and e-mail messages missing from the office of the vice president. At one point, Mr. Gore insisted that the 103 White House coffees with campaign donors were not ''fund-raising tools,'' even though a Senate panel found in 1997 that supporters who attended these events between November 1995 and October 1996 contributed $7.7 million within one month of having attended them. During the questioning, Mr. Gore recalled that he had been to few of the coffees and remembered ''only one that I attended briefly.'' But the Senate panel found that he had been the host of 23 coffees and attended 8 with President Clinton. Mr. Gore, in an effort to blunt the suggestion that he had been uncooperative during the interview, released a transcript of the session on Friday. Law enforcement officials said Mr. Gore's answers appeared to provide too little evidence of wrongdoing to justify referring the case to an outside counsel -- a step that they said Ms. Reno would take only if there was evidence that Mr. Gore had deliberately lied to conceal a relevant fact. But Ms. Reno may have little time to reflect on her decision. She is scheduled to testify on Tuesday at a Senate hearing. She is certain to be questioned about the Gore fund-raising case and why she refused to refer it to an independent counsel when prosecutors first recommended that she do so in 1997, and again when the issue was brought to her attention in 1998.
 In Washington today, Vice President Al Gore, standing in front of a score of veterans seated at the foot of the Tomb of the Unknowns in Arlington National Cemetery, remembered those who fought in the Korean War. June 25, Mr. Gore said, ''will live in honor,'' and the anniversary is a day when Americans will remember the veterns of war and their sacrifices. Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential candidate, said that while looking into the past to remember this day, it is also important to look to the future. Pointing to the recent summit meeting between the North and South Korean leaders, Mr. Gore said the region was moving toward ''a new progress for peace.''
 Consumer advocate Ralph Nader is nominated for president by Green Party; accepts nomination with blistering attack against Republicans, Democrats, Congress, corporate America and commission that sets rules for presidential debates; condemns political system for making Democratic candidate Vice Pres Al Gore and Republican rival Gov George W Bush virtually indistinguishable; says he and Reform Party nominee should be allowed to participate in campaign debates; photo (M) With a blistering attack against Republicans, Democrats, Congress, corporate America and the commission that sets the rules for presidential debates, Ralph Nader today accepted the presidential nomination of the Green Party, a growing political force that could weaken the prospects of Vice President Al Gore. Condemning a political system that he said makes Mr. Gore and his likely Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, virtually indistinguishable, Mr. Nader said he could imagine winning in November, especially if the Presidential Debate Commission -- and by extension, its corporate sponsors and the two major parties -- allowed him and the Reform Party nominee to take part in the debates. With a blistering attack against Republicans, Democrats, Congress, corporate America and the commission that sets the rules for presidential debates, Ralph Nader today accepted the presidential nomination of the Green Party, a growing political force that could weaken the prospects of Vice President Al Gore. Condemning a political system that he said makes Mr. Gore and his likely Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, virtually indistinguishable, Mr. Nader said he could imagine winning in November, especially if the Presidential Debate Commission -- and by extension, its corporate sponsors and the two major parties -- allowed him and the Reform Party nominee to take part in the debates. ''Polls show that the American people want the debates opened to my candidacy and that of Pat Buchanan,'' Mr. Nader said at the Green Party National Convention, referring to the leading contender for the Reform nomination. ''But the demands of the people mean little to Gore and Bush. It is very important to them that the electoral process remains a closed-door affair between the Republican and Democratic parties.'' Mr. Nader, who belongs to no political party, including the Greens -- ''It's a thing with me,'' he told reporters -- has demonstrated broad appeal to voters who see Mr. Gore's moderate positions on many issues, including support of the death penalty and international trade agreements, as a betrayal of traditional Democratic constituencies, like labor unions. Because of his opposition to global trade agreements, Mr. Nader also has a certain attractiveness to some Republican conservatives. But with Mr. Nader's strongly held liberal views on social issues, views  that most Republicans would oppose -- he favors gun control and abortion rights for women, which are popular among Democrats -- his support in the fall's election is far more likely to come at the expense of Mr. Gore. And with the support he predicted he would win from people who are disenchanted with the electoral process because of the influence of money on the major parties, Mr. Nader has appeared to eclipse Mr. Buchanan as the leading third-party contender. A recent NBC/Wall Street Journal poll found Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore by 43 percent to 39 percent and Mr. Nader leading Mr. Buchanan, a Republican-turned-Reform candidate, by 7 percent to 4 percent. In his denunciation of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush as ''drab and dreary'' choices whose policies largely reflect the influence of corporate campaign contributions, Mr. Nader called on the debate commission to change the  criteria for participation. Currently, a candidate must show at least 15 percent support in the polls.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, under criticism from Republicans who accuse him of having no energy plan, will propose array of economic incentives to encourage cleaner technologies intended to reduce nation's dependency on foreign oil; will call for billions of dollars in tax breaks, low-interest loans, grants and other federal subsidies to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products; has come under attack by Republican presidential rival Gov George W Bush for having supported higher gas taxes in past; Bush's criticisms of Clinton administration for allegedly allowing gasoline prices to rise steeply noted; photo (M) Under fire from Republicans who say he has no energy plan, Vice President Al Gore will propose on Tuesday an array of economic incentives to encourage cleaner technologies intended to reduce the nation's dependency on foreign oil, aides said today. The aides said Mr. Gore would call for billions of dollars in tax breaks, low-interest loans, grants and other federal subsidies to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products, like alternative-fuel cars or solar houses, and to encourage companies to develop sources of energy that do not burn oil. Under fire from Republicans who say he has no energy plan, Vice President Al Gore will propose on Tuesday an array of economic incentives to encourage cleaner technologies intended to reduce the nation's dependency on foreign oil, aides said today. The aides said Mr. Gore would call for billions of dollars in tax breaks, low-interest loans, grants and other federal subsidies to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products, like alternative-fuel cars or solar houses, and to encourage companies to develop sources of energy that do not burn oil. In recent days, Mr. Gore has come under sharp attack by his likely Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, for having supported higher gas taxes in the past. Mr. Bush has also accused the Clinton administration of idly allowing gasoline prices to rise steeply this summer. Prices at the pump have soared nationwide, rising as much as 50 cents a gallon in parts of the Midwest, an important battleground region in the presidential race. Mr. Gore's advisers counter that they can turn the issue to their advantage by portraying Mr. Bush, a former executive with a small oil company, as a pawn of big oil producers whose profits have risen sharply over the last year. Mr. Gore's aides say they are planning an offensive this week in which surrogates will attack Mr. Bush's ties to the oil industry while the vice president focuses on a more positive message. o In an early taste of those attacks, Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, said today on ''Fox News Sunday,'' ''It seems to me what Mr. Bush and what the Republicans are saying and the oil companies are saying is that their answer to the crisis is to keep their profits up.'' Mr. Gore had planned to devote this week to discussing the environment in his three-week ''progress and prosperity'' tour. But with gasoline prices dominating the news in the Midwest, he has chosen to shift gears somewhat and focus his message as much on reducing oil prices and consumption as on cleaning up the environment. Mr. Gore's aides declined to provide specifics on the cost of the plan. They said the vice president would propose setting aside part of the federal surplus in a protected ''environmental trust fund'' that would pay for the proposals. The aides acknowledged that Mr. Gore's new proposals would have little short-term effect on oil prices. But they noted that he had already called for having the Federal Trade Commission investigate possible price gouging by the oil industry and had urged the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to increase production. Under the plan that the aides said  Mr. Gore would unveil this week, he would provide tax breaks to encourage consumers and small-business owners to buy houses, cars, hot-water heaters and other products that were energy efficient. His aides said the plan would expand on a similar proposal by President Clinton that would cost $9 billion over 10 years. Mr. Gore would also propose federal subsidies to help utility companies upgrade or replace coal-fired power plants that are the source of much of the air pollution that causes acid rain and smog along the Eastern seaboard, the aides said. Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said of Mr. Gore's proposals, ''After eight years of weak leadership on energy issues, Al Gore is proposing nothing new.'' He added, ''One thing that is consistent is Al Gore's longtime support of higher gas prices.'' In 1993, Mr. Gore cast the tie-breaking vote in the Senate for the administration's economic stimulus plan, which was intended to reduce the budget deficit by cutting spending and raising some taxes, including taxes on gasoline. Some Republicans in Congress are now calling for suspending all or part of that federal gasoline tax. Governor Bush has tried to use Mr. Gore's writings to accuse him of wanting to increase gasoline taxes as a means of discouraging consumption. Last week, Mr. Bush read a passage from Mr. Gore's 1992 book ''Earth in the Balance'' that described ''higher taxes on fossil fuels'' as ''one of the logical first steps in changing our policies in a manner consistent with a more responsible approach to the environment.'' But Mr. Gore's aides say that the Republicans have willfully misread ''Earth in the Balance.'' The book proposed taxing companies that emit carbon dioxide, a byproduct of burning fossil fuels that is also a significant component of smog. But Mr. Gore also proposed reducing payroll taxes for those companies so that they would not have to increase prices to consumers. In turn, the Gore campaign has circulated copies of a 1992 letter from Mr. Bush warning that his father, President George Bush, who was then seeking re-election, might lose support in some oil-producing states because he ''is viewed as favoring cheap energy.'' Mr. Gore's aides contend the letter demonstrates that Governor Bush is more concerned about protecting oil companies' profits than reducing retail prices. Mr. Bartlett said today that Governor Bush was simply urging his father's administration to support a tax break for small, independent oil companies that could help them increase production. He said that Mr. Gore, then a senator from Tennessee, also supported that tax break. During Mr. Gore's swing through Pennsylvania, Ohio and parts of the Midwest this week, the aides said, he  will argue that cleaning up the environment could help the economy, rather than hinder it. ''The environment and the economy are really one and the same thing,'' Mr. Gore said to a group of Democrats in Miami on Saturday night. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT  Correction:  June 28, 2000, Wednesday  A front-page article on Monday about Vice President Al Gore's plan to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products misstated the environmental impact of carbon dioxide. It is a heat-trapping gas associated with global warming, not a component of smog. A front-page article on Monday about Vice President Al Gore's plan to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products misstated the environmental impact of carbon dioxide. It is a heat-trapping gas associated with global warming, not a component of smog.
