 Ralph Nader's campaign as the Green Party candidate for president (news article, June 26) may deliver the election to a right-wing Republican, George W. Bush, damaging progressive interests for a generation. Mr. Nader is not a member of any political party, not even the Greens. If he had really wanted to generate progress on vital issues like the corporate domination of our political system, he should have challenged Al Gore in the primaries and moved the Democratic Party to the left. Ralph Nader's campaign as the Green Party candidate for president (news article, June 26) may deliver the election to a right-wing Republican, George W. Bush, damaging progressive interests for a generation. Mr. Nader is not a member of any political party, not even the Greens. If he had really wanted to generate progress on vital issues like the corporate domination of our political system, he should have challenged Al Gore in the primaries and moved the Democratic Party to the left.
 Analysis of Vice Pres Al Gore's and Gov George W Bush's strikingly different reactions to Supreme Court ruling striking down Nebraska's ban on so-called partial birth abortion; Gore, seeking to make court appointments key issue in presidential race, cites closeness of 5-4 decision; Bush, hoping matter will fade from political horizon, makes no mention of court makeup, while scoring decision (M) The strikingly different reactions to the Supreme Court's ruling on abortion today underscore how Vice President Al Gore is trying mightily to catapult the court into a front-and-center issue in the presidential campaign, while Gov. George W. Bush wants the matter to fade from the political horizon. Soon after the court announced its 5-to-4 decision striking down Nebraska's ban on the type of abortion that opponents call partial-birth abortion, Mr. Gore upended a planned talk in Blacklick, Ohio, about the environment and energy, and instead opened his remarks by warning that the unexpected closeness of the vote demonstrated the importance of electing a president who would pick justices who would protect abortion rights. He said nothing about the procedure addressed by the court. The strikingly different reactions to the Supreme Court's ruling on abortion today underscore how Vice President Al Gore is trying mightily to catapult the court into a front-and-center issue in the presidential campaign, while Gov. George W. Bush wants the matter to fade from the political horizon. Soon after the court announced its 5-to-4 decision striking down Nebraska's ban on the type of abortion that opponents call partial-birth abortion, Mr. Gore upended a planned talk in Blacklick, Ohio, about the environment and energy, and instead opened his remarks by warning that the unexpected closeness of the vote demonstrated the importance of electing a president who would pick justices who would protect abortion rights. He said nothing about the procedure addressed by the court. By contrast, Mr. Bush made no mention of the broader makeup of the court, though he did upbraid the justices for not upholding the right to ban what he called ''the brutal practice'' of the procedure opponents call partial-birth abortion. The contrasting strategies -- and remarks from the two rivals -- reflect differing political imperatives. The Bush strategy is to make the abortion issue go away, and, for his campaign, the timing of today's ruling is not propitious. The last thing the Republicans want one month before their nominating convention is another spectacle that turns rancorous over abortion. Not only that, the ruling comes as Mr. Bush is mulling whether he dares pick a running mate who favors abortion rights and how he can finesse the issue in the party platform. Mr. Gore wants to do whatever he can to keep the matter alive -- and paint Republicans as riven by internecine squabbles over abortion. In fact, Gore officials have been waiting gleefully for months in anticipation of today's decision. ''This is the worst news that the Bush campaign could get,'' said Ann Stone, national chairwoman of the Republicans For Choice PAC. The closeness of the ruling, Ms. Stone said, gave Mr. Gore a fresh hook to declare that abortion rights may be endangered, and to shore up his sagging support from women. Richard N. Bond, the former Republican Party chairman who for years has counseled the party not to let itself split over abortion, said the best thing Mr. Bush could do was to keep a low profile on the issue. ''They'll try to paint Bush as risky, extremist, out of touch, intolerant,'' Mr. Bond said of Democrats. ''I don't think Bush is going to take the bait on this. What can a presidential candidate do about a Supreme Court decision?'' As if on cue, Mr. Gore put out fresh bait. He seized on the ruling -- and another that gives states greater leeway to restrict anti-abortion demonstrations outside health clinics -- and tried to reignite the abortion issue in the Republican Party. For months, in speech after speech, the vice president has warned that religious conservatives like Patrick J. Buchanan and Jerry Falwell would ratify prospects for the bench if Mr. Bush is elected. Today, Mr. Gore said: ''The next president will nominate at least three and probably four, perhaps four, justices to the Supreme Court. One extra vote on the wrong side of those two issues would change the outcome and a woman's right to choose would be taken away.'' Specifically, Mr. Gore recalled that Mr. Bush has said he respects Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, both of whom were dissenters in the decision today. On Air Force II tonight on a flight from Columbus, Ohio, to New York, Mr. Gore stepped up his attack, asserting that Mr. Bush was determined to overturn Roe v. Wade, which affirms a woman's right to an abortion. ''His views about choice are really quite extreme,'' Mr. Gore said. It was no surprise that Mr. Bush, in his remarks, failed to mention the prospect of vacancies on the Supreme Court. While conservative groups have trumpeted the balance of the court as a high-stakes voting issue, Mr. Bush almost never raises it. He does not want to put off moderate and swing voters who may support abortion rights. He also knows, perhaps, that usually only the most partisan voters think about the makeup of the court. Instead, Mr. Bush told supporters in Cleveland, ''I hope to be able to come up with a law that meets the constitutional scrutiny. And, unlike Al Gore, I pledge to fight for a ban on partial-birth abortion.'' The court's ruling is discouraging for Mr. Bush and many Republicans not only because it gives Mr. Gore another rationale to talk about the court. In addition, the Republicans' embrace in the last few years of eliminating the so-called partial-birth procedure allowed the party to maintain its anti-abortion position in a way that is more palatable to many voters than suggesting overturning the Supreme Court's constitutional rationale allowing abortion. Even many Democrats who favor abortion rights tell pollsters they object to the ''partial-birth'' procedure. In addition to energizing Democrats, the ruling today may embolden conservatives, some of whom want Mr. Bush, like Mr. Gore, to turn it into a rallying cry to discuss the court itself. But in their determination that Mr. Bush capture the White House, they are reluctant to press him to be outspoken on the issue. Asked if Mr. Bush should raise the abortion issue more, Ms. Schlafly said, ''I don't know that he has to make it the first thing he talks about at every stop. There's so much to talk about.'' Gov. Bill Graves of Kansas put it this way: ''Many Republicans are prepared to put aside differences on abortion and other issues in exchange for the greater good: the election of George Bush as president.''
 Eason Jordan, the president of newsgathering for CNN, said, ''People expect us to be on top of every breaking story. This is a story that involved President Clinton, Vice President Gore, Attorney General Reno, Congress and the Supreme Court and has had impact on Cuban-American relations.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, both campaigning in Ohio, seek to portray the other as more tarred by big oil companies and thus more responsible for high gasoline prices; Bush cites Gore proposals for tax break to industry for deep-water drilling in search of natural gas; Gore camp holds tax break could help cut energy prices; gas prices have risen most sharply in Midwest, in Ohio and other states up for grabs in presidential election (M) Who is more tarred by the big oil companies and therefore more responsible for the high price of gasoline? That was the burning question in the presidential contest today as both Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore campaigned in Ohio. The latest accusation came from Mr. Bush, who said that although Mr. Gore had accused him of cozying up to big oil, it was really Mr. Gore who was doing so because he had proposed extending a tax break to the industry for deep-water drilling in search of natural gas. Who is more tarred by the big oil companies and therefore more responsible for the high price of gasoline? That was the burning question in the presidential contest today as both Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore campaigned in Ohio. The latest accusation came from Mr. Bush, who said that although Mr. Gore had accused him of cozying up to big oil, it was really Mr. Gore who was doing so because he had proposed extending a tax break to the industry for deep-water drilling in search of natural gas. The Gore camp replied that this was a foolish accusation, that the tax break provided an incentive for natural-gas exploration, which could help increase domestic supplies, reduce dependence on foreign oil and thereby cut energy prices for consumers. Mr. Bush has said he would encourage foreign oil producers to increase the supply of crude oil and the domestic industry to increase exploration, including in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Mr. Bush also wants to deregulate utilities to spur demand for natural gas. Mr. Gore laid out a sweeping plan on Tuesday to reduce dependence on foreign oil. It would provide more than $125 billion in tax breaks over 10 years to businesses that provide cleaner forms of energy; one proposal would extend the moratorium on royalties paid by natural-gas companies while they drill under the Gulf of Mexico. The moratorium is scheduled to expire in November. At a campaign stop here today, Mr. Bush, a former oil executive himself and the recipient of $1.5 million in campaign contributions from the gas and oil industries, told reporters: ''My opponent is giving major oil companies a huge tax break. I believe a royalty moratorium ought to happen when the price declines. We ought not to have moratoriums when the prices are high.'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said that the tax breaks would help bring down the cost of fuel and that Mr. Bush's position showed his true colors because it aligned him with the oil companies. ''This policy provides an incentive to increase domestic energy production, reduce our dependence on foreign oil and cut energy,'' Mr. Hattaway said. ''Bush clearly favors big oil at the expense of cheaper, cleaner forms of energy.'' Mr. Gore, who has received less than $100,000 in contributions from oil and gas interests, has been casting Mr. Bush as the darling of big oil and more likely to look out for his friends in the industry than for the average consumer. So it was with some zeal that Mr. Bush and his aides seized on the chance to portray the vice president as the one giving the industry a break. And Mr. Bush went further. He suggested that the oddity of the vice president's call for tax breaks for the oil industry -- the same industry that Mr. Gore says has Mr. Bush in its clutches -- was emblematic of a candidate who would, in the bumper-sticker parlance of the Bush campaign, ''say anything to get elected.'' Mr. Bush used both a sledgehammer and a scalpel to make his point. First, the sledgehammer: ''Al Gore yesterday apparently said he never made comments about raising prices of gasoline, yet in his book, 'Earth in the Balance,' he advocated higher taxes on fuel use and he supported a B.T.U. tax, which would raise gasoline prices on people,'' Mr. Bush said. ''When you tax energy, it raises the cost. He advocated it, strongly advocated it, two such measures, and now that the political heat is on he's changing his tune. Changing his tune. He advocates for raising taxes, raising gas prices, and he denies he ever did that.'' Then the scalpel: ''This is another example where he doesn't know what the meaning of 'raise' is,'' Mr. Bush said. This was a reference to Mr. Gore's quibbling over the definition of the word ''raising'' -- as in money -- in his April 18 sworn testimony about his fund-raising.
 In Tallahassee, Gov. Jeb Bush said the case had been ''mishandled from the very beginning'' and should have been settled in a family court. For seven months, federal judges have found that family courts -- state courts -- have no jurisdiction in the case.
 THE QUESTION OF INFLUENCE -- Critics of the influence of money in politics have long complained that the only real way to get a place at the table is to buy one, and Vice President Al Gore seemed to edge up on a similar assessment this week in his remarks to a mostly black crowd of first- and second-generation immigrants from Africa at a $1,000-per-person fund-raiser in Washington. Noting that the event raised $350,000 for the Democratic National Committee, Mr. Gore told the audience, ''That is a sign that this group has really entered a brand new relationship to the national politics of our country.'' He added that ''as Irish-Americans have been able to focus the attention of our policy makers,'' so, too, would the audience on Tuesday night be able ''to play its proper role in helping to focus the attention of our country on issues in Nigeria or Ethiopia or Ghana or Cameroon or South Africa.'' A QUESTION OF PARTICIPATION -- Gov. George W. Bush says politics just might be more important than principle in deciding whether to back bids by Ralph Nader and Patrick J. Buchanan to be allowed in this fall's presidential debates. ''I don't know,'' Mr. Bush said on Tuesday when asked if he favored letting Mr. Nader, the Green Party nominee, and Mr. Buchanan, the probable Reform Party nominee, join him and Vice President Al Gore on the debate stage. ''I haven't figured out the impact yet.'' Was he saying he would be willing to let them in only if he concluded that it would help his own White House bid? ''I am trying to win, aren't I?'' he replied, flashing a big grin. The Commission on Presidential Debates recommended last week that the debates be open only to candidates receiving the backing of at least 15 percent of voters in national polls. THE QUESTION OF INFLUENCE -- Critics of the influence of money in politics have long complained that the only real way to get a place at the table is to buy one, and Vice President Al Gore seemed to edge up on a similar assessment this week in his remarks to a mostly black crowd of first- and second-generation immigrants from Africa at a $1,000-per-person fund-raiser in Washington. Noting that the event raised $350,000 for the Democratic National Committee, Mr. Gore told the audience, ''That is a sign that this group has really entered a brand new relationship to the national politics of our country.'' He added that ''as Irish-Americans have been able to focus the attention of our policy makers,'' so, too, would the audience on Tuesday night be able ''to play its proper role in helping to focus the attention of our country on issues in Nigeria or Ethiopia or Ghana or Cameroon or South Africa.'' A QUESTION OF PARTICIPATION -- Gov. George W. Bush says politics just might be more important than principle in deciding whether to back bids by Ralph Nader and Patrick J. Buchanan to be allowed in this fall's presidential debates. ''I don't know,'' Mr. Bush said on Tuesday when asked if he favored letting Mr. Nader, the Green Party nominee, and Mr. Buchanan, the probable Reform Party nominee, join him and Vice President Al Gore on the debate stage. ''I haven't figured out the impact yet.'' Was he saying he would be willing to let them in only if he concluded that it would help his own White House bid? ''I am trying to win, aren't I?'' he replied, flashing a big grin. The Commission on Presidential Debates recommended last week that the debates be open only to candidates receiving the backing of at least 15 percent of voters in national polls.
 Defending Gore on Fund-Raising  President Clinton, in a wide-ranging news conference, defended Vice President Al Gore against accusations of campaign finance irregularities, saying that Mr. Gore had made ''a compelling case'' that he did nothing wrong. Defending Gore on Fund-Raising  President Clinton, in a wide-ranging news conference, defended Vice President Al Gore against accusations of campaign finance irregularities, saying that Mr. Gore had made ''a compelling case'' that he did nothing wrong.
 The committees span the political spectrum. One group, Republicans for Clean Air, ran $2.5 million in advertisements attacking Mr. McCain and praising Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in the Republican primaries. Liberal groups, like the Sierra Club, also have 527 committees. Spokesmen for the two presumptive presidential nominees, Gov.  George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, applauded the House vote and urged Senate passage.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column disputes Republican presidential candidate Gov George Bush's assertions that he is a 'different kind of Republican' (M) George W. Bush is telling all who will listen that he is a ''different kind of Republican.'' He insists that while he remains a conservative, he nevertheless is willing to address the concerns of ethnic minorities and others who, to one degree or another, have perceived the Republican Party to be hostile to their interests. To accept this claim of heightened consciousness and increased tolerance, one has to overlook certain things about Mr. Bush. On Monday, for example, he spoke at a dinner given by the eccentric Congress of Racial Equality, where he shared the dais with -- of all people -- Bob Grant, one of the vilest, most racially inflammatory personalities ever to be heard on New York radio. George W. Bush is telling all who will listen that he is a ''different kind of Republican.'' He insists that while he remains a conservative, he nevertheless is willing to address the concerns of ethnic minorities and others who, to one degree or another, have perceived the Republican Party to be hostile to their interests. To accept this claim of heightened consciousness and increased tolerance, one has to overlook certain things about Mr. Bush. On Monday, for example, he spoke at a dinner given by the eccentric Congress of Racial Equality, where he shared the dais with -- of all people -- Bob Grant, one of the vilest, most racially inflammatory personalities ever to be heard on New York radio. To see Mr. Bush as a different kind of Republican, as a politician serious about reaching out to blacks and other minorities, one would have to overlook his decision to share the dais with such a man. Just as one would have to overlook the flap over Charles W. Williams, who was appointed by Governor Bush to lead a commission that oversees law enforcement training in Texas. The appointment came a year after Mr. Williams testified in a discrimination case that he did not consider certain grotesque, racially charged terms to be ethnic slurs. The terms included ''porch monkey'' and ''black bastard.'' Governor Bush said he had not been aware of Chief Williams's comments when he appointed him chairman of the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. The governor said: ''I don't accept racism in any shape or form. At the very minimum, he ought to apologize.'' Governor Bush's appointee as state health commissioner, Dr. William R. Archer III, got into similar trouble. He made offensive comments about Hispanics back in April, and during the controversy over those remarks it came out that he had made offensive remarks about blacks a couple of years earlier. And it was George W. Bush himself who in February made that now-notorious visit to Bob Jones University in South Carolina to tout what he called ''our ideas, Republican ideas, conservative ideas.'' There certainly is a need for a different kind of Republican. Senator Robert Bennett, a Republican from Utah, declared several months ago that Mr. Bush was virtually certain to be the Republican Party's presidential nominee, unless ''some black woman comes forward with an illegitimate child that he fathered.'' At the moment, Governor Bush's claim to being ''different'' seems weak. He's been hanging out in some low places with some low people. He says his heart is pure, but there's only so much you can overlook.
 The measure passed by the House in a post-midnight session yesterday would stop a new, particularly indefensible form of campaign abuse -- the spread of tax-exempt groups created under Section 527 of the tax code to raise money from secret sources and spend it on campaign ads. Mr. DeLay has created his own secret groups and harvested uncounted sums for the campaign. Some supporters of Gov. George W. Bush paid for ads attacking Senator John McCain in March, but they were eventually found out. A spectrum of groups from the Sierra Club to various right-to-life organizations were also raising money for ads under the Section 527 rubric. The measure passed by the House in a post-midnight session yesterday would stop a new, particularly indefensible form of campaign abuse -- the spread of tax-exempt groups created under Section 527 of the tax code to raise money from secret sources and spend it on campaign ads. Mr. DeLay has created his own secret groups and harvested uncounted sums for the campaign. Some supporters of Gov. George W. Bush paid for ads attacking Senator John McCain in March, but they were eventually found out. A spectrum of groups from the Sierra Club to various right-to-life organizations were also raising money for ads under the Section 527 rubric.
 Q. Do you believe that Governor Bush made the wrong decision by allowing Mr. Graham to go to his death last week? And secondly, do you believe it's time for the American people to stop and reassess where we stand on implementation of death penalty in this country? Gore Investigation Now, let me come back to the polls. First of all, I must say, I -- I haven't looked at -- I haven't seen any or done any lately, so I don't know. But I'm -- I'm perplexed that -- I can't remember a time when we had two major polls coming out within a couple of days of each other that had 13 points difference. One said there was a 13-point difference in the race; the other one said it was tied, and they came out and they were done within two or three days of each other. I don't mean that -- I don't think either one of those pollsters rigged the results. So my instinct is that people are still trying to figure out what they think about this race. And all I can tell you is I know three things, and I've said this over and over again, I know three things: One is no person in the history of the republic has ever had the positive impact on this country as vice president that Al Gore has had. That is a historical fact. We've had a lot of presidents who were vice presidents who were great presidents: Jefferson, Teddy Roosevelt, Harry Truman were great presidents. But not because of their service as vice president. Nobody has ever done as much for America as vice president as Al Gore has. Therefore, in my lifetime, he's the best qualified person to serve. So I think that what will happen is we'll come to the conventions, we'll have these debates and somehow -- what I've been amazed by, an amazing volatility since the end of the -- you know, at the end of the primary campaign most of the polls had him up a point or two. So there's been a lot of volatility in these polls and my best judgment is that people are still trying to figure out what they're going to do. And sooner or later they will. But I don't think they have. And I think they know those three things about Al Gore, and it's still more likely than not that he will win. . . . Q. Mr. President, Governor Bush has been critical of you and the energy policy of the administration saying that you've failed to adequately convince OPEC to increase oil production. He also claims that if he became president he would able to use personal diplomacy to persuade allies like Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to, I believe he said, turn on the spigot. Do you find that kind of claim realistic? And do you have any reaction to his criticism of you?
 Vice Pres Al Gore, campaigning in Ohio, calls for tax credits of up to $6,000 for buying electric and other energy-efficient cars and up to $2,000 for buying houses that meet energy-saving standards; his aides say proposals would cost about $48 billion over 10 years; Gov George W Bush's aides hold Gore promotes recycled, unrealized Clinton administration proposals; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore wants more Americans to drive vehicles powered by electricity and to sleep under roofs latticed with solar panels, and today he explained how he would nudge them in that direction: with tax credits of up to $6,000 for buying energy-efficient cars and up to $2,000 for buying houses that meet energy-saving standards. Mr. Gore's proposals boil down to a philosophy that says that if the federal government wants Americans to live and travel in a fashion less dependent on oil and kinder to the environment, it should make it worth their while. As president, Mr. Gore said today, he would. Vice President Al Gore wants more Americans to drive vehicles powered by electricity and to sleep under roofs latticed with solar panels, and today he explained how he would nudge them in that direction: with tax credits of up to $6,000 for buying energy-efficient cars and up to $2,000 for buying houses that meet energy-saving standards. Mr. Gore's proposals boil down to a philosophy that says that if the federal government wants Americans to live and travel in a fashion less dependent on oil and kinder to the environment, it should make it worth their while. As president, Mr. Gore said today, he would. ''When you get the tax credit, then it becomes too good of a deal to pass up,'' Mr. Gore said as he sat on a stack of drywall in the backyard of a house being built with an array of energy-saving devices in this suburb of Columbus. ''Hopefully, over time, that will change the pattern of practice so that these energy-saving options begin to be just the normal way we do things in this country.'' Mr. Gore's aides said the ideas the vice president outlined today would represent about $48 billion in lost federal tax revenue and spending over 10 years. On Tuesday, Mr. Gore proposed a 10-year, $75 billion package of tax breaks and other measures to motivate utility companies and manufacturers to use more energy-efficient methods to reduce the country's dependence on oil. The vice president was expected on Thursday to make additional proposals that would bring the 10-year price of what he described as a new energy and environmental initiative to much more than $125 billion. Although Mr. Gore's critics have often painted him as a tree-hugging extremist or a starry-eyed idealist on environmental issues, the vice president has seized on sudden concerns over the country's dependence on oil as an opportunity to dream big environmental dreams. In remarks at a fund-raiser in Washington on Tuesday night, Mr. Gore described this moment as ''an echo'' of the energy crisis of the late 1970's. And Mr. Gore spoke today in a suburb that is not only in a swing state for the general election but also in a region of the country hit particularly hard by high gasoline prices. The Gore campaign and the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas have spent much of the last week trading bitter accusations that resemble the schoolyard chant, ''I know you are, but what am I?'' Mr. Gore and his aides have asserted that Mr. Bush, as a former oilman who has received large sums of campaign money from oil and gas companies, would be unable to stand up to oil-industry interests. And Mr. Bush's aides, in turn, have combed through the vice president's past proposals and statements for suggestions or evidence that Mr. Gore at times supported higher fuel prices and had his own cozy ties to the oil and gas industry. Today, Mr. Bush's aides complained that the ideas Mr. Gore was promoting were recycled, unrealized proposals by the Clinton administration. ''They're just adding more money,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign. That was true of some of Mr. Gore's proposals today, but not of others. Mr. Gore's plan included a tax credit of 20 percent of the cost of home equipment that does not rely on oil, like electric heat pumps, hot water heaters and natural gas heat pumps; a tax credit of up to $1,000 for buying solar water heating systems and $2,000 for solar electricity systems; an unspecified tax credit for consumers who choose utilities in their areas that use cleaner energy sources and financial help for low-income families so that they could  ''weatherize'' their homes and save  energy.
 Pres Clinton turns news conference on wide range of issues into effort to bolster Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign and to defend him from charges of 1996 campaign finance irregularities; dismisses polls showing Gore running behind Gov George W Bush; says he sees no need for Atty Gen Janet Reno to name special counsel to probe Gore's campaign fund-raising; argues his administration has been repeatedly vindicated of wrongdoing despite Washington 'scandal machine'; presses his legislative agenda; expresses concern about racial disparities among those facing execution for federal crimes; comments on Elian Gonzalez's return to Cuba; lauds Boy Scouts, in comment on Supreme Court ruling allowing organization to bar gays, but calls for movement toward great inclusion in society; photo (M) President Clinton turned an hourlong news conference today into an effort to bolster Vice President Al Gore's campaign and to defend him from accusations of campaign finance irregularities. He said Mr. Gore made ''a compelling case'' that he did nothing wrong and argued that the ''so-called scandals'' of the last eight years ''were bogus.'' In a wide-ranging discussion that included gasoline prices, the death penalty, missile defense, Elian Gonzalez, prescription drug coverage and how much brain power it takes to be president, Mr. Clinton invoked Mr. Gore's name more than a dozen times. President Clinton turned an hourlong news conference today into an effort to bolster Vice President Al Gore's campaign and to defend him from accusations of campaign finance irregularities. He said Mr. Gore made ''a compelling case'' that he did nothing wrong and argued that the ''so-called scandals'' of the last eight years ''were bogus.'' In a wide-ranging discussion that included gasoline prices, the death penalty, missile defense, Elian Gonzalez, prescription drug coverage and how much brain power it takes to be president, Mr. Clinton invoked Mr. Gore's name more than a dozen times. He dismissed polls showing Mr. Gore running behind Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, noting that this week alone one poll showed a 13-point lead for the presumed Republican candidate while another indicated a virtual tie. The president said that once Americans examine Mr. Gore's record, his economic policy and his understanding of new technology, ''it's still more likely than not that he will win.'' Mr. Clinton said he did not see a need for Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special counsel to investigate Mr. Gore's involvement in campaign fund-raising, including his appearance at a Buddhist temple in California in April 1996. The president said that she had already considered, and rejected, an outside review and that ''the best thing to do is for the American people to make their own judgments about it.'' The president also plugged Mr. Gore when asked about the brain power needed to be a good president and gently tweaked Mr. Bush, who has said he plans to surround himself with the best advisers to compensate for areas in which he is not an expert. ''I don't think it's so much a question of intelligence generically,'' Mr. Clinton said in describing the qualities it takes to be president. ''I mean, I think it's more a question of curiosity and willingness to learn what you think is important,'' a clear reference to suggestions that Mr. Bush often skims the surface rather than delving deeply. ''I guess I think that no president can say, well, it should be enough for the voters if I get the best advisers in my party and they come up with a position and I take it,'' he added. ''So what the voters will have to analyze here is how important is the fact that Al Gore spent 20 years working on arms control issues, for example, and dealing with all these things?''
 Prof Alfred E Kahn letter comments on June 23 article on presidential candidacy of consumer advocate Ralph Nader and threat it poses to that of Vice Pres Al Gore (S) You report (news article, June 23) about the threat that Ralph Nader's presidential candidacy poses to Vice President Al Gore's chances of election. Now that Mr. Nader has the Green Party nomination he sought (news article, June 26), I trust that some reporter will ask him how comfortable he feels about the strong possibility that his candidacy will determine whether it will be Mr. Gore or Gov. George W. Bush of Texas who makes the next several appointments to the Supreme Court, where many cases are decided by the narrowest of margins. You report (news article, June 23) about the threat that Ralph Nader's presidential candidacy poses to Vice President Al Gore's chances of election. Now that Mr. Nader has the Green Party nomination he sought (news article, June 26), I trust that some reporter will ask him how comfortable he feels about the strong possibility that his candidacy will determine whether it will be Mr. Gore or Gov. George W. Bush of Texas who makes the next several appointments to the Supreme Court, where many cases are decided by the narrowest of margins.
 If Ralph Nader and Patrick J. Buchanan, the probable Reform Party nominee, want to get into the presidential debates with the major party candidates, they should start by agreeing to debate each other. By scheduling a series of NaderBuchanan debates in the days leading up to the first Bush-Gore debate, they could attract considerably more attention to their candidacies than either could on his own. If Ralph Nader and Patrick J. Buchanan, the probable Reform Party nominee, want to get into the presidential debates with the major party candidates, they should start by agreeing to debate each other. By scheduling a series of NaderBuchanan debates in the days leading up to the first Bush-Gore debate, they could attract considerably more attention to their candidacies than either could on his own. Then, if the voters, after watching these debates, find Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan credible and attractive candidates, the candidates' poll numbers would rise and the Presidential Debate Commission would face even greater pressure to allow them to take part in the Bush-Gore debates.
