 Few politicians have been able to resist exploiting public anger over $2-a-gallon gasoline in the Midwest. But none have shed much light on the subject. Vice President Al Gore suspects that oil companies are gouging customers, and he would not mind if voters took revenge on Gov. George W. Bush, a former oil company executive. Mr. Bush accuses the administration of having sat back while OPEC tripled the price of crude oil. He also cites Mr. Gore's book on the environment to suggest that Mr. Gore thinks gas prices are too low to begin with. Others have called for relaxing environmental standards. Few politicians have been able to resist exploiting public anger over $2-a-gallon gasoline in the Midwest. But none have shed much light on the subject. Vice President Al Gore suspects that oil companies are gouging customers, and he would not mind if voters took revenge on Gov. George W. Bush, a former oil company executive. Mr. Bush accuses the administration of having sat back while OPEC tripled the price of crude oil. He also cites Mr. Gore's book on the environment to suggest that Mr. Gore thinks gas prices are too low to begin with. Others have called for relaxing environmental standards.
 Democrats and Republicans both believe that their positions on Al Gore's fund-raising in 1996 will be supported by transcript of his April interview with Justice Department investigators (M) When Vice President Al Gore announced last week that he was releasing the transcript from his April 18 interview with Justice Department investigators, he confidently declared, ''I think the truth is my friend in this.'' Democrats are convinced that he is right. Attorney General Janet Reno is unlikely to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Gore's 1996 fund-raising activities, they say. And voters will be inclined to view Mr. Gore as having been truthful in the interview and forthright in releasing the transcript. When Vice President Al Gore announced last week that he was releasing the transcript from his April 18 interview with Justice Department investigators, he confidently declared, ''I think the truth is my friend in this.'' Democrats are convinced that he is right. Attorney General Janet Reno is unlikely to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Gore's 1996 fund-raising activities, they say. And voters will be inclined to view Mr. Gore as having been truthful in the interview and forthright in releasing the transcript. But Republicans clearly believe Mr. Gore's transcript will also be their friend. Even if Ms. Reno does not appoint a special prosecutor, they say, the mere whiff of scandal from the transcript will hurt the vice president this November. And perhaps more useful, Republican strategists argue, will be Mr. Gore's words themselves. In the frequently combative four hours of questioning, conducted under oath, the vice president often comes across as evasive or legalistic, they assert. Many of his answers are too carefully parsed. And more than a few times, his memory -- considered to be quite excellent -- fails. For that reason, Republicans argue, Mr. Gore's performance that day can only bolster their contention that he, like President Clinton, plays fast and loose with the truth. Mr. Miller was referring to a passage in which Robert Conrad of the Justice Department's task force on campaign finance abuses, quizzed Mr. Gore about White House events in which contributors, or potential contributors, met with Mr. Clinton or Mr. Gore over coffee. Had anyone told Mr. Gore that those coffees would be used to raise money, Mr. Conrad asked. Mr. Gore replied, ''Well, let me define the term 'raising,' if I could, because if you mean by it, would they be events at which money was raised, the answer is no.'' In fact, Mr. Gore said, the coffees were a means to show potential contributors ''respect,'' and that the pitch for money would come later. Hence, they were not fund-raisers, he argued. Mr. Conrad followed up. Did Mr. Gore know that, according to a Senate Republican report, more than 103 White House coffees had helped raise $26.4 million? And given that report, would it not be fair to describe the coffees as ''a fund-raising tool?'' ''I hesitate to wordsmith it,'' Mr. Gore replied. ''I would not call them fund-raising tools.'' To some political analysts, such hair-splitting echoes President Clinton's response to a question about whether he was having an affair with Monica S. Lewinsky: ''It depends on what the definition of is, is.'' Or Mr. Gore's explanation for why he had not broken the law when he made fund-raising phone calls from the White House, that there was ''no controlling legal authority.'' Mr. Gore's aides argue that the public will see Mr. Gore's answers as reasonable and forthright, given the contentious conditions of the interview. More important, they assert that the public no longer cares about the continuing scandal investigations, and that there may even be an electoral backlash against Republicans who continue to push for more. ''The Republicans think this plays into Clinton fatigue,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary. ''But the thing people are fatigued with is scandal.'' Mr. Gore's argument with Mr. Conrad over the definition of ''fund-raiser'' spilled over into questions about his 1996 appearance at the Hsi Lai Temple in Los Angeles. In 1996, Mr. Gore described that event as ''community outreach.'' In 1997, he called it ''a political event'' at which ''finance people were going to be present.'' And to Mr. Conrad, he called it a ''finance-related event.'' Asked to define that, Mr. Gore said the event was not a fund-raiser because, ''There was no solicitation of money. I did not see any money or checks exchange hands.'' In yet another passage, Mr. Gore seemed to raise questions about the sincerity of form letters to his supporters. One letter contained ''the kind of routine overstatement that is quite common,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I do mean it,'' Mr. Gore replied. ''But I don't mean it in the way that you and I would use the phrase with a lifelong friend that you met in college or something.''
 Mrs. Clinton agreed that prices were high and that oil-producing nations should be pressured to increase their output, She said people should consider other solutions advocated by Vice President Al Gore, including expanding the use of alternative technology to reduce the nation's dependency on foreign oil.
 William Nicoson letter replies to June 25 editorial on Vice Pres Al Gore's 1996 fund raising You are right to blame Attorney General Janet Reno for ''dereliction of duty'' in failing last year to appoint an independent counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's 1996 fund-raising efforts (editorial, June 25). But you are wrong to propose, as a remedy, that the Justice Department share with the public any information that contradicts Mr. Gore's statements to investigators ''and let the voters decide.'' You are right to blame Attorney General Janet Reno for ''dereliction of duty'' in failing last year to appoint an independent counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore's 1996 fund-raising efforts (editorial, June 25). But you are wrong to propose, as a remedy, that the Justice Department share with the public any information that contradicts Mr. Gore's statements to investigators ''and let the voters decide.'' Criminal investigations cannot be resolved by political elections. Mr. Gore is entitled to cross-examine his accusers in court. Many voters may read accounts of government evidence but miss accounts of evidence for the defense.
 Explaining Decision on Inquiry  Attorney General Janet Reno said at a Senate hearing that no one ever pressured her into deciding against having an outside prosecutor investigate fund-raising by President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore.
 Excerpts from Vice Pres Gore's campaign speech on energy policy (M) Following are excerpts from Vice President Al Gore's speech today on energy policy, as released by his campaign: Following are excerpts from Vice President Al Gore's speech today on energy policy, as released by his campaign:
 At the Union Square Greenmarket, Oak Grove Plantation sells about 10 varieties, all organically grown. Plants are $4 each or four for $14. In Westport, Conn., Gilbertie's Herb Farm (203-227-4175) has 13 varieties, including anise, cinnamon, lemon and Sweet Bush, for $2.50 each. Peconic River Herb Farm in Calverton, N.Y., (516-369-0058) sells cinnamon, Thai Lemon and Thai Siam Queen basil and, for true green-thumbs, seedlings ($6 a plant; $1.50 for four seedlings). Chelsea Garden's three Manhattan locations will special-order flats of lemon, Thai and cinnamon basil for $5.99 a plant.
 Correction of June 26 article about Vice Pres Gore's plan to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products; carbon dioxide effects explained (S) A front-page article on Monday about Vice President Al Gore's plan to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products misstated the environmental impact of carbon dioxide. It is a heat-trapping gas associated with global warming, not a component of smog. A front-page article on Monday about Vice President Al Gore's plan to encourage consumers to buy clean-energy products misstated the environmental impact of carbon dioxide. It is a heat-trapping gas associated with global warming, not a component of smog.
 Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, said today at a news conference in Wayne, Mich., that he continued to oppose the legislation, saying no softening in sanctions are warranted until Mr. Castro puts an end to human rights violations. ''I have opposed lifting the sanctions, and I still continue to do so,'' Mr. Bush said. He expressed skepticism that Mr. Castro would let food reach his people, and added, ''I like to remind people this is a man who is tyrannical.'' Aides for Vice President Al Gore, the likely Democratic nominee, said Mr. Gore took issue with the bill's interference with a president's right to issue sanctions.
 National Hockey League  BOSTON BRUINS--Signed RW Lee Goren.  CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS--Re-signed D Kevin Dean.
 The idea for the fame program began, Ms. Zirinsky said, when a ''48 Hours'' crew was following an 11-year-old singer, Sammie Bush. The program trailed him for a year, during which he did in fact emerge as a young singing sensation.
 Gov George W Bush says that as president he would bring down gasoline prices through sheer force of personality, by creating good will that would persuade 'our friends in OPEC' to increase oil output; photo campaigning in Michigan; Bush disagrees with Supreme Court ruling upholding Miranda warnings to suspects (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that if he was president, he would bring down gasoline prices through sheer force of personality, by creating enough political good will with oil-producing nations that they would increase their supply of crude. ''I would work with our friends in OPEC to convince them to open up the spigot, to increase the supply,'' Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican candidate for president, told reporters here today. ''Use the capital that my administration will earn, with the Kuwaitis or the Saudis, and convince them to open up the spigot.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that if he was president, he would bring down gasoline prices through sheer force of personality, by creating enough political good will with oil-producing nations that they would increase their supply of crude. ''I would work with our friends in OPEC to convince them to open up the spigot, to increase the supply,'' Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican candidate for president, told reporters here today. ''Use the capital that my administration will earn, with the Kuwaitis or the Saudis, and convince them to open up the spigot.'' Implicit in his comments was a criticism of the Clinton administration as failing to take advantage of the good will that the United States built with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Also implicit was that as the son of the president who built the coalition that drove the Iraqis out of Kuwait, Mr. Bush would be able to establish ties on a personal level that would persuade oil-producing nations that they owed the United States something in return. Asked why the Clinton administration had not been able to use the power of personal persuasion, Mr. Bush said: ''The fundamental question is, 'Will I be a successful president when it comes to foreign policy?' '' Mr. Bush made his comments in a news conference here after a brief meeting with participants in a local private welfare-to-work program. This was his only public event of the day, which began with a fund-raising breakfast in New York that raised $3 million, private meetings with the editorial boards of The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, and then, after his news conference, ended with a private meeting with financial contributors at the Masco Corporation in Taylor, Mich. Accompanying Mr. Bush was the Michigan governor, John Engler, a Republican. Mr. Bush jokingly pre-empted a question about his vice-presidential selection process by saying Mr. Engler was on his short list and then adding: ''What do you expect me to say? He's standing right here.'' On a more serious note, Mr. Bush said that he had disagreed with the Supreme Court's 7-to-2 ruling on Monday that upheld the reading of Miranda warnings to criminal suspects. Mr. Bush said that the news on Monday that projections of the federal budget surplus were up to $4.2 trillion only confirmed his own earlier estimates. He said he did not expect to increase the size of his proposed tax cut -- $1.3 trillion over 10 years -- just because more money might be available. He brushed off President Clinton's proposal, driven by the new surplus estimates, that he would accept a Republican proposal to cut the marriage tax penalty in exchange for the inclusion of a prescription drug benefit in Medicare. ''In terms of horse-trading with the Congress, it's up to the president and the Congress,'' Mr. Bush said. He was also asked to respond to remarks made this morning by Chris Lehane, press secretary to Vice President Al Gore, to reporters in Philadelphia. Mr. Lehane had criticized Republicans, and Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, in particular, for releasing reports last week that a Justice Department official had called for a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Gore's fund-raising activities. Mr. Lehane said that the Republicans were ''turning the U.S. Congress into a scandal-industrial complex'' and that Mr. Bush was ''the C.E.O.'' of that. Mr. Bush dismissed Mr. Lehane's comments, saying, ''It's frankly the type of politics people in America are sick of, this kind of finger pointing, calling names and trying to divert attention.''
 Off the West Branch of the Delaware, they include Little Delaware, Falls, Honest and Elk Creeks and Betty Brook. On the West Branch, they include Read Creek, Baxter, Trout and Downs Brooks, and Batavia and Bush Kills. On the Beaverkill, they include Trout, Horton and Russell Brooks, and off the Willowemoc, Little Beaverkill, Mongaup Creek and Fir Brook. Off the lower Delaware River, there's East Branch Callicoon Creek and Panther Rock Brook.
 BIG BREAKFAST FOR BUSH  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas knows how to give a breakfast. By offering scrambled eggs at the River Club overlooking the East River in Manhattan yesterday, he was able to extract $3 million from about  55 donors for the Republican National Committee. Neither the campaign nor the committee would identify any of the people at the event. The location was kept secret from reporters until the event was over. Karen Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman, said private events were, well, private. This also applies to a lunch that Mr. Bush is to attend today in Cleveland, where each couple will pay $25,000 to raise $1 million for the committee. The breakfast was unusual in that such big-ticket events are rarely held in the morning. (Usually donors get at least lunch.) A Bush fund-raiser said the donors came from across New York State, although most were from Manhattan and many were from Wall Street. ILLINOIS BALLOT GROWS  The two leading third-party presidential hopefuls, Patrick J. Buchanan and Ralph Nader, have filed petitions for a ballot spot in Illinois. Mr. Buchanan, the probable Reform Party nominee, showed up on Monday in Springfield, the capital, to file, saying he had collected some 67,000 signatures from supporters, more than twice the 25,000 required. ''Illinois is a crucial swing state, and if you're not on the ballot in Illinois, you're not a serious candidate,'' he declared. The papers to put Mr. Nader, the Green Party nominee, on the ballot were also filed on Monday, by party officials. Both men say they expect to make the ballot in almost every state by Election Day. The two are still well down in the single digits in most national polls, but in states where Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are in a tight race, like Illinois, they could be an influential factor.
 Atty Gen Janet Reno tells Senate hearing that no one ever pressured her not to appoint outside prosecutor to investigate fund-raising by Pres Clinton and Vice Pres Gore in 1996; photo; Reno blunts Republican criticism by reading from Justice Department documents explaining her thinking at the time (M) Attorney General Janet Reno said today at a Senate hearing that no one ever pressured her into deciding to refuse to seek an outside prosecutor to investigate President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore for their political fund-raising activities during the 1996 campaign. Ms. Reno, who has repeatedly rebuffed requests for outside inquiries of Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, testified that she had made judgments on the basis of the facts and her interpretation of the independent counsel law. Attorney General Janet Reno said today at a Senate hearing that no one ever pressured her into deciding to refuse to seek an outside prosecutor to investigate President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore for their political fund-raising activities during the 1996 campaign. Ms. Reno, who has repeatedly rebuffed requests for outside inquiries of Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, testified that she had made judgments on the basis of the facts and her interpretation of the independent counsel law. Ms. Reno testified five days after Justice Department officials confirmed that Robert J. Conrad Jr.,  head of the agency's campaign finance unit, had urged her to appoint a special counsel to investigate Mr. Gore's fund-raising in 1996. Today, Gore aides criticized a Republican on the committee, Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, who has been leading hearings into how the Justice Department handled campaign finance issues and who was the first lawmaker to publicly disclose Mr. Conrad's recommendation. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the  Gore campaign, accused Mr. Specter of ''McCarthyite tactics.'' Mr. Lehane said that Mr. Specter and other Republicans ''have turned the Congress into a scandal industrial complex designed to manufacture and create partisan scandals and inflict political damage on the vice president a mere four months before voters go to the polls.'' At the hearing, Mr. Specter said he had announced Mr. Conrad's recommendation for purposes of ''public accountability'' only after Mr. Conrad had refused to respond when Mr. Specter asked him in an earlier hearing whether the prosecutor had sought a special counsel for Mr. Clinton or Mr. Gore. ''That disclosure was made in the course of the committee's business,'' Mr. Specter said. Ms. Reno has twice refused to seek an independent counsel to investigate Mr. Gore's political fund-raising. Although the law governing such appointments has lapsed, Ms. Reno still has the authority to name special counsels under rules that grant these prosecutors much the same powers as an independent counsel. Mr. Conrad's recommendation to appoint a special counsel was based largely on Mr. Gore's sometimes combative answers during an April 18 interview with prosecutors in which Mr. Gore was asked about a number of events, among them his appearance at a Buddhist temple in California, White House coffees for campaign supporters and missing e-mail messages.
 Vice Pres Gore proposes tax breaks and other incentives to reduce nation's dependence on oil and clean up environment; offers sweeping vision of conquering pollution and cars running without gasoline; ten-year plan that would cost more than $125 billion is framed as opportunity and obligation created by country's current extraordinary prosperity; Gore also calls for FTC probe of possible price-gouging by oil industry; photo of Gore at Trigen Energy Corp in Philadelphia (M) Offering a sweeping vision of a future in which pollution is conquered and cars run without a ''drop of oil or gasoline,'' Vice President Al Gore proposed tax breaks and other incentives today for both reducing America's dependence on oil and cleaning up the environment. Offering a sweeping vision of a future in which pollution is conquered and cars run without a ''drop of oil or gasoline,'' Vice President Al Gore proposed tax breaks and other incentives today for both reducing America's dependence on oil and cleaning up the environment. The plans that the vice president outlined today -- mostly various forms of tax breaks for businesses that provided or invested in more efficient, less conventional or less polluting sources of energy -- represented an estimated $75 billion in lost federal tax revenue or spending over 10 years, aides said. But they said that the additional proposals that Mr. Gore was expected to make on Wednesday and Thursday would bring that figure up to more than $125 billion. Mr. Gore framed that investment as both an opportunity and an obligation created by the country's current period of extraordinary prosperity. ''There can be a next stage of prosperity in which American creativity builds not just a better product but also a healthier planet,'' Mr. Gore said outside an energy plant here that was a model for the use of newer, cleaner, more efficient technology. ''We will say to the nation's inventors and entrepreneurs: if you invest in these new technologies, America will invest in you,'' Mr. Gore continued. ''And we will prove, once and for all, that we can clean up pollution, make our power systems more efficient and more reliable, and move away from dependence on others all with no new taxes, no new bureaucracies, and no onerous regulations.'' While economists and business executives often worry that more clean-air efforts and stringent environmental regulations would hamper industry and limit the creation of new jobs, Mr. Gore's approach emphasized the carrot of tax savings rather than the stick of restrictions, and it anticipated the growth of new companies and new jobs on the cutting edge of fuel technology. But Mr. Gore's pitch was more than just an exhortation for a cleaner environment. It also reflected the sudden emergence of high gasoline prices as a potent issue in the 2000 presidential elections. Republicans have assailed the Clinton administration for an energy policy that they say has left the country too vulnerable to the whims of foreign oil producers. Mr. Gore even folded into his speech a call for the Federal Trade Commission's investigation into possible price-gouging by the oil industry to include public hearings, possibly with testimony from consumers. Earlier this month, when Mr. Gore embarked on what he called a ''prosperity and progress'' tour, he said he would spend this week talking about environmental policy. But since then, gas prices have become an increasingly heated point of contention between Republicans and Democrats, and today, the word energy accompanied and even preceded the word environment in the headlines atop the written remarks and policy summaries that Mr. Gore's aides distributed to reporters. And Mr. Gore frequently alluded in his 26-minute address to the problems of American dependence on ''big oil,'' a phrase undoubtedly meant as a dig against his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, a former oil company executive. Democrats have said that Mr. Bush's former professional ties and the enormous sums of campaign money he has received from oil companies would make him unwilling to press for lower prices at the gas pump. In any case, Mr. Gore said in his speech, ''Our next-stage prosperity must be built on our ability to make sure Americans will be free forever from the dominance of big oil and foreign oil.'' Mr. Gore said that America today stood ''on a new frontier of energy independence and environmental protection'' and should not fail to explore it. ''It is an old, timid way of thinking to build our lives and livelihoods around a fuel source that is distant, uncertain and easily manipulated,'' he said. ''It is a new, bold way of thinking to demand and develop new technologies to free ourselves from gas-tank price-gouging.'' Later, in a satellite interview with an ABC affiliate in Green Bay, Wis., Mr. Gore attacked Mr. Bush more directly. ''I have never been afraid to take on big oil,'' Mr. Gore said. But, the vice president added, ''My opponent comes out of the oil industry. His experience is as an oil company executive. He called for higher oil prices to boost the oil companies' profits.'' Officials with the Bush campaign noted that Mr. Bush had endorsed the Federal Trade Commission's investigation into oil companies and said that Mr. Gore was merely trying to deflect attention from the Clinton administration's responsibility for gas prices that have risen as much as 50 cents a gallon in some areas of the Midwest. Mr. Gore, as it happens, will be taking his new energy message to that region over the next few days. Mr. Bush's aides further said that what Mr. Gore unveiled today was really a set of environmental proposals, none of them especially visionary, that were recast and reconfigured to sound like an energy plan because the political landscape had changed so quickly. ''The vice president seems to forget who's been in office for seven years,'' Mr. Bush said at a news conference in Michigan this afternoon. ''This is an administration that's been in charge and the price of gasoline has risen steadily.'' The plan that Mr. Gore began to outline today centered on an unspecified ''menu of financial mechanisms,'' as material distributed by his aides called it, of tax incentives, loans, grants and bonds to help ''power plants and industries that come forward with projects that promise to dramatically reduce climate and health-threatening pollution.'' Some of Mr. Gore's proposals represented expansions of current federal programs, while others were new. They included doubling the tax credit for businesses that turn wind or landfill methane into electricity and giving accelerated tax deductions to companies for the purchase of equipment that makes cleaner and more efficient use of fuel. In the coming days, Mr. Gore's aides said, the vice president will talk about tax breaks for consumers who use solar energy or buy products, like cars, that do not use traditional sources of fuel like oil. Mr. Gore's proposals seem to veer in somewhat different directions from those of the last Democratic president to offer a sweeping set of proposals on energy use, Jimmy Carter. As a way of trying to reduce dependence on foreign oil, Mr. Carter set import quotas on the amount of foreign oil accepted into American ports. And he encouraged the development of alternative sources of fuel, including coal, oil shale, unconventional gas and the sun. Mr. Carter asked that utility companies cut their use of oil by 50 percent over a decade, and switch to other fuels,  particularly coal.
