 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, raised the stakes even further. In May, he said that as president he would back research on more robust antimissile weapons like lasers and weapons in space, taking a page from President Reagan's ''Star Wars'' plan.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed article on two announcements this month--on mapping of human genome and on threat of antibiotic-resistant bacteria--that have opposite and profound implications for human well-being; notes that neither Vice Pres Al Gore nor Gov George W Bush appear to have taken a position on antibiotics controversy, and that Bush has avoided subject of genome map (M) ''One of the most important events in the history of mankind,'' said Al Gore, a person who we all know is not given to overstatement. ''One of the most important events in the history of mankind,'' said Al Gore, a person who we all know is not given to overstatement. For those of us who are scientifically illiterate, the precise meaning of the genome research project is a tad murky. But the verbiage floating around -- ''eradicate once incurable diseases'' (Bill Clinton) or ''a limitless progression of new medical breakthroughs'' (Mr. Gore) -- seems to suggest that our biotech guys are six months away from curing death. The rigors of political campaigns require that candidates defend these and all other practices popular with the farm lobby as part of ''a vanishing way of life.'' Neither Al Gore nor George Bush actually appears to have a position on the antibiotics controversy -- we're still waiting for Mr. Bush to make a statement about the genome map. He's avoided the subject since last January, when he announced, ''I worry about people taking the place of God.''
 On Stage and Off column; light fare in view for fall season includes Neil Simon's Dinner Party and revival of Gore Vidal's The Best Man, with Chris Noth making Broadway debut; photo; Drama Dept and Signature Company plans also noted (S) As for ''Dinner Party,'' it joins another comedy, ''The Tale of the Allergist's Wife'' by Charles Busch, and a couple of revivals that mix sugar and salt: Jane Wagner's ''Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe'' from 1985 and Gore Vidal's 1960 political satire ''The Best Man.'' (More on that guy later.)
 Editorial says Ralph Nader, in running for president as 'spoiler' candidate on Green Party ticket, is engaging in a self-indulgent exercise that will distract voters from clear-cut choice represented by major party candidates Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, and will particularly hurt Gore Ralph Nader's long history of public service championing the causes of consumers, the environment and economic justice automatically commands respect. But in running for president as the nominee of the Green Party, he is engaging in a self-indulgent exercise that will distract voters from the clear-cut choice represented by the major-party candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. His candidacy will be especially harmful for Mr. Gore, the contender closest to Mr. Nader on the environment and other issues. This political reality casts doubt on Mr. Nader's claim to be driven by policy differences rather than ego. We are equally reluctant to see the main election choices clouded by the spoiler candidacy of Patrick Buchanan on the Reform Party ticket, an effort that seems likely to pull votes from both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Of course, both Mr. Buchanan and Mr. Nader have the right to run. But given the major differences between the prospective Democratic and Republican nominees, there is no driving logic for a third-party candidacy this year, and the public deserves to see the major-party candidates compete on an uncluttered playing field. Ralph Nader's long history of public service championing the causes of consumers, the environment and economic justice automatically commands respect. But in running for president as the nominee of the Green Party, he is engaging in a self-indulgent exercise that will distract voters from the clear-cut choice represented by the major-party candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. His candidacy will be especially harmful for Mr. Gore, the contender closest to Mr. Nader on the environment and other issues. This political reality casts doubt on Mr. Nader's claim to be driven by policy differences rather than ego. We are equally reluctant to see the main election choices clouded by the spoiler candidacy of Patrick Buchanan on the Reform Party ticket, an effort that seems likely to pull votes from both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Of course, both Mr. Buchanan and Mr. Nader have the right to run. But given the major differences between the prospective Democratic and Republican nominees, there is no driving logic for a third-party candidacy this year, and the public deserves to see the major-party candidates compete on an uncluttered playing field. It is especially distressing to see Mr. Nader flirt with the spoiler role. For years, few Americans have made a more cogent critique of the Washington influence game and the abuses of corporate power. From his early attacks on automobile safety records to his most recent advocacy of campaign finance reform, he has elevated issues and sharpened Americans' awareness of flaws in their political system. Mr. Nader acknowledges that on his traditional issues, Mr. Gore would promise more  progress than Mr. Bush. But because he regards Mr. Gore as too much an incrementalist, Mr. Nader is saying in effect that he would choose outright defeat for the Democrats over small steps forward on those issues. That is a kind of irresponsibility that more befits a Ross Perot than someone with Mr. Nader's record and professed concerns. Mr. Nader may argue that he will force Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush to be more sensitive to election fund-raising reform and environmental issues. But the fact is that they have defined broad differences on these two issues without his help. The main economic issue that divides Mr. Nader from the major-party candidates is trade, and there, both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have positions that are better for the wage-earning voters that Mr. Nader claims to represent. For he and the Green Party are against all the recent trade agreements, including American membership in the World Trade Organization.
 Reform Party gathers enough signatures to put Ross Perot on ballot for party's primary, which will be conducted by mail and over Internet; Los Angeles City Council reconsiders setting aside Pershing Square as gathering place for protesters during Democratic national convention; acts on concerns of police and merchants about violence; George W Bush campaign seeks 'real-looking people,' particularly 'Hispanic and Caucasian' for 'nonunion commercial'; Al Gore campaign event in Chicago features recordings by Fleetwood Mac (S) CONCERNS ABOUT PROTESTS  Less than a week after voting to set aside Pershing Square in downtown Los Angeles as a gathering place for protesters at the Democratic National Convention, the Los Angeles City Council is reconsidering the move under pressure from the police and merchants' groups worried about violence or disruptions at convention hotels and the jewelry mart near the square. The police have proposed putting demonstrators in a fenced-off parking lot near the convention site. The council approved the new plan as part of a $4 million bailout of the convention's local organizing committee, at the insistence of one member, Jackie Goldberg, a liberal Democrat representing Hollywood, who held the decisive vote. The Secret Service has now decided not to have Vice President Al Gore stay at the Royal Biltmore Hotel, opposite the square, citing safety concerns. After a sometimes impassioned debate on Wednesday, the council referred the matter to a committee; a final vote is expected next week. REALITY-BASED AD FOR BUSH  The Bush campaign is searching for real people, or at least actors who look like them. In a casting notice sent to talent agents this week, a company representing the campaign said it was looking for ''a wide range of assorted, real-looking people'' to appear in a spot for Gov. George W. Bush that is to be filmed in July. Describing the spot as a ''nonunion commercial,'' the memorandum asked for ''everyday people on the street'' with a ''strong emphasis on Hispanic and Caucasian.'' The notice was a surprise to officials of the Screen Actors Guild, which is on strike against the advertising industry. Guild officials said they thought they had a signed agreement that gave the Bush campaign permission to hire union actors. But Mark McKinnon, Mr. Bush's media consultant, said that while two members of the campaign's advertising team who are partners in a separate agency had signed such an agreement, the Bush campaign's agency, Maverick Media, had not. IT'S IN THE MUSIC  Vice President Al Gore's ''progress and prosperity'' tour carries an implicit argument for four more years of the current administration, and at a campaign event in Chicago yesterday, the recorded music made the same case. It was by Fleetwood Mac, the band that played at President Clinton's inauguration festivities in 1993, and it even included the song ''Don't Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow),'' Mr. Clinton's theme. The other tunes had their own strange relevance. There was ''The Chain,'' a plea for continuity that includes a declaration -- ''if you don't love me now, you will never love me again'' -- with disturbing implications for a candidate trailing in many polls. And there was ''Tusk,'' which seemed to capture the uncertainty of Mr. Gore's future in Washington with its opening lines: ''Why don't you ask him if he's going to stay? Why don't you ask him if he's going away?''
 Gov. Jeb Bush, a Republican who has enjoyed the support of Cuban-Americans in Miami, blamed the media for what he called a misunderstanding of the situation. ''I think it's damaged -- incorrectly so -- the nature of Cuban-Americans in Miami,'' Governor Bush said. ''It breaks my heart to see the national press depict people who have been lovers of freedom the way that this has all played out.'' But as Mr. Bush spoke, Cuban-Americans here continued to vent their anger at a government that they feel has betrayed them, at best, and, at worst, is in league with Mr. Castro.
 Many names for Democratic vice-presidential nomination have been circulating for months and with less than six weeks before convention, new names are slipping into the void; but Vice Pres Al Gore remains tight-lipped, perhaps hoping for boost to his campaign from suspense over vice-presidential pick; photo (M) Advisers to Vice President Al Gore insist that no one knows anything. But the Gore camp is coming to believe that it needs to do something dramatic to catch imaginations, especially since Gov. George W. Bush, who holds a strong lead in most polls, will probably be riding pretty high when he comes out of the Republican convention with his own running mate two weeks earlier. The media attention has seemed to focus more on the Republican side, in part because Mr. Bush is gabbier than Mr. Gore, his convention is sooner and he seems to have more choices. But if Mr. Gore is to be taken at his word, he is under the same time constraints as Mr. Bush. He told reporters in late April that his choice would not be dictated by Mr. Bush's choice and that he expected to make his selection by the time the Republicans gather in Philadelphia, at the end of July, even though the Democratic convention is two weeks later. ''The conventions are so close together,'' Mr. Gore said at the time, that whether his choice is actually announced or not, ''it will be effectively made before then.'' The tight-lipped Mr. Gore has said little publicly since then, except to note that his top criterion was whether the person could take over immediately as president and that he would obviously want to pick someone with whom he was personally comfortable. (''No, I'm going to pick someone I can't stand!'' he joked recently when asked, as he is endlessly, whether personal chemistry was important.) From all signs, Mr. Gore is replicating the selection process that was used by Bill Clinton. He has put the same super-discreet person, Warren Christopher, in charge of the search. And he is hoping for the same kind of spontaneous combustion that took place when Mr. Gore himself was chosen by Bill Clinton. Mr. Clinton, who in 1992 had been dragging in the polls behind President Bush and was even running third behind Ross Perot, announced Mr. Gore as his vice-presidential running mate four days before the convention. Mr. Clinton was suddenly catapulted to first place and never looked back. Mr. Gore's had not been among the names mentioned in advance, and it is quite possible that Mr. Gore's ultimate choice will not be among those mentioned now. Mr. Gore, unlike Mr. Bush, has not really flirted publicly with any of his possible choices. Mr. Bush seems to be amused by the game, while Mr. Gore does nothing to encourage speculation about anyone. One of the considerations for Mr. Gore at this point is whether to go with a regional candidate to nail down a particular state or whether to go with a bigger-picture candidate to generate more national excitement and make a broader appeal. In the second would be someone like Mr. Rubin, who would send a signal that a seasoned financial expert would be minding the store. A big subject of debate in Democratic circles is what kind of candidate Mr. Rubin, who has never run for office, might make and whether his lack of expertise in other realms would matter. He has appeared numerous times with Mr. Gore on the campaign trail, but rarely to scintillating effect. Others say that his financial experience is such a plus, who cares? And there is a third category -- someone who might help capture a particular kind of voter, not one based on region. This would include Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who might help Mr. Gore improve his standing with organized labor and neutralize the effect of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate who threatens to undermine Mr. Gore. One person who is enjoying watching the process is Neil Oxman, a Democratic consultant based in Philadelphia and Mr. Gore's media adviser in 1988. He said that while he had no specific knowledge of this year's process, a very complex polling process was almost certainly going on beneath the surface, one that would consume perhaps $400,000 over the next few weeks as people close to Mr. Gore conducted focus groups across the country. For example, he said, pollsters were likely showing voters in Indiana relatively neutral interviews with Senator Bayh and then asking if his presence on the ticket would make them more likely or less likely to vote for Mr. Gore. They would ask the same question in media markets close to Indiana, he said, but then, the farther away from Indiana they got, they would ask more generic questions -- what is known in the trade as ''Candidate A'' questions. One Republican who is close to the Bush campaign said it was clear, in any case, that Mr. Gore needed to do something dramatic to shake up the race. So who would he pick if he were Mr. Gore? He thought for a moment and said the most dramatic name he could think of: ''Bill Clinton.''
 Kenneth L Lay, chairman of Texas energy giant Enron Corp, is a major campaign contributor to Gov George W Bush, and has over the years been able to count on Bush's support on many issues; Enron and its executives have given over $550,000 to Bush's various campaigns, more than any other source; Bush listens closely to what Lay and others at Enron have to say about important policy matters; as governor, Bush has been suuporter of legislative initiatives that have been most important to Enron, including deregulating electric utilities, easing tax burden on capital-intensive companies, and passing tort-reform law meant to curb large jury awards in civil cases; photo (M) In October 1997, George W. Bush placed a call to his friend Tom Ridge, the Republican governor of Pennsylvania, to vouch for the Enron Corporation, the giant Houston energy and trading company that, at the time, was battling to sell electricity in Pennsylvania. Mr. Bush made the call at the request of Kenneth L. Lay, the chairman and chief executive of Enron. In October 1997, George W. Bush placed a call to his friend Tom Ridge, the Republican governor of Pennsylvania, to vouch for the Enron Corporation, the giant Houston energy and trading company that, at the time, was battling to sell electricity in Pennsylvania. Mr. Bush made the call at the request of Kenneth L. Lay, the chairman and chief executive of Enron. After a nasty regulatory fight, Enron cracked into Pennsylvania's market. And in the ensuing years, the Texas energy company has seen its influence widen nationally and internationally. Along the way, Enron and its executives have been Mr. Bush's most generous contributors, giving more to his various campaigns --  over $550,000 -- than any other source. The relationship between Mr. Bush and Mr. Lay is close, and old: the two men got to know each other in the 1980's, when Mr. Lay was a big political supporter of Governor Bush's father, former President George Bush. It is the sort of friendship where the governor takes the time to write a joshing birthday note to Mr. Lay: ''One of the sad things about old friends is that they seem to be getting older -- just like you! 55 years old. Wow! That is really old.'' Mr. Bush, 53, listens closely to what Mr. Lay, now 58, and others at Enron have to say about important policy matters. As governor, Mr. Bush has been a supporter of the legislative initiatives that have been most important to Enron, including deregulating electric utilities, easing the tax burden on capital-intensive companies, and passing laws meant to curb large jury awards in civil cases. On all of them, Mr. Bush received advice from top Enron executives, sometimes soliciting it. Many of the issues important to Enron, particularly tort reform, were also important to other Texas businesses. And Governor Bush, a spokesman said, has gone to bat for other companies, too, never making  unusual overtures for Enron or pushing for legislation specifically tailored to benefit the company. Tom Smith, director of the Texas office of Public Citizen, the group founded by Ralph Nader, who is himself a presidential candidate, said: ''Enron's investment in the Bush gubernatorial campaigns have paid off in policies beneficial to them. And that's why they're investing so heavily in the presidential campaign.'' Aides say it is not unusual for Governor Bush to lend his name to a Texas company's efforts outside the state, as he did for Enron in Pennsylvania. In the past, for example, he has contacted foreign leaders considering whether to buy military aircraft from Texas companies. In the presidential race alone, Enron and its executives have given Mr. Bush about $105,000, making Enron the ninth largest donor to the Bush campaign so far, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. And that does not include the unlimited donations to the Republican Party, known as soft money. Mr. Lay is also one of the ''Pioneers,'' Bush supporters who pledge to collect at least $100,000 in direct contributions. As part of that role, he sent a letter last year to several hundred people, many of them Enron executives, urging them to make the maximum contribution to Mr. Bush's campaign. ''In no way is this a condition of employment or continued employment at Enron,'' the letter said. Mr. Bush declined to comment for this article. A campaign spokesman, Dan Bartlett, said Mr. Bush and Mr. Lay have been close friends for many years. ''The fact that he heads this company is secondary to their personal relationship,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''One issue that you could say that Enron has played a key role in shaping the debate is deregulation. Governor Bush does share in their philosophy of competition in the marketplace.'' Enron officials have in the past asked Mr. Bush to help lobby lawmakers to appropriate funds for O.P.I.C., as well as for the Export-Import Bank, another federal agency that aids American companies abroad. In one such letter, obtained by The New York Times under Texas open records laws, Mr. Lay asked Mr. Bush in March 1997 to contact every member of the Texas delegation to explain how ''these export credit agencies of the United States are critical to U. S. developers like Enron, who are pursuing international projects in developing countries.'' Mr. Lay's request was to be ''handled'' by the state-federal relations office, a lobbying office the state of Texas maintains in Washington, according to a note written on the letter by a Bush staffer. But according to Mr. Bartlett, the Bush spokesman, Bush officials have not lobbied on behalf of either agency. In Texas, Mr. Bush has always been an advocate of electric utility deregulation, but his support did not always fall Enron's way. Late in the 1997 legislative session, after Mr. Bush's attempts at sweeping tax reform failed, he tried to push through a last-minute deregulation bill. To succeed, the bill needed support from the state's big utilities, but Enron officials felt the bill was weighted so far in favor of the utilities that they could not endorse it. The bill ultimately failed. In 1999, Texas lawmakers passed a deregulation bill that Mr. Lay said is probably the best in the nation. As part of a group of large energy and manufacturing companies, Enron lobbied during the 1997 Texas legislative session for lower property taxes. Before the session began, Mr. Bush appointed a 17-member committee to study the issue, including Richard Kinder, who was then Enron's president, on the panel. The proposal Mr. Bush introduced would have resulted in $9 million in annual tax savings to Enron. But the Bush plan had little legislative support, and it soon died. Enron has also sought Mr. Bush's help on narrower issues. In November 1998, the chairman of Enron Oil & Gas, which at the time was majority-owned by Enron but is now a separate public company called EOG Resources, complained to Mr. Bush that the state comptroller was improperly assessing the company about $415,000 in crude-oil production taxes. The chairman, Forrest E. Hoglund, who has also been a Bush donor and who has since retired, wrote to Mr. Bush: ''We need to have this handled before there is a big industry backlash. Sorry to bother you with it.'' The case is still pending, according to officials at the Comptroller's Office. Mr. Bartlett, the Bush spokesman, said the Enron Oil and Gas complaint, and similar letters from four other companies, had been routed to Albert Hawkins, Mr. Bush's budget director. One of Mr. Hawkins' staffers called the Comptroller's Office to inquire about its methodology, but did not suggest rescinding or easing the action against Enron Oil and Gas, Mr. Bartlett said. Long before Mr. Bush's inauguration in 1995, Enron had built relationships with both the Bush family and officials from the Bush administration. In addition to Mr. Lay being a big fund-raiser and supporter of the former president, Enron and its affiliates later hired a number of high-level Bush officials, including former Secretary of State James Baker 3d and former Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher. Governor Bush has even been accused of working on Enron's behalf. Rodolfo Terragno, a senior Argentine official, has told several publications that in 1988, he received a call from Mr. Bush asking him to award a pipeline contract to Enron. Mr. Terragno, who is currently the Argentine cabinet chief, declined requests for an interview. But in a statement sent by e-mail, he said he now is not sure if the call came from Governor Bush or from one of his brothers, Neil Bush. Bush officials say no one from the family ever lobbied for Enron or spoke to Mr. Terragno about the project. Says Mr. Lay, ''No member of the Bush family has ever been on the Enron payroll.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore calls for more federal spending on light rail transportation systems and on buses that use cleaner fuels, saying he would devote $25 billion over 10 years to improving mass transportation (M) Vice President Al Gore called today for more federal spending on light rail transportation systems and on buses that use cleaner fuels, saying he would devote $25 billion over 10 years to improving mass transportation in states and cities, reducing air pollution and liberating Americans from too heavy a dependence on oil. He also said he wanted to liberate them from having to travel to work every day in the same old, tired, potentially expensive and possibly sluggish way. ''You deserve the independence to get in your car and drive anywhere you want to go, on your own schedule, without having to empty your wallet at every filling station,'' Mr. Gore said at a campaign event today in Chicago, against a backdrop of the skyline and Lake Michigan. Vice President Al Gore called today for more federal spending on light rail transportation systems and on buses that use cleaner fuels, saying he would devote $25 billion over 10 years to improving mass transportation in states and cities, reducing air pollution and liberating Americans from too heavy a dependence on oil. He also said he wanted to liberate them from having to travel to work every day in the same old, tired, potentially expensive and possibly sluggish way. ''You deserve the independence to get in your car and drive anywhere you want to go, on your own schedule, without having to empty your wallet at every filling station,'' Mr. Gore said at a campaign event today in Chicago, against a backdrop of the skyline and Lake Michigan. The $25 billion that he pledged brought to about $148 billion the amount of money Mr. Gore has said the federal government should spend over 10 years to make everything from power plants to family sedans more fuel-efficient and less toxic to the environment. Mr. Gore outlined his plans over three days in three swing states -- Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois -- that he was tentatively scheduled to visit yet again next week. Mr. Gore's aides said that the $25 billion would finance grants for which states, cities and local agencies could compete, and it would cover projects like the rehabilitation of neighborhoods near rail stations. ''I reject the idea that in order to have a clean environment and reduce our dependence on foreign oil, we all have to put on hair shirts and turn off the air-conditioners and swelter inside and feel good that we're doing our duty for the environment,'' Mr. Gore said. As for domestic oil, Mr. Gore said that its producers had a lot of explaining to do and that he had informed officials with the Federal Trade Commission that he wanted its hearings into the increase in gasoline prices to be open to the public. Mr. Gore proudly noted that since he called for those hearings last week, prices had begun to decline.
 Still, the government said the crew had serious roots in organized crime, perhaps best exemplified by Mr. Amato, the balding, bespectacled 48-year-old described as its leader. Mr. Amato got his start in the mob as a bodyguard for Carmine Galante, the former Bonanno family chief, and was sitting just feet from Mr. Galante when masked gunmen killed the aging crime boss at Joe and Mary's Restaurant in Bushwick, Brooklyn, in 1979. Though investigators have long believed that Mr. Amato helped plan the killing, he was never charged. But he went to prison in 1987 on a conviction in the Pizza Connection case.
 Ralph Nader, Green Party candidate for president, sharply criticizes Clinton-Gore administration's energy policies, asserting that administration set stage for higher gasoline prices this summer by allowing oil company mergers in recent years (M) Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate and Green Party candidate for president, sharply criticized the Clinton-Gore administration's energy policies today, asserting that the administration had set the stage for higher gasoline prices this summer by allowing oil company mergers in recent years. Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate and Green Party candidate for president, sharply criticized the Clinton-Gore administration's energy policies today, asserting that the administration had set the stage for higher gasoline prices this summer by allowing oil company mergers in recent years. Mr. Nader, who is expected to draw most of his support from among Democrats, also ridiculed the energy proposals unveiled by Vice President Al Gore this week. Mr. Gore, the likely Democratic nominee, called for tax breaks and other financial incentives to encourage people to buy, and companies to develop, fuel-efficient cars, solar homes and other energy-saving products. Mr. Nader went on to label Mr. Gore ''an environmental imposter'' and a ''gee-whiz techno twit'' who had all but abandoned poor and working-class people in favor of corporate America, with its big campaign contributions. Despite his attacks on Mr. Gore, Mr. Nader argued that his candidacy would be good for Democratic Congressional candidates because he would draw Democratic-leaning voters to the polls. And he took a few shots at Gov. George W. Bush, the likely Republican nominee. ''The problem with George W. Bush is that he's beyond satire,'' Mr. Nader said. ''He's the corporate welfare king of all presidential candidates.''
 Pres Clinton nominates former Repr Norman Y Mineta as secretary of commerce, laying groundwork for Mineta to become first Asian-American to hold a Cabinet post; if confirmed, Mineta will replace William M Daley, who will formally step down on July 15 to become campaign chairman for Vice Pres Al Gore (M) If confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Mineta would replace William M. Daley, who will formally step down on July 15 to become campaign chairman for Vice President Al Gore's presidential bid. He would be Mr. Clinton's fourth commerce secretary, following Mickey Kantor and the late Ron Brown, as well as Mr. Daley. Despite a considerable salary increase when he went into the private sector, Mr. Mineta had clearly not turned his back entirely on politics. He served as an informal adviser to Mr. Gore's presidential effort and had recently considered a run for his old seat in Congress.
 29TH INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN ARTS FESTIVAL, Boys and Girls High School Field, 1700 Fulton Street, at Utica Avenue, Bushwick, Brooklyn. An outdoor celebration with music, dance, comedy, food and a fashion show. Today through Tuesday, 10 a.m. to midnight. Admission: $7; $2 for children under 12 and the elderly; free for all on Monday before 4 p.m. Information: (718) 638-6700.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas issued a statement applauding passage of the disclosure bill. During the primary season, Sam Wyly, a longtime supporter of Mr. Bush, set up a Section 527 group called Republicans for Clean Air, which spent $2.5 million on issue advertisements criticizing the environmental record of Mr. Bush's leading opponent for the Republican nomination, Senator John McCain of Arizona.
 Day's schedules for Presidential candidates George W Bush and Al Gore
