 Former Pres George Bush and his wife, Barbara, express confidence that their son, Gov George W Bush, will be elected president; say American voters crave change, just as it did after eight years of Pres Reagan and four of Pres Bush; believe that notion of 'Clinton fatigue' is real and that their son's frequent pledge to restore honor and integrity to Oval Office is one that will resonate with voters who feel that those virtues have been compromised by Pres Clinton; photos (M) In a rare face-to-face interview about his son's presidential campaign, former President George Bush said today that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas would emerge victorious in November largely because American voters periodically craved change, and because President Clinton's conduct in office had sharpened that appetite. President Bush, 76, who sat with his wife, Barbara, 75, for a nearly hourlong interview at the family compound here, said that Vice President Al Gore's ties to Mr. Clinton would not allow him to present himself credibly as a fresh start, and that his son's ability to do so would prove decisive. In a rare face-to-face interview about his son's presidential campaign, former President George Bush said today that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas would emerge victorious in November largely because American voters periodically craved change, and because President Clinton's conduct in office had sharpened that appetite. President Bush, 76, who sat with his wife, Barbara, 75, for a nearly hourlong interview at the family compound here, said that Vice President Al Gore's ties to Mr. Clinton would not allow him to present himself credibly as a fresh start, and that his son's ability to do so would prove decisive. ''I think I was the victim of people wanting change,'' said Mr. Bush, who served as vice president under President Ronald Reagan for two terms before moving into the White House. He described voters' sentiments in 1992 as ''eight years of Reagan, four years of Bush, we want a change.'' He and Mrs. Bush also said that they thought the notion of ''Clinton fatigue'' was real, and that their son's frequent pledge to ''restore honor and integrity'' to the Oval Office was one that would resonate with voters who felt that those virtues had been compromised by Mr. Clinton. ''It isn't even debatable, in my view,'' Mr. Bush said. Aides said that today's joint interview was one of only three or four that the Bushes had done in the last year, and their comments were striking for several reasons, chief among them the way in which Mr. Bush interpreted both his and his son's presidential fortunes in terms of historic forces outside their control. In assessing his son's prospects, Mr. Bush dwelled longer on the country's itch for something different than on the Texas governor's record and positions on issues, though he did offer hearty praise for both. At the very least, the Bushes exhibited a sensitivity to President Bush's legacy. Mrs. Bush, almost as an aside, murmured that the strong economy the country was enjoying  was really her husband's doing, and Mr. Bush mentioned that he was bothered by President Clinton's assertions that Mr. Gore was perhaps the best vice president ever. ''I'd like to argue that on my own behalf,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to his own years as vice president. ''We had the, you know, drug interdiction program. We had the deregulation task force. I headed up the antiterrorist task force. I took the case for American missiles to Germany, the Pershings. I mean, there was a lot of substance there.'' When Mr. Clinton's name had initially come up, Mrs. Bush signaled that she and her husband would take a pass on the topic, in accordance with a long-held vow not to speak ill of Mr. Bush's successor. But minutes later, Mrs. Bush was discussing Americans' lowered expectations for public officials, and when her husband said she could not blame that entirely on Mr. Clinton, she responded, ''Oh, I can.'' The Bushes also addressed the persistent questions about whether their son had enough knowledge of foreign affairs to lead the nation. Mr. Bush, a former U.N. ambassador and an envoy to China who campaigned for the White House on his foreign policy expertise, acknowledged that his son did not know as much as he did when he became president. Did his son know as much as Mr. Gore? ''Gore's had eight years of experience there,'' the former president acknowledged. ''But the way I should be judged on whether I knew foreign policy is by the kind of people I had around me. Because I didn't know all this stuff.'' ''You get good people,'' he added, echoing his son's frequent refrain that a president principally assembles a team, delegates responsibilities and makes final decisions based upon good advice. ''George knows enough to do that and enough about the world to have good judgment on his own at this point,'' Mr. Bush said. Mrs. Bush then chimed in with a reference to Mr. Gore's awkward toast, during a visit to China in 1997, with Prime Minister Li Peng, who had ordered the violent crackdown on protesters in Tiananmen Square in 1989. ''I don't think we ought to think of Al Gore in China at the time that he was caught with the Champagne glasses,'' she said. ''I'm not going to think about that.'' ''What are you doing?'' Mr. Bush said, acting displeased with her acidic interruptions but never really seeming so. ''You're not going to be in this interview if you're going to start talking like that. George will call and he'll be furious.'' The Bushes have kept a fairly low public profile throughout their son's presidential campaign, taking care not to overshadow him, not to invite criticism that he was simply riding on his family's name, or to make accidental statements that could become controversial. ''It's mind-boggling for me,'' Mr. Bush said during the interview, which began in the living room of the main house, continued over a lunch of lobster salad on a rear terrace overlooking the Atlantic, and ended when he had to rush off with his son Jeb, the Florida governor, for a 12:30 p.m. tee time at a nearby golf course. Jeb Bush, who joined his parents for lunch, said that his brother, George, was benefiting from a Republican yearning to take back the White House -- a desire so strong that the party was managing to paper over internal divisions that had fractured it in the past. ''Eight years in the wilderness brings a higher tolerance for diversity,'' Jeb Bush said, adding that 12 years in the wilderness had made the Democratic Party rally in a similar way around Mr. Clinton in 1992. ''If you looked at Bill Clinton's record as governor of Arkansas, he was given a huge break by groups that were anxious to have a Democrat in the White House,'' Jeb Bush said. Although he did not make any sort of similar appraisal of his brother's record, he later added, ''Well, I think the same thing applies this year and benefits George, rather than Gore.'' President and Mrs. Bush acknowledged that in 1992 or 1993 or even the beginning of 1994, they never expected a day like this to come. Mr. Bush left Washington as something of a pariah in the Republican Party, a man who had acquiesced to a tax increase and lost the White House. And George W. Bush had never really demonstrated the sort of political ambition that his brother Jeb had. When he told his mother that he planned to run against the incumbent Texas governor, Ann Richards, in 1994, she told him he would lose. His mother was wrong. Both Mr. and Mrs. Bush had generally kind words for Mr. Gore, saying that when they were in the White House and he was a senator, they had met and liked him. When asked if Mr. Gore had gone overboard, during the impeachment proceedings, by calling Mr. Clinton one of the greatest American presidents, Mr. Bush expressed sympathy for the political bind in which Mr. Gore found himself. ''Greatest president, though?'' Mrs. Bush asked, referring to Mr. Gore's remark. ''In history?'' ''You're saying too much,'' Mr. Bush told her.
 Senior Bush Predicts History Will Favor His Son  Former President George Bush, in a rare face-to-face interview about his son's presidential campaign, said Gov. George W. Bush would emerge victorious in November largely because American voters periodically craved change, and because President Clinton's conduct in office had sharpened that appetite. Vice President Al Gore, a longtime supporter of capital punishment, said that he backed the Clinton administration's decision to postpone the first federal execution in nearly 40 years but that he did not support a nationwide death-penalty moratorium. The Democrats released a draft of their party platform that strongly articulates the centrist ''new Democratic'' views of Vice President Gore, but also offers concessions to liberals on several major issues, including trade, the death penalty and gay rights.
 Democratic Party drafts platform that strongly articulates centrist 'new Democratic' views of Vice Pres Al Gore, but also offers concessions to liberals on several major issues, including trade, death penalty and gay rights (M) The Democrats released a draft of their party platform today that strongly articulates the centrist ''new Democratic'' views of Vice President Al Gore, but also offers concessions to liberals on several major issues, including trade, the death penalty and gay rights. In many ways, the 41-page document tries to straddle the same ideological divide that faces Mr. Gore in his quest for the presidency. Even as he tries to reach out to moderate and independent voters this fall, Mr. Gore will need to energize core Democratic voters, who tend to be more liberal. The Democrats released a draft of their party platform today that strongly articulates the centrist ''new Democratic'' views of Vice President Al Gore, but also offers concessions to liberals on several major issues, including trade, the death penalty and gay rights. In many ways, the 41-page document tries to straddle the same ideological divide that faces Mr. Gore in his quest for the presidency. Even as he tries to reach out to moderate and independent voters this fall, Mr. Gore will need to energize core Democratic voters, who tend to be more liberal. ''Al Gore will insist on and use the authority to enforce worker rights, human rights and environmental protections'' in trade accords, it says. ''We should use trade to lift up standards around the world, not drag down standards here at home.'' Where the platform adopts Republican-sounding ideas, it usually criticizes the Republican version of those ideas. On tax cuts, for instance, the platform advocates reductions for ''working parents.'' But it harshly attacks Gov. George W. Bush's proposed across-the-board tax cut with populist language. The draft also echoes Mr. Gore's  attacks on Mr. Bush's proposal to let  taxpayers invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes in the stock market. ''Taken together, George W. Bush's $2 trillion tax cut, his campaign-season spending proposals, his support for privatizing Social Security add up to an assault on the surplus, causing Americans to have to choose between drastic cuts in education and health care or a return to the days of deficit spending,'' the draft reads. Not surprisingly, the platform highlights Mr. Gore's core campaign proposals to preserve Social Security, expand health care, help the elderly buy prescription drugs, overhaul the campaign finance system and strengthen gun regulations. And it devotes it largest section to Mr. Gore's education proposals. In its language as well as its policies, the document echoes Mr. Gore's stump speeches. It is divided into three major sections -- prosperity, progress and peace -- which were the themes of a recent campaign swing by the vice president. It paraphrases the title of Mr. Gore's book on the environment, saying, ''The Earth truly is in the balance.'' And it closes with a pet Gore slogan: ''Now, we say to America, 'You ain't seen nothing yet.' ''
 NEW EVIDENCE OF NADER'S IMPACT  When Michigan voters consider a three-way presidential race among George W. Bush, Al Gore and Patrick J. Buchanan, the expected Reform Party nominee, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are statistically tied, with Mr. Buchanan coming in a very distant third, a new poll indicates. But when the name of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, is added, Mr. Gore slips well behind Mr. Bush, trailed by Mr. Nader and then Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Nader appears to draw some labor support at Mr. Gore's expense because of differences over trade issues. In a statewide telephone poll conducted for The Detroit Free Press by the research group EPIC/MRA, a research group in Lansing, Mr. Bush drew the support of 45 percent of likely voters, Mr. Gore 40 percent and Mr. Buchanan 4 percent. When Mr. Nader was added, Mr. Bush was the choice of 46 percent of the voters, Mr. Gore 34 percent, Mr. Nader 8 percent and Mr. Buchanan 3 percent. The poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. NEW EVIDENCE OF NADER'S IMPACT  When Michigan voters consider a three-way presidential race among George W. Bush, Al Gore and Patrick J. Buchanan, the expected Reform Party nominee, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are statistically tied, with Mr. Buchanan coming in a very distant third, a new poll indicates. But when the name of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, is added, Mr. Gore slips well behind Mr. Bush, trailed by Mr. Nader and then Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Nader appears to draw some labor support at Mr. Gore's expense because of differences over trade issues. In a statewide telephone poll conducted for The Detroit Free Press by the research group EPIC/MRA, a research group in Lansing, Mr. Bush drew the support of 45 percent of likely voters, Mr. Gore 40 percent and Mr. Buchanan 4 percent. When Mr. Nader was added, Mr. Bush was the choice of 46 percent of the voters, Mr. Gore 34 percent, Mr. Nader 8 percent and Mr. Buchanan 3 percent. The poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. GORE'S TENANTS MOVING ON  The family renting a Tennessee home from Vice President Al Gore is moving to Ohio -- with the help of seven volunteer movers and officials from the Tennessee Republican Party. The moving team arrived yesterday at the home in Carthage to load two trucks with the household goods of Charles and Tracy Mayberry and their four children. Mrs. Mayberry called Mr. Gore a ''slumlord'' last month, saying she wanted to get his attention so much-needed repairs would be made. Mr. Gore promised to get the repairs done, but Mrs. Mayberry contends that nothing has happened. A Gore spokesman, Douglas Hattaway, said that all the repairs requested had in fact been made.
 Nader for president! You say you are serious this time, running as the candidate of the Green Party, and you deride those who say you should get out of Al Gore's way. Fair enough. Third parties are an honorable, if frustrating, American tradition. Nader for president! You say you are serious this time, running as the candidate of the Green Party, and you deride those who say you should get out of Al Gore's way. Fair enough. Third parties are an honorable, if frustrating, American tradition.
 Vice Pres Al Gore backs Clinton administration's decision to postpone first federal execution in nearly four decades but does not support a nationwide death-penalty moratorium (M) Vice President Al Gore said today that he backed the Clinton administration's decision to postpone the first federal execution in nearly four decades but did not support a nationwide death-penalty moratorium. Mr. Gore, a longtime supporter of capital punishment, spoke one day after administration officials indicated that the federal execution, of Juan Raul Garza, convicted of three drug-related murders, would be delayed beyond its scheduled date of Aug. 5 so that the Justice Department could first issue regulations for federal death-row inmates to follow in seeking clemency from the president. Vice President Al Gore said today that he backed the Clinton administration's decision to postpone the first federal execution in nearly four decades but did not support a nationwide death-penalty moratorium. Mr. Gore, a longtime supporter of capital punishment, spoke one day after administration officials indicated that the federal execution, of Juan Raul Garza, convicted of three drug-related murders, would be delayed beyond its scheduled date of Aug. 5 so that the Justice Department could first issue regulations for federal death-row inmates to follow in seeking clemency from the president. ''I do support the decision to put these clemency procedures in place,  and pending that to hold off on this particular case,'' Mr. Gore said at a  news conference while campaigning in the battleground state of Pennsylvania. ''I have not yet seen evidence that to me would justify a nationwide moratorium,'' Mr. Gore said. ''If such evidence emerges, I would not hesitate to support that step. But I have not seen it yet.'' While the Justice Department is now completing a report on the issue of any racial and geographical disparities in federal capital cases, Mr. Gore's spokesman, Chris Lehane, said later today that what the vice president had been referring to was any evidence of systemic prosecutorial flaws suggesting large numbers of wrongful convictions. Mr. Gore today also continued an  assault on pharmaceutical companies and accused his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush, of being the industry's candidate. A half-hour later, at the news conference, he declined to criticize his own chief media adviser, Carter Eskew, who, The Washington Post disclosed today, tried last year to obtain the pharmaceutical industry's lucrative public relations contract to help fight legislation like Mr. Gore's own proposal for a Medicare prescription drug benefit. Asked how he countenanced such a proposal by Mr. Eskew, Mr. Gore said: ''You'll have to ask him that. What he did before he worked for me is something you'll have to ask him.'' The vice president called the efforts by Mr. Eskew and his former firm a ''completely separate matter'' from the Gore campaign. Mr. Gore's aides said they did not contest that the memo was genuine. Mr. Eskew did not return a call to his office. Earlier this week, Mr. Gore accused Citizens for Better Medicare, a group created by the drug industry, of running a media campaign that was ''polluting the airwaves.'' Democrats then tied the group to the Bush campaign by noting that the firm of Alex Castellanos, the media consultant working on the ads, had done work placing television commercials for the Bush organization.
 Presidential campaign of 2000 attracts 224 candidates as of June, not including Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; Paula Bennett, Michael T Strauss, Temperance Lance-Council and other candidates on the fringe tell why they run; photos (M) Ms. Bennett, a political independent from Lincoln, Neb., is running for president this year in a field that is far more crowded than one might think. As of last month, 226 people had filed papers with the Federal Election Commission indicating their intention of seeking the White House. The list includes major party candidates like Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas but also candidates so far on the political fringe -- in some cases, even beyond -- that they make people like Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party, John Hagelin of the Natural Law Party and Ralph Nader of the Green Party seem like mainstream contenders. Ms. Bennett, a political independent from Lincoln, Neb., is running for president this year in a field that is far more crowded than one might think. As of last month, 226 people had filed papers with the Federal Election Commission indicating their intention of seeking the White House. The list includes major party candidates like Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas but also candidates so far on the political fringe -- in some cases, even beyond -- that they make people like Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party, John Hagelin of the Natural Law Party and Ralph Nader of the Green Party seem like mainstream contenders. In that regard, Ms. Harder is typical of the outsiders who filed papers. At best, many say, they hope to influence Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush on an issue or two. But even better-known alternative candidates, like Ralph Nader of the Greens, Harry Browne of the Libertarians or Ross Perot, who represented the Reform Party in 1992 and 1996, do little more than draw new focus to old issues.
 Excerpts from interview with former Pres George Bush and his wife, Barbara Following are excerpts from an interview today with former President George Bush and his wife, Barbara, about the presidential campaign of their son Gov. George W. Bush of Texas: GEORGE BUSH. I think he'll win. Again, it's mind-boggling for me, a former president, to think our son will be president. I think a lot of it is that after this primary, where he took such a huge pounding, the press had a massive love affair with John McCain -- nobody can question that, that's just objective, even from a nonobjective guy -- but after that, there was a distorted view of George, I think, and now . . . people are beginning to see what his heartbeat is, what he's really like, that he's a decent person, that he likes people, has done a good job in his state. I don't think in the fall that the press is going to have the same love affair with Gore that they had with John McCain. Following are excerpts from an interview today with former President George Bush and his wife, Barbara, about the presidential campaign of their son Gov. George W. Bush of Texas: GEORGE BUSH. I think he'll win. Again, it's mind-boggling for me, a former president, to think our son will be president. I think a lot of it is that after this primary, where he took such a huge pounding, the press had a massive love affair with John McCain -- nobody can question that, that's just objective, even from a nonobjective guy -- but after that, there was a distorted view of George, I think, and now . . . people are beginning to see what his heartbeat is, what he's really like, that he's a decent person, that he likes people, has done a good job in his state. I don't think in the fall that the press is going to have the same love affair with Gore that they had with John McCain. MR. BUSH. Oh, I don't know about that. I'm going to leave it to George's campaign to define Al Gore. He can identify with people, and I think that's coming through. And also, they're going to want change. And I believe there is a Clinton fatigue. And all of these things will inure to George's benefit just as Gore will be trying to have this good economy inure to his . . . MR. BUSH. We don't get into that because he beat me and then it looks like a poor sport, but I did speak out once in the depths of the Monica Lewinsky thing and said this is disgraceful. But I think it's more than that very unhappy time period of impeachment. I think it's change. I think I was the victim of people wanting change: ''Eight years of Reagan, four years of Bush, we want a change.'' And all the things that I felt strongly about never materialized as issues. And I think the same thing is true now. I think people kind of like change, like the idea of change from time to time. I think that works for George's benefit. I don't think Gore can present himself as a candidate of change. . . . Q. As much as Gore? MR. BUSH. Gore's had eight years of experience there. But the way I should be judged . . . is by the kind of people I had around me. Because I didn't know all this stuff. You know, how much reduction you can do on atomic weapons. But Brent Snowcroft did. I didn't know how Gorbachev was going to react when the Iraqis invaded Kuwait, but Jimmy Baker was over there the next day, with Shevardnadze and Gorbachev, and figured it out. I didn't know how the military would work, but we had Colin Powell and Norm Schwarzkopf. We had confidence in generals and officers who were right when all the critics were wrong. So how do you know? You get good people. George knows enough to do that . . .
 ''He knows every bit as much about it as Bill Clinton did.'' GEORGE BUSH, on questions about the foreign policy expertise of his son, George W. Bush. [A11] ''He knows every bit as much about it as Bill Clinton did.'' GEORGE BUSH, on questions about the foreign policy expertise of his son, George W. Bush. [A11]
 The issue has also entered the presidential campaign, with Vice President Al Gore endorsing a limited version of the plan and Gov. George W. Bush backing a more ambitious system that could be deployed in space.
 The Democratic Party released a draft of its platform that strongly reflects the centrist views of Vice President Al Gore. The Democratic Party released a draft of its platform that strongly reflects the centrist views of Vice President Al Gore.
