 The onlookers get samples of Coke and other promotional items, he added. The Familia de Beisbol program features players from different Spanish-speaking countries, including Venezuela, Mexico and the Dominican Republic. The players appear in posters hung inside stores and on Coke vans driven around neighborhoods like Inwood and Bushwick.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush presses efforts to boost image with Hispanic groups by telling San Diego convention of National Council of La Raza that he is on mission to topple any serious stereotype that Republicans are insensitive to minorities and new immigrants; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush told members of one of the nation's largest and most influential Hispanic groups today that he was on a mission to topple any stereotype that Republicans were insensitive to minorities and new immigrants. And Mr. Bush sought to prove his own compassion by proposing to spend an additional $100 million in federal money every year to expedite foreigners' applications for immigration. Gov. George W. Bush told members of one of the nation's largest and most influential Hispanic groups today that he was on a mission to topple any stereotype that Republicans were insensitive to minorities and new immigrants. And Mr. Bush sought to prove his own compassion by proposing to spend an additional $100 million in federal money every year to expedite foreigners' applications for immigration. But Mr. Bush mentioned that plan only in passing, in the context of a fairly general assertion of his belief that his agenda, priorities and attitude of compassion should appeal to minority voters who had perhaps been suspicious of Republicans in the past. Mr. Bush has acknowledged that he faces a formidable challenge in courting Hispanic voters in California. But he asked them today to judge him not by the past actions of members of his party but by the amount of time he was spending in densely Hispanic neighborhoods. Mr. Bush sporadically used Spanish phrases and words like ''corazon,'' which means ''heart,'' in today's speech. Although Mr. Bush repeatedly announced his appreciation of diversity and his concern for minorities, he did not offer much detail about the specific policies he wanted to implement, or how they would help Hispanics or other minorities. He offered an only slightly altered version of his usual stump speech, framing some of his positions in terms of how they would benefit foreigners and recent immigrants. Mr. Bush spoke for 19 minutes. In contrast, Vice President Al Gore's appearance at the La Raza convention on Monday night lasted about an hour, and half of that time was devoted to answering questions from the audience. Mr. Bush did not open the door to a similar exchange with the audience, although he did hold a brief news conference with reporters after he spoke. His speech was his only public event of the day, and it came on a week when he planned to spend every other day at home in Texas. Mr. Bush's appearance today reflected not only his effort to demonstrate concern for members of minorities and to project a sensitive, moderate image, but also his desire to compete seriously for California's 54 electoral votes -- 21 more than any other state -- or at least make the appearance of doing so. Even if Mr. Bush does not carry the state, his campaign would like to give Mr. Gore a scare and a good reason to spend campaign cash on advertising in California's expensive media markets. Making inroads with Hispanic voters, who represented about 13 percent of the Californians who voted in the 1998 elections, is a key part of Mr. Bush's strategy in the state, which he has visited six times, including today, since the Republican primaries essentially ended in the spring. As he has done in previous appearances, Mr. Bush introduced his nephew George P. Bush, the oldest son of his brother Jeb and Jeb's wife, Columba, and noted that Columba's Mexican ancestry made his nephew half-Hispanic. He told the members of La Raza how proud he was to have Hispanic blood in his family. In calling for improvements at the immigration service, Mr. Bush was joining voices in both major political parties and staking ground that was anything but controversial. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said Mr. Bush was defining a problem that was already on its way to being solved. ''Once again, Bush is playing follow the leader,'' Mr. Hattaway said. ''Al Gore has long believed that we should streamline the I.N.S., and under the leadership of this administration, the I.N.S. has already cut the application time significantly.'' Before Mr. Bush left the stage at the La Raza conference, he was presented with a birthday cake decorated to look like an American flag. Mr. Bush, who turns 54 on Thursday, said he did not have any special celebration planned.
 Bush Antiques, at 2109 Magazine Street, has F.F.F. (fine French furniture), but also small interesting pieces -- like the metal chandelier that Ms. Parlange easily reinvented with tinted silver leaf.
 The Camp David meetings begin next Tuesday and could run anywhere from a few days to a few weeks, with President Clinton participating on a regular basis. Any peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians produced under his auspices would enhance Mr. Clinton's place in history. But the importance of achieving Mideast peace should transcend personality or partisanship. Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, would be wise to give full support to Mr. Clinton's peacemaking efforts.
 Presidential campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore has placed gun control at center of his agenda, attacking rival Gov George W Bush as pawn of National Rifle Assn, while largely airbrushing away Gore's early record in Congress of fighting gun control legislation; Gore and supporters argue that his embrace of gun control is heartfelt response to rising tide of gun violence in late 1980's; critics say stark evolution from NRA ally to enemy provides clear evidence that on contentious issues Gore has molded his views to fit political needs (M) During his first campaign for the Senate, Al Gore was asked by The Nashville Banner in 1984 whether he could support ''stiff controls'' on firearm sales and ownership. His answer was a resolute ''no.'' ''I do not believe that such measures would keep handguns out of the hands of criminals,'' said Mr. Gore, then a four-term congressman from a rural Tennessee district who earned an ''A'' rating from the National Rifle Association that year. During his first campaign for the Senate, Al Gore was asked by The Nashville Banner in 1984 whether he could support ''stiff controls'' on firearm sales and ownership. His answer was a resolute ''no.'' ''I do not believe that such measures would keep handguns out of the hands of criminals,'' said Mr. Gore, then a four-term congressman from a rural Tennessee district who earned an ''A'' rating from the National Rifle Association that year. But in 1987, when Mr. Gore was running his first campaign for president, he gave a very different answer to gun control advocates seeking his support on Senate legislation to ban plastic guns. ''He wanted to do whatever it took to reduce gun violence,'' said Sarah Brady, the president of Handgun Control Inc. Ever since, Mrs. Brady has regarded Mr. Gore as one of her movement's staunchest supporters. This year, Mr. Gore has placed gun control at the center of his campaign for president. He has attacked his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush, as a pawn of the N.R.A. and proposed an array of tough laws, including licensing new handgun buyers, limiting gun purchases to one a month and banning inexpensive and easily concealed handguns. But in promoting his gun agenda, Mr. Gore's campaign has largely airbrushed away his early record in Congress of fighting gun control legislation. To his critics, his stark evolution from N.R.A. ally to enemy provides clear evidence that on contentious issues like gun control, abortion and smoking, Mr. Gore has molded his views to fit political needs. Mr. Gore and his supporters argue that his embrace of gun control was a heartfelt response to a rising tide of gun violence in the late 1980's. Mr. Gore himself credits Mrs. Brady -- whose husband, James, was partly paralyzed in 1981 by a bullet meant for President Ronald Reagan -- with helping to change his views. ''The views of many people, not just elected officials, have evolved on this issue as gun violence has become more prevalent,'' said Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager for communications. Mr. Bush has been more consistent on the issue than Mr. Gore, and for years has been seen as a reliable N.R.A. ally. As Texas governor, he has signed into law several bills the rifle association supported, including one letting people with handgun licenses carry concealed weapons and another prohibiting municipalities from suing gun makers. N.R.A. officials said it was virtually certain the group would endorse Mr. Bush this fall and throw millions of dollars behind his campaign. In explaining his opposition to stringent gun control, Mr. Bush often asserts that a well-armed populace is an effective deterrent to crime. In contrast, a review of Mr. Gore's record over 24 years suggests that his journey through the gun control issue has been more complicated than either his supporters or critics imagine. Indeed, some people who knew him at the time suspect that Mr. Gore, a one-time divinity school student, actually supported gun controls before he entered office. But cautious and pragmatic to the bone, they suggest, he behaved like most other Tennessee Democrats when he became a politician, expressing opposition to gun laws. In Mr. Gore's first campaign for Congress in 1976, for instance, he indicated to The Nashville Banner, the more conservative of the city's two daily newspapers, that he would not support new gun control laws. When the paper endorsed him, Mr. Gore reprinted and distributed the editorial, which included a glowing reference to his opposition to gun restrictions. Yet Mr. Gore also muddied his position with mixed messages. In an interview that same year with the city's more liberal newspaper, The Tennessean, where Mr. Gore had earlier worked as a reporter and editorial writer, he contended that The Banner had oversimplified his positions. Instead of opposing gun control wholesale, he told the paper, he was open to certain restrictions, including one he advocates today, a ban on the cheap handguns known as Saturday night specials. Friends and colleagues say they think Mr. Gore stifled or concealed those pro-gun-control sentiments during the 1976 campaign, fearing that he would anger voters in the Fourth Congressional District, a staunchly Democratic but socially conservative swathe of hamlets, rolling forests and tobacco farms in middle Tennessee. ''My thinking is that he wavered on gun control,'' said Lloyd Armour, who was Mr. Gore's boss on The Tennessean's editorial page. ''But you had to recall that he was from a very conservative, I mean very conservative, district. He could not have survived if he had been as forthright as he is now.'' If Mr. Gore was conflicted on the issue during the 1976 campaign, his early voting record in Washington was not. During his first decade in Congress, Mr. Gore steadfastly opposed gun restrictions, winning ''A'' or ''A-'' ratings from the N.R.A. in three of his first five campaigns. And though it appears that he did not receive campaign contributions from the rifle association, the group says it mailed literature praising his record to its members in his district. Mr. Gore supported efforts in the late 1970's to stop the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms from creating a system of serial numbers to be used to trace weapons. The N.R.A. argued that the system was a first step toward national gun registration. Mr. Gore agreed, and voted to cut the bureau's budget by $4.2 million, killing the plan. After winning election to the Senate in 1984, Mr. Gore continued to be a reliable vote for the rifle association. In his first year, he supported the gun lobby's most prized goal of the decade: a sweeping repeal of federal gun laws that had been enacted after the murders of Senator Robert F. Kennedy and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King in 1968. Mr. Gore's father, Albert, had voted for those restrictions in the Senate. With Mr. Gore and most other Southern Democrats voting for it, the Firearm Owners Protection Act, as it was known, sailed through the Senate by a 79-to-15 vote. To this day, Mr. Gore contends the act contained provisions that made it worth supporting, including tougher penalties for crimes committed with guns. After enactment of the repeal measure, Mr. Gore continued to express skepticism about gun control, telling the magazine Washington Monthly in 1986 that ''gun laws haven't been an effective solution to the underlying problem of violent crime.'' When Mrs. Brady called Mr. Gore that year to solicit his support for the ban on plastic guns, he readily agreed. He was absent for the vote when the measure failed, but co-sponsored a similar bill the next year. Republican opponents and other critics say Mr. Gore had an added motivation for switching sides just then: in the spring of 1987, he had jumped into the presidential campaign. Two leading Democratic candidates, Michael S. Dukakis and Jesse Jackson, were strong proponents of gun control, and, his critics assert, Mr. Gore was trolling for votes in New York and New England, places where regulating guns was popular. Mr. Gore denies that. Though his presidential campaign collapsed in early 1988, Mr. Gore's advocacy for gun control grew stronger. In 1990, he helped negotiate a bill banning certain semi-automatic weapons, and urged his fellow Tennessee Democrat, Senator Jim Sasser, to support it. His critics say Mr. Gore tried to have it both ways on the assault weapons ban, voting against an amendment to extend the ban to more weapons, then voting for the final bill. But gun control advocates call the amendment a ''poison pill'' that could have killed the overall bill. In 1991, Mr. Gore co-sponsored a bill named after James Brady requiring a five-day waiting period for handgun buyers. Six years earlier, Mr. Gore had voted against similar legislation. This time, he rose to give one of his few floor speeches about gun control in 16 years in Congress. ''Violence in this country and violence with guns is a problem that must be addressed not next month, not next year, but now,'' Mr. Gore said, in a losing cause. But even as Mr. Gore was working for passage of the Brady bill in Washington, his staff was telling reporters in Tennessee that Mr. Gore was undecided about the measure, according to news accounts in Nashville papers. Both the assault weapons ban and the Brady bill were defeated in Congress those years. But in the Clinton administration, Congress passed both bills and they were signed into law. And last year, Mr. Gore cast the tie-breaking vote in the Senate on legislation to require background checks for gun buyers at gun shows. That bill is now stalled in negotiations between the House and Senate. Republicans say Mr. Gore's shifting views on gun control raise questions about his candidness and credibility. But gun control advocates say what matters most is that Mr. Gore is staunchly in their camp today.
 Bush Addresses Hispanic Group  Gov. George W. Bush told members of the National Council of La Raza, one of the nation's largest and most influential Hispanic groups, that he was on a mission to topple any stereotypes that Republicans are insensitive to minority groups and new immigrants. And he sought to demonstrate his own compassion by proposing to spend an additional $100 million in annual federal spending to expedite foreigners' applications to immigrate.
 Both expected presidential nominees, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, have made education and better schools a major issue of their campaigns. Governor Bush has also devoted considerable attention to education to woo swing voters and has proposed a five-year, $2.9 billion plan to improve teaching. Part of that would go to greater financing for teacher training, as well as bolstering a program that recruits retired military personnel to become teachers and a plan to allow a tax deduction of up to $400 a year for teachers who spend their own money on supplies.
 Presidential campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore, after spring of ever-shifting strategies and messages, is turning to populist themes that appeal to Democratic faithful; new move is allowing him to speak in voice distinct from Pres Clinton's, tying him back to own record in Congress; photo (M) After a spring of ever-shifting strategies and messages, Vice President Al Gore has turned to more red-meat, populist themes that appeal to the Democratic faithful. Today Mr. Gore criticized drug companies for the second time in three days, accusing them of ''price gouging'' and putting ''millions of dollars'' into a ''phony'' group ''which is polluting the public airwaves with special interest TV ads designed to deceive the American people about a prescription drug benefit.'' After a spring of ever-shifting strategies and messages, Vice President Al Gore has turned to more red-meat, populist themes that appeal to the Democratic faithful. Today Mr. Gore criticized drug companies for the second time in three days, accusing them of ''price gouging'' and putting ''millions of dollars'' into a ''phony'' group ''which is polluting the public airwaves with special interest TV ads designed to deceive the American people about a prescription drug benefit.'' Mr. Gore's populist appeals have allowed him to speak in a voice distinct from President Clinton's, tying the vice president back to his own record in Congress where, as a young lawmaker, he fought excessive drug company profits. Mr. Gore faces challenges Mr. Clinton did not. Unlike Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore has been lagging slightly behind his Republican opponent in recent polls, in part because Democrats are not rallying behind him as enthusiastically as Republicans are supporting Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. And, on his left, Mr. Gore has to contend with Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate running on the Green Party line. Mr. Nader is drawing about 5 percent in the polls, but some Gore supporters fear that, in a tight race, even a small percentage could hurt Mr. Gore in key states. So the vice president's advisers and Democratic supporters say the themes now being sounded by the vice president serve several purposes. For one, they are supposed to stoke the perception that Mr. Bush, whose campaign has raised record sums, is the candidate of the well off. ''He's taken $90 million in this campaign, which is unprecedented, and time and again he took the side of the special interests,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. The tones also rally the Democratic faithful. Mr. Gore appeared today before some of his party's staunchest supporters, a teachers union gathering here in Philadelphia, and a conference of the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Cincinnati. The audience at the American Federation of Teachers convention here was often cheering as Mr. Gore criticized the insurance industry or pledged to give all children health insurance. And though aides say it is not Mr. Gore's primary intent, the attack on corporate interests co-opts some of Mr. Nader's anti-corporate message. By portraying himself as a fighter for the common man against big business, Mr. Gore also takes one of his vulnerabilities -- that he can seem strident -- and tries to turn it into a plus. As he put it several times this week, ''The question is whether you're for the people or for the power.'' But Mr. Gore's aides say that, despite his comment about Scotch drinkers at their club, he is more often taking on corporate interests that the public distrusts than he is the well-to-do. Mr. Gore's aides say these themes will resonate with swing voters as much as with Democrats. ''These issues are core Democratic issues,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman, ''but they appeal to voters across the board.'' And Mr. Gore is no longer criticizing Mr. Bush head-on, the way he did in the spring when he spoke of Mr. Bush's ''risky'' tax scheme and criticized every Bush proposal. Instead, he goes after certain business interests that he then tries to link to either the Congressional Republicans or to Mr. Bush, or both. In a letter to Citizens for Better Medicare that was distributed on his campaign plane, Mr. Gore challenged the group's leaders to make public its donor list and show who was behind it, saying, ''The American people deserve to know who exactly is trying to influence this critical issue.''. In his appearance before the teachers, Mr. Gore said the group should be called Citizens for Bad Medicare, saying, ''That's what they are promoting -- our opponent's plan, which tells seniors to go beg the H.M.O.'s and the insurance companies with help with prescription drugs.'' Mr. Gore was referring to the House Republicans' plan for a prescription drug benefit, which broadly follows principles Mr. Bush has set out. Their bill gives subsidies and incentives to insurance companies to provide drug coverage to Medicare recipients. Mr. Gore has a more expansive plan which would offer the benefits directly through the Medicare program. Dan Zielinski, a spokesman for the group, said it was reviewing Mr. Gore's letter to decide on a response.  Mr. Zielinski said the coalition had not disguised its drug company backing. Even as Mr. Gore was delivering his criticisms, Democratic officials sought to demonstrate ties between the pharmaceutical industry and Republicans. They said Alex Castellanos, a Republican media consultant who helped produce the commercials for Citizens for Better Medicare, had ties to the Bush campaign. Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said Mr. Castellanos's firm, National Media, had no part in the production of Mr. Bush's campaign advertisements. One Bush adviser acknowledged that the company did buy media time  for the Bush campaign, but said Mr. Castellanos was on the ''creative side'' of the company and was not involved in buying time for the Bush commercials. Mr. McLellan accused Mr. Gore of trying to ''divert attention away from his Washington, D.C., one-size-fits-all'' approach to providing a drug benefit directly through the federal Medicare program. Mr. McClellan also accused three of Mr. Gore's friends and advisers -- Peter Knight, Tom Downey and Anthony Podesta -- of being drug industry lobbyists. Mr. Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, however, noted that the vice president was acting in opposition to the drug industry despite the ties of some of his friends and advisers. But Mr. Lehane asserted that the Bush campaign was benefiting from the Citizens for Better Medicare advertisements, and was putting forward ''an agenda that is in the best interests of the pharmaceutical companies.''
