 Soon we will bid farewell to Bill Clinton, our companion through so many civic adventures, from the New Covenant to the V-chip. We can be confident that his successor will be a man who listens to the lessons of the past. In fact, both Al Gore and George W. Bush are so soaked in the lore of bygone elections that they might well be called the metaphorical equivalent of history's drowned kittens. We all realize that Mr. Bush is the son of one former president. But how many of you know that he is also a direct descendant of another? Yes, some of Mr. Bush's genomes were once worn by Franklin Pierce -- the man known as ''Young Hickory'' to his supporters in New Hampshire and ''The Fainting General'' to his troops in the field. He was also called ''the victor over many a hard-fought bottle,'' but only by political opponents wishing to harp on isolated incidents, all of which I believe occurred before his 40th birthday. Our candidates are both the products of great traditions of public service. Mr. Gore is the son of a senator, Mr. Bush is the grandson. America has been blessed with many presidents who spring from such well-hoed political truck gardens. Perhaps this year's winner will find it in him to become another John Quincy Adams or Benjamin Harrison, or even a second, smaller, William Howard Taft. Some people go further and claim that there are not even any issues worth fighting for in this flaccid new era. They miss the days when the mere mention of ''free silver'' or ''Remember the Maine'' or ''Save Checkers'' set passions quivering. Today, our blood runs cooler. Still, who among us did not feel a twinge of excitement as we watched the Al Gore Prosperity and Progress Tour? Who did not feel relief at the news that George W. Bush intends to be a Reformer With Results? No issues? Speak on, you prophets of doom -- what say you of Mr. Bush's war against the ''tollbooth on the road to the middle class,'' a loathsome structure he intends to destroy with copious tax reductions? Mr. Bush hates that tollbooth, even on the days he refers to it as ''toolboth.'' Mr. Gore says he would use our excess money to pay down the national debt, and make the nation totally solvent for the first time since 1835, an era when Franklin Pierce was just a pup and America was preparing to celebrate the Panic of 1837.
 Center for Responsive Politics report shows that since Gov George W Bush announced his presidential candidacy in March 1999, he has rolled up money 'burn rate' of $1.3 million a week, or $180,000 a day (S) HOW TO BURN $73 MILLION  With George W. Bush breaking all fund-raising records, a lot of people in the political consulting and media business are reaping a windfall. A new report by the Center for Responsive Politics shows exactly how Mr. Bush spent the $73 million raised for his primary bid. The big-ticket item was $21.7 million in campaign advertising, mostly for television. Air charters came in second at $4.7 million, and other forms of travel expenses -- buses, cars, parking and hotels -- added an additional $1.4 million. Then came direct-mail expenses at $4.2 million, with $4.1 million on postage, printing and delivery of those direct-mail pieces, plus $2.9 million for payroll, $135,741 for consultants and -- of course -- $672,210 for fund-raising. ''Bush's spending seems more fitting for a small corporation than a campaign for president,'' said Holly Bailey, who wrote the study. Put another way, since Mr. Bush announced his presidential candidacy in March 1999, he has rolled up a money ''burn rate'' of $1.3 million a week, or $180,000 a day. HOW TO BURN $73 MILLION  With George W. Bush breaking all fund-raising records, a lot of people in the political consulting and media business are reaping a windfall. A new report by the Center for Responsive Politics shows exactly how Mr. Bush spent the $73 million raised for his primary bid. The big-ticket item was $21.7 million in campaign advertising, mostly for television. Air charters came in second at $4.7 million, and other forms of travel expenses -- buses, cars, parking and hotels -- added an additional $1.4 million. Then came direct-mail expenses at $4.2 million, with $4.1 million on postage, printing and delivery of those direct-mail pieces, plus $2.9 million for payroll, $135,741 for consultants and -- of course -- $672,210 for fund-raising. ''Bush's spending seems more fitting for a small corporation than a campaign for president,'' said Holly Bailey, who wrote the study. Put another way, since Mr. Bush announced his presidential candidacy in March 1999, he has rolled up a money ''burn rate'' of $1.3 million a week, or $180,000 a day. LONG RUNNING MATE LIST  Gov. George W. Bush met with the head of his vicepresidential search team yesterday and said he still had a long and varied list of potential running mates to consider. At his ranch north of Waco, Tex., the Texas governor met with former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and said he had not even decided whether to announce his choice before or at the Republican National Convention, which begins in four weeks in Philadelphia. Mr. Bush again said that he was not ruling out supporters of abortion rights and that women were being considered. ''The main test will be, Can the person be president and will the person be loyal to this administration and will the person bring added value to the Bush administration,'' he said. BIG LEAD MISLEADING?  Although most national polls have shown Gov. George W. Bush with a healthy lead over Vice President Al Gore, a new survey by Newsweek magazine has found them in a dead heat. In a two-way race, Mr. Gore has the support of 46 percent of voters, with Mr. Bush at 45 percent, the survey found. A four-way race also produced a deadlock with Mr. Bush at 41 percent, Mr. Gore at 40 percent, Ralph Nader at 6 percent and Patrick J. Buchanan at 2 percent. The survey polled 752 people in late June and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush are turning presidential election into referendum on which candidate can best reshape government to meet challenges of New Economy; they are raising significant questions about how some of most fundamental public institutions should be shaped for global, digital age that offers prospect of sustained prosperity--and enormous uncertainty; Bush wants to decentralize government and reshape New Deal and Great Society programs for elderly; he wants private sector to provide more government services and make people less dependent on one-size-fits-all federal programs; Gore wants to expand traditionally Democratic entitlement programs; his aides argue that lower and middle classes need more government assistance with education and health care and retirement pensions (M) With their competing array of policy speeches, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush seem to be turning this election into a referendum on which candidate can best reshape government to meet the challenges of the New Economy. From health care to education to tax cuts to Social Security, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are placing before the voters significant questions about how some of the most fundamental public institutions should be shaped for a global, digital age that offers the prospect of sustained prosperity -- and enormous uncertainty. With their competing array of policy speeches, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush seem to be turning this election into a referendum on which candidate can best reshape government to meet the challenges of the New Economy. From health care to education to tax cuts to Social Security, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are placing before the voters significant questions about how some of the most fundamental public institutions should be shaped for a global, digital age that offers the prospect of sustained prosperity -- and enormous uncertainty. Mr. Bush's advisers say the technology-based economy and the growth of a middle-income investor class will make voters far more responsive to Republican ideas for decentralizing government and reshaping the New Deal and Great Society programs for the elderly. Governor  Bush would like the private sector to provide more government services and make people less dependent on one-size-fits-all federal programs. Mr. Gore, on the other hand, wants to expand the traditionally Democratic entitlement programs. His aides argue that the lower and middle classes need more government assistance with education and health care and retirement pensions at a time when knowledge is ever more important to success and when employers offer less generous and less secure health and pension plans. Those differences were on display again today as Mr. Gore promoted his plan for a Medicare prescription-drug benefit and attacked a House Republican version, supported in concept by Mr. Bush, that subsidizes private insurers to offer the coverage. [Page A10.] ''It's a misnomer,'' Mr. Gore said here in Clayton of the Republicans' plan. ''It's nothing. It doesn't work.'' Stephen Goldsmith, Mr. Bush's chief domestic policy adviser said, ''There's a big fault line here.'' Some talk of the new economy is as much about symbolism as about substance. It allows Mr. Gore to try to capitalize on what should be his greatest strength, the extraordinary economic expansion of the Clinton years. And for Mr. Bush, analysts say, presenting himself as a managerial reformer lets him look less ideological than other Republicans, particularly those in Congress. Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush agree on some broad themes. They both embrace free trade in the increasingly global economy, in contrast to the third-party contenders, Patrick J. Buchanan and Ralph Nader, and many Congressional Democrats. For example, Mr. Gore would expand three government entitlement programs, Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security. He would bring more of the uninsured under the auspices of Medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor. He would create a new Medicare prescription-drug benefit for the elderly. And he would offer more Social Security benefits to women. Mr. Bush argues for more individual choice. So he would allow workers to divert an unspecified part of their Social Security payroll tax to private investment accounts. He would turn Medicare from a fee-for-service guaranteed benefit program to one that lets people buy different levels of health insurance. A similar contrast concerns education. Both men would invest in schools and teachers -- Mr. Gore putting in about 10 times more money than Mr. Bush -- and both have plans for how to improve accountability and performance. But two proposals are particularly telling. Mr. Gore would extend the reach of public-school systems by giving states grants to create public pre-schools. Mr. Bush, as a lever against failing schools, would give low-income parents whose children attend such schools vouchers that could pay for private-school tuition. Mr. Bush calls for a $1.3-trillion across-the-board tax cut over a decade, saying, ''A government with unlimited funds soon becomes a government of unlimited reach.'' Mr. Gore offers $500 billion in tax cuts intended to reimburse people for particular needs -- like child care or college tuition -- and phasing out as income rises. Mr. Bush's aides call the top-down, big-government structures outmoded relics of the Great Depression. ''Governor Bush will put more control over decisions -- whether they are health, retirement or savings -- in the hands of individuals,'' Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman, said. ''The vice president will maintain them in the hands of government.'' Democrats respond that Mr. Bush's ideas would erode the common commitment to many government institutions. ''The big danger with a lot of the Bush programs is what we call cherry-picking,'' said Robert Reich, the former labor secretary. ''The healthy, the wealthy or the well-educated will be the first to opt out, leaving the poor, the sicker and the lesser-educated behind in the general insurance pools or in the education system. This is a sure-fire recipe for social stratification.'' Mr. Gore's aides are also trying to turn the debate to the issue of whom the competing plans help, particularly pointing to the tax cuts. ''Bush takes the old-fashioned approach of cutting everybody's rates which ends up really, really, really helping wealthy people because they pay so much and being of marginal help, if any, to people in lower brackets,'' said Elaine Kamarck, Mr. Gore's policy director. Mr. Bush promotes his tax cut by saying it would remove six million low-income families from the tax rolls. Critics say it would also give most of its benefits to higher-income groups simply because those pay the most taxes. An analysis by Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal public policy group, found that Mr. Bush's plan would give the top 1 percent of tax payers 42 percent of the tax cuts, while the bottom 20 percent of tax payers would get less than 1 percent. Mr. Bush's aides counter that their approach to tax cuts gives individuals more choice on how to use their money. ''Gore views government's roles as manipulating people and uses people's own tax money to manipulate their behavior,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser. ''Bush says it's your money. You keep it. Do what you think is best with it.'' A similar debate is brewing over Social Security. Depending on how it is structured, Mr. Bush's plan to switch some Social Security payroll tax to individual savings accounts could prove more lucrative for upper-income groups. Some plans on Capitol Hill try to address this by cutting the basic Social Security benefit more for higher-income individuals than lower-income ones or by giving extra contributions to low-income workers. Mr. Bush has said the idea of matching funds for the lower incomes should be considered. But he has not committed to it. Mr. Gore would preserve the current Social Security system, and create a new retirement plan in addition to it. This plan would be similar to a 401 (k) plan and geared toward helping lower-income groups. Mr. Bush's aides also say Mr. Gore would make Medicare and Social Security more expansive and costly at a time when the boomer generation's impending retirement threatens to bankrupt the systems. ''The fundamental challenge facing the next president is to solve this problem,'' Mr. Lindsey said. ''What Gore just proposed is layering another new unfunded entitlement on top of what's already out there.'' Mr. Bush's aides also prefer to steer the debate to how people are helped. They say they want to give people with lower incomes the same kinds of choices the wealthy have -- whether it is the choice of attending a private school or the choice of investing their retirement money in the stock market.
 The demographic shift has begun to change the state's politics as scores of Hispanic voters have registered as Democrats in a backlash spurred by Republican-led campaigns against illegal immigration. That is complicating efforts by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to make inroads in a state where his aides believe his Southwestern brand of Republicanism should be appealing.
 Gore Links Drug Makers And G.O.P. to High Costs  Vice President Al Gore accused drug makers of ''price-gouging'' and ''special interest schemes'' to keep prices high, as he began a weeklong drive on an issue that has emerged as one of the most potent this election season -- the rising cost of prescription drugs. His speech to an elderly crowd in Missouri also sought to link Gov. George W. Bush and Congressional Republicans to the pharmaceutical industry.
 At both conventions, the coming presidential election loomed large, with many delegates wearing political buttons and several speakers urging support for Vice President Al Gore, who is scheduled to address each group later this week. Though Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee, has made public education a focus of his campaign, Ms. Feldman said his real goal was to ''demonize it, starve it, and privatize it.'' Both unions support Mr. Gore and are expected to play an important role in the election through advertising and organizing.
 Vice Pres Al Gore appears in swing state of Missouri beginning weeklong drive to highlight spiraling cost of prescription drugs, which is potent issue this election season; Gore seeks to tie Gov George W Bush to drug industry; contends that drug companies wrote House Republicans' recently passed bill, which Bush supports, that provides prescription drug benefit for Medicare recipients; bill would rely on private insurance companies to sell drug coverage policies to elderly, backed by government subsidies and incentives; Democrats support more expansive measure, relying directly on Medicare system; Gore has history of taking on drug companies, dating to his years in Congress; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore today accused drug companies of ''price-gouging'' and ''special interest schemes'' to keep drug prices high, and he pledged to a crowd of the elderly to ''fight for you, not for the powerful drug companies.'' Mr. Gore's appearance at a community center in the swing state of Missouri began a weeklong Gore drive to highlight an issue that has emerged as one of the most potent this election season: the spiraling cost of prescription drugs. Vice President Al Gore today accused drug companies of ''price-gouging'' and ''special interest schemes'' to keep drug prices high, and he pledged to a crowd of the elderly to ''fight for you, not for the powerful drug companies.'' Mr. Gore's appearance at a community center in the swing state of Missouri began a weeklong Gore drive to highlight an issue that has emerged as one of the most potent this election season: the spiraling cost of prescription drugs. The vice president worked to tie his main opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, and the Republicans in Congress to the drug industry. ''It is not all that complicated,'' Mr. Gore said at a news conference. ''Governor Bush is with the big pharmaceutical companies.'' ''I think they crafted the actual words,'' Mr. Gore said. The Democrats support a more expansive measure, relying directly on the Medicare system. Mr. Bush generally supports the House Republican plan. Mr. Gore has a history of taking on the drug companies, dating to his years in Congress, although some of his friends and advisers now represent the pharmaceutical industry as lobbyists. His campaign advisers believe the issue allows him to draw a sharp contrast with Mr. Bush, who received more campaign contributions from the industry. Mr. Gore's aides distributed a list of contributions that drug companies had made to Republicans. Separate figures, provided by the Campaign Study Group, a nonpartisan research organization, showed that Republican Party committees have received $4 million in unregulated ''soft money'' contributions from pharmaceutical companies since January 1999, while Democrats received $1.4 million. In response to Mr. Gore's speech, the Bush campaign released a statement by Representative James M. Talent, Republican of Missouri, asserting that the Clinton administration had been ''an obstacle'' to overhauling Medicare for eight years. Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the minority leader, who was at Mr. Gore's side today, said House Democrats would campaign on the issue across the country this week. Mr. Gore pointed to assertions by insurance companies that the Republican bill would not work. He said the Republican bill reminded him of a story about a veterinarian and taxidermist who ''go into work together and they put up a sign saying, 'Either way, you get your dog back.' '' He added, ''There is a difference.'' Mr. Gore today heard stories from hard-pressed elderly people, including a woman who told of buying 16 boxes of macaroni and cheese dinners because they cost only $4, saving her money for medicine. ''You've been eating macaroni and cheese for every meal?'' Mr. Gore prompted her. Mr. Gore singled out for criticism the manufacturer of Claritan D, a top-selling allergy medication, because it is circulating legislation to extend its patent. He said drug patents were not designed to create a situation ''where we can be just exploited forever by the wealthy and the powerful.'' Mr. Gore, like other Democrats, has proposed a more generous benefit than the Republicans, which would cost $255 billion over a decade. It would carry no deductible and would cover half of the costs of drugs, up to $5,000. The premium would start at $25 a month. The vice president's plan and that of the House Republicans would both contain subsides for low-income seniors and protections for those with high drug costs. The Republicans would provide 100 percent drug-cost coverage after an individual's out-of-pocket costs reached $6,000. Mr. Gore would pay for all expenses after out-of-pocket costs reached $4,000. The drug industry is the second industry that Mr. Gore has gone after in recent weeks, having just finished a series of broadsides against the oil companies. Today, he hailed news that Saudi Arabia was raising oil production and called on the ''big oil companies'' to pass along price reductions.
 Is Al Gore's candidacy so fragile that it should be insulated from challenges by third-party candidates, as you suggest? If my candidacy as the Green Party's nominee for president subtracts more from Mr. Gore, it is because the Democratic Party under this administration has become little more than a corporate shadow of its former self. Major problems, like concentration of corporate power, corporate crime and corporate welfare, health care, continued degradation of inner cities and child poverty, linger on election after election without solution, regardless of which party captures the White House. Facile rhetoric becomes a substitute for leadership. The Clinton-Gore record offers no real hope for changing the concentration of power by the few over the needs of the many.
