 Ralph Nader is running aggressively as Green Party candidate for president this year, in contrast to his low-cost symbolic race in 1996; Nader draws attention from media and left-learning voters who see him as more liberal than Al Gore; he is drawing five to ten percent in polls, and sees West Coast as fertile ground for railing against 'Republicrats'; photo (M) He sharply criticized an ''apartheid economy'' that was benefiting only the rich, and he bemoaned the state of affairs in a country with ''far more problems than it deserves and far more solutions than it applies.'' And he scoffed at the notion that he might be a spoiler, drawing enough votes away from Al Gore to tip the election to George W. Bush. He sharply criticized an ''apartheid economy'' that was benefiting only the rich, and he bemoaned the state of affairs in a country with ''far more problems than it deserves and far more solutions than it applies.'' And he scoffed at the notion that he might be a spoiler, drawing enough votes away from Al Gore to tip the election to George W. Bush. He may wind up as a passing phenomenon in this campaign, like former Senator Bill Bradley or Senator John McCain. But for now, Mr. Nader is attracting a lot of attention -- among the news media, among left-leaning voters who see him as a more reliably liberal voice than Mr. Gore, and among leaders of organized labor, who agree with his stands on trade. Mr. Nader is a staunch critic of the North American Free Trade Agreement and the World Trade Organization, both of which he depicts as evidence of a ''corporate globalization'' that harms worker rights and the environment. Though the number is small, much of that support comes at the expense of Vice President Gore, who most analysts believe has to carry California to win in November. But even with Mr. Nader campaigning hard in the state, Democrats here profess to be little concerned about his impact. But at the presidential level, Mr. Nader has nothing but venom for Mr. Gore and President Clinton, whom he accuses of offering ''some of the most intensive demonstrations of political cowardliness in American history.'' He says the race offers voters two ''Republicrat'' candidates, barely distinguishable. ''The only distinction between Bush and Gore is the velocity with which their knees hit the floor when big corporations knock on the door,'' Mr. Nader said the other day in Los Angeles, campaigning outside a public housing project. If there was any good news for Mr. Gore out of the rally here, it would seem to be that Mr. Nader's crowd was, by and large, so left-leaning that many voters there were not even the vice president's to lose. Several people in the audience said they had voted for Green or Libertarian Party candidates in the past.
 Vice Pres Gore mixes praises for Latin culture with appeals to Hispanic 'values and virtues,' campaign speech to Hispanic audience in Washington; photo (S) Mixing praise for Latin American culture with appeals to Hispanic ''values and virtues,'' Vice President Al Gore asserted this evening that his approach to education, health care and the economy would ''unleash the promise of every brave young Latino in this nation.'' ''The values and virtues that are at the heart of the Latino experience -- honor and responsibility, faith and family, caring and community -- are the same values that are most important in keeping America strong,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech before the League of United Latin American Citizens. ''I want to give all hard-working Americans of all backgrounds the chance to live out their values and reach for their dreams.'' Mixing praise for Latin American culture with appeals to Hispanic ''values and virtues,'' Vice President Al Gore asserted this evening that his approach to education, health care and the economy would ''unleash the promise of every brave young Latino in this nation.'' ''The values and virtues that are at the heart of the Latino experience -- honor and responsibility, faith and family, caring and community -- are the same values that are most important in keeping America strong,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech before the League of United Latin American Citizens. ''I want to give all hard-working Americans of all backgrounds the chance to live out their values and reach for their dreams.'' In a 30-minute speech liberally salted with Spanish phrases, Mr. Gore made a handful of policy pledges specifically intended for Hispanic voters, including affirming his support for bilingual education. ''I say to you tonight, 'Todavia no han visto nada,' '' Mr. Gore said. ''You ain't seen nothing yet.'' Mr. Gore's speech came at the end of the organization's weeklong convention, which opened on Monday with a speech by the vice president's likely Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush. In a much shorter address, Mr. Bush called for splitting the Immigration and Naturalization Service into two agencies and for making it easier for relatives of permanent residents to enter the country. The competition between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush for Hispanic voters has stepped up in recent days, when some recent polls have shown Mr. Bush cutting into the Democrats' historical domination among Hispanic voters. In a poll from interviews with 2,721 likely Hispanic voters released today by The San Jose Mercury News, Mr. Gore was shown winning 50 percent of the Hispanic vote, compared with 34 percent for Mr. Bush. In 1996, President Clinton won more than 70 percent of the Hispanic vote. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said polls showing Mr. Bush making inroads among Hispanic voters are meaningless so early in the campaign. ''You can't compare poll numbers this far out from an election with results of previous elections,'' he said. ''Hispanic voters see that Al Gore is focused on issues they care deeply about, like education and health care,'' he continued. ''And the more they learn about both candidates the wider this margin will grow.'' Mr. Gore was accompanied tonight by several Hispanic members of the Administration, including Energy Secretary Bill Richardson and Aida Alvarez, the head of the Small Business Administration. Mr. Gore did not mention Mr. Bush in his remarks. But he criticized Senate Republicans for holding up the nomination of Enrique Moreno to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.
 The so-called missile shield is an example in another sense, even more profound. President Clinton is considering a ''thin'' system, designed to deal with the possibility of long-range nuclear missiles coming from such countries as North Korea. Republicans in general, and Gov. George W. Bush in particular, are arguing for a much bigger and more expensive system that would also cover American troops abroad and our allies. The purpose of the thin idea is plainly political. President Clinton wants to protect himself -- and Vice President Gore -- from Republican charges that they are weak on defense. Ironically, it seems doubtful that the tactic will succeed. Despite enormous scientific doubts about the workability of antimissile devices, and extravagant cost, Americans have liked the dream of an invulnerable shield since President Reagan floated it. Governor Bush is likely to score with his call for an all-out system.
 You oppose Ralph Nader's run for president because it may pull some votes from Vice President Al Gore. Also, implicit in your editorial is the notion that the Democratic and Republican Parties represent almost the entire political spectrum; therefore, they alone should set the agenda for presidential campaigns. You oppose Ralph Nader's run for president because it may pull some votes from Vice President Al Gore. Also, implicit in your editorial is the notion that the Democratic and Republican Parties represent almost the entire political spectrum; therefore, they alone should set the agenda for presidential campaigns.
 This week, when Al Gore proposed an energy plan with a light-green tint, he no doubt pulled a few votes from the Nader camp. If Mr. Gore can keep going and co-opt the Green Party positions on campaign reform, labor issues and world trade, he just might take enough votes from Mr. Nader to win the election. And I wouldn't be surprised if Mr. Nader declared such an outcome a victory, exonerating himself of charges of egotism.  GLENN CHENEY  Hanover, Conn., June 30, 2000
 Vice Pres Al Gore, attacking pharmaceutical industry for engaging in 'corporate chutzpah' and for 'gouging the consumer unfairly,' says that he will take on drug manufacturers next week at campaign stops in battleground states from California to Pennsylvania, int; casts himself as longtime critic of what he contends are industry's excessive prices and profits (M)/ Attacking the pharmaceutical industry for engaging in ''corporate chutzpah'' and for ''gouging the consumer unfairly,'' Vice President Al Gore said today that he would take on the drug manufacturers next week at campaign stops in battleground states from California to Pennsylvania. In an interview on the veranda of his home here, Mr. Gore cast himself as a longtime critic of what he said were the industry's excessive prices and profits. Attacking the pharmaceutical industry for engaging in ''corporate chutzpah'' and for ''gouging the consumer unfairly,'' Vice President Al Gore said today that he would take on the drug manufacturers next week at campaign stops in battleground states from California to Pennsylvania. In an interview on the veranda of his home here, Mr. Gore cast himself as a longtime critic of what he said were the industry's excessive prices and profits. So Mr. Gore is dusting off his Congressional record and past speeches to stake out policies at odds with the manufacturers. A review of his record, though, and a detailed talk with the vice president make clear that his views are more nuanced than his language suggests. And some of the same drug makers that Mr. Gore now criticizes have hired his friends and advisers to represent them as lobbyists. The pharmaceutical industry, which responded icily to Mr.Gore's statements today, has in some cases embraced his positions. For instance, drug manufacturers are among the biggest beneficiaries of the government's tax credit for research and development, and Mr. Gore favors legislation that would make that credit permanent. And while he argued for greater disclosure of the industry's pricing practices, the vice president allowed that some information probably should remain proprietary. Mr. Gore has also been a strong supporter of the biotechnology industry, which through collaborations and mergers is becoming part of the prescription-drug business. ''I don't see myself as a basher of the pharmaceutical companies,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I see myself as opposing the excesses that have accompanied their enormous market power, excesses that have come at the expense of consumers.'' Drug executives, who have contributed far more to the campaign of Mr. Gore's Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush, have mixed feelings about Mr. Gore. His support for innovation and new technology endears him to them, and he is not nearly as vociferous a critic as the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader. But industry executives are becoming more nervous about Mr. Gore as the presidential campaign progresses. And when asked about today's escalating attack, their trade association responded in kind. With his heightened, anti-industry stand that consumers are ''being ripped off'' by drug makers, Mr. Gore is positioning himself as a champion of a far-reaching Medicare prescription drug benefit for senior citizens. At the same time, his campaign's polls show that the issue resonates strongly with voters. So Mr. Gore is also trying to sharpen the distinctions between himself and Mr. Bush, who supports a benefit that would rely more heavily on private insurers, an approach the industry favors. That concern is reflected in the contributions the two major presidential contenders have received. To date, Mr. Bush's campaign has received $221,715 from drug company executives, while Mr. Gore has received $50,700, election records show. Mr. Bush has not made the prescription-drug issue a cornerstone of his campaign, but one of his top health advisers said that the Texas governor is opposed to tampering with the industry's ability to develop life-saving medications. ''Anything that would dampen innovation, particularly price controls, ought to be avoided,'' said Bill Roper, who was a top health official in the administration of Mr. Bush's father, and is now dean of the School of Public Health at the University of North Carolina. The Bush campaign did not make the Texas governor available for an interview. Mr. Gore said today that he, too, opposed regulating drug prices or profits. ''I don't see it as the government's role,'' he said. For example, Mr. Gore said he supported a legislative amendment, recently passed by the House of Representatives, requiring drug makers to agree to reasonable prices for treatments invented in collaboration with government scientists. There are more than 90 such collaborations under way with the National Cancer Institute alone. But the industry has consistently opposed a pricing clause, and its protests were a main reason why the National Institutes of Health abandoned such a provision in 1995. ''If I had been in the Congress, I certainly would have voted for it,'' Mr. Gore said. In a similar vein, Mr. Gore supports requiring drug companies to pay a fee to the government for medicines developed with the help of government grants. Some of today's top-selling drugs got their start in the federally financed laboratories of university scientists, and Mr. Gore said that the public ''ought to have some right not to be gouged on the purchase of products that they themselves helped to develop.'' Mr. Gore's stance on Claritin puts him somewhat at odds with a close adviser and friend, Peter Knight. Last year, Claritin's manufacturer, the Schering-Plough Corporation, hired Mr. Knight to help develop a lobbying campaign for the patent extension, among other issues. Mr. Knight has since left the lobbying business, and Mr. Gore insisted today that he has never talked with him, or other friends who have represented drug makers, about industry issues. ''All the positions I've taken,'' he said, ''are against their clients.'' Mr. Gore was clearly well-briefed for the hourlong interview, and seemed to relish the opportunity to go on the offensive against an industry he has long taken an interest in. At one point, he recalled a meeting he had 18 years ago with Representative Richard Bolling, then the chairman of the House Rules Committee -- a meeting that led to the defeat of the patent-extension legislation the industry coveted. At the time, Mr. Gore said, he was particularly irked that the industry refused to make public data that would have supported its position. ''It was the most astounding example of corporate chutzpah I had ever run across,'' he said. As it happens, Shiloh takes medicine for arthritis. ''This dog here,'' Mr. Gore said, ''gets a cheaper price for the same drug than humans.''
 Gore Criticizes Drug Makers  Vice President Al Gore, accusing the pharmaceutical industry of ''corporate chutzpah'' over prices and profits, promised to take on drug makers next week at campaign stops. But a review of his record makes it clear that his views are more nuanced than his language suggests. Gore Criticizes Drug Makers  Vice President Al Gore, accusing the pharmaceutical industry of ''corporate chutzpah'' over prices and profits, promised to take on drug makers next week at campaign stops. But a review of his record makes it clear that his views are more nuanced than his language suggests.
 PEROT WILL NOT RUN -- Ross Perot, a two-time presidential candidate, decided yesterday against putting his name on the Reform Party's primary ballot, removing a big potential roadblock for Patrick J. Buchanan's candidacy. A Perot spokesman, Russell Verney, said Mr. Perot decided against running because he had no intention of actually competing for the White House against Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican contender, and Vice President Al Gore, his Democratic rival. A daylong series of meetings at Mr. Perot's office in Dallas included ''intense pressure'' to put his name on the ballot in an effort to stop Mr. Buchanan, Mr. Verney said. But Mr. Perot felt it would be unethical to seek the nomination but not really run, he said. Another difficulty was that Mr. Perot would have appeared on only about half the states' ballots in November. His decision to forgo a place on the primary ballot leaves two candidates who say they have enough support to win spots there: Mr. Buchanan, a former Republican, and the Natural Law Party candidate, John Hagelin. PEROT WILL NOT RUN -- Ross Perot, a two-time presidential candidate, decided yesterday against putting his name on the Reform Party's primary ballot, removing a big potential roadblock for Patrick J. Buchanan's candidacy. A Perot spokesman, Russell Verney, said Mr. Perot decided against running because he had no intention of actually competing for the White House against Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican contender, and Vice President Al Gore, his Democratic rival. A daylong series of meetings at Mr. Perot's office in Dallas included ''intense pressure'' to put his name on the ballot in an effort to stop Mr. Buchanan, Mr. Verney said. But Mr. Perot felt it would be unethical to seek the nomination but not really run, he said. Another difficulty was that Mr. Perot would have appeared on only about half the states' ballots in November. His decision to forgo a place on the primary ballot leaves two candidates who say they have enough support to win spots there: Mr. Buchanan, a former Republican, and the Natural Law Party candidate, John Hagelin. PROMOTING A NEW NO. 2 -- With former Senator John Danforth of Missouri having taken himself out of the running, Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma has become the speculative name-of-the-moment as a potential running mate for George W. Bush. Mr. Keating's name surfaced at midweek on the Internet as the latest favorite of the Republican presidential contender, though with caveats that everything could change. The Bush campaign took the rumor in stride. ''It's not true,'' the campaign spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said. ''The governor has made no decision.'' Mr. Bush is to meet at his Texas ranch on Monday with Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary who is heading the vice-presidential search, but only for an update, Mr. Fleischer said. CLINTON TWEAKS G.O.P. -- President Clinton said in Philadelphia yesterday that Republicans would talk a good game when they arrived for their convention in late July but were not eager to point out the serious differences that divide the two parties. ''You'll have the awfulest time trying to figure out what the differences are,'' Mr. Clinton told a group of union members. ''They're going to love everybody and help everybody.'' Speaking at a gathering of the American Federation of Federal, State, County and Municipal Employees, Mr. Clinton recited a litany of issues on which Democrats and Republicans diverge, from the patients' bill of rights to the minimum wage to gun control. Mr. Clinton also questioned Gov. George W. Bush's commitment to Hispanics, saying he had not urged Republican senators to confirm Enrique Moreno, a Texan whom Mr. Clinton nominated to be a federal judge. ''If he had asked them to give him a hearing, they would have done it,'' Mr. Clinton said of Mr. Bush. ''He didn't say a word.'' CONTRADICTING BUSH -- A ''Texas Truth Squad'' made up of union members from George W. Bush's home state chose the city where he will be nominated for president to begin a national speaking tour intended to besmirch the governor's record. The squad, consisting of a teacher, a prison guard, a food worker and a social worker, made its debut on Thursday at a union luncheon in Philadelphia presided over by John J. Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has endorsed Vice President Al Gore. Squad members asserted in a series of short speeches that during Mr. Bush's two terms as governor,  Texas has consistently ranked near the bottom in providing health insurance for children, retirement pensions, environmental protection and pay for state workers. Taking special aim at Mr. Bush's claim to be an education reformer, the group said he had diverted money from public schools and tried to raid teacher retirement funds at a time when the state ranked 45th in the College Board test scores. The squad is scheduled to make at least a dozen appearances around the country before Election Day.
 The administration's policy is also emerging as an issue in the presidential campaign between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''The word policy is probably an overstatement in describing the administration attitude toward Iraq,'' Richard Perle, a former assistant defense secretary and now an adviser to Governor Bush's campaign, said to a Senate subcommittee on Wednesday. ''Paralysis is probably more appropriate.''
 In other words, the audience response is not so much a reflexive, gut-wrenching surrender to brilliant wit as it is a communal signal of understood references. Yes, the laughter seems to say, we know that Vice President Al Gore comes across as a stiff, that George W. Bush appears unlikely to qualify for Mensa, that President Clinton has strayed from his marital vows, that Hillary Rodham Clinton is ambitious. In other words, the audience response is not so much a reflexive, gut-wrenching surrender to brilliant wit as it is a communal signal of understood references. Yes, the laughter seems to say, we know that Vice President Al Gore comes across as a stiff, that George W. Bush appears unlikely to qualify for Mensa, that President Clinton has strayed from his marital vows, that Hillary Rodham Clinton is ambitious. The content may change from performance to performance, but on a recent night, the up-to-the-minute barbs, nicely sung and acted, poked fun at Rick Lazio (''all I want is a Senate seat''), his rival, Mrs. Clinton (''don't cry for me, Giuliani''), Vladimir Putin (puttin' on a blitz''), gasoline prices (''what kind of fuel am I?''), commencement addresses, and Mr. Bush as a contestant on ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire.'' Sample puzzler: ''The President of France is the leader of which of these countries?''
 Glenn Cheney letter says that if Gore continues co-opting Green Party's positions he just might take enough votes from Ralph Nader to win presidential election (S)
