 The legislation restricting secret fund-raising was a significant step forward, but its impact should not be exaggerated. Some of the shadowy tax-exempt groups affected by the bill are now expected to transform themselves into for-profit shell corporations and continue their practices. Other nonprofit groups may also run ads. It is still legal for groups without tax exemptions to raise money and run sham campaign ads like the ones attacking Senator John McCain that were organized by donors to Gov. George W. Bush last March. The legislation restricting secret fund-raising was a significant step forward, but its impact should not be exaggerated. Some of the shadowy tax-exempt groups affected by the bill are now expected to transform themselves into for-profit shell corporations and continue their practices. Other nonprofit groups may also run ads. It is still legal for groups without tax exemptions to raise money and run sham campaign ads like the ones attacking Senator John McCain that were organized by donors to Gov. George W. Bush last March.
 A white with a different personality might have fared better. There was one other white on the 70-man squad, Matt Bushart. And though as a punter he was at the periphery of the team and little noticed by fans, Mr. Bushart had the personality and experience to cope better as a minority. While Marcus had seemed protected and naive even to the middle-class white students at Catholic High, Matt's years at a local public high school where most of his football teammates were black had taught him how to live comfortably among them. While Marcus was more introspective, a loner, a little too sensitive for some of his coaches' tastes, Matt was noisy, funny, sometimes crude -- so outgoing, his girlfriend said, that he could talk to a wall. When Mr. Bushart's teammates made fun of the country music he liked, he gave it right back to them about their rap, and kept listening to his music. ''I get kidded about it,'' he said, ''but there's been a song that's been playing and one of the black guys will come by and say, 'Play that again, that's actually not too bad.' '' One weekend last fall, at the request of a reporter, Mr. Jacoby went to a Southern game for the first time since quitting. This was Homecoming Day, and from his seat in the stands he watched Southern seniors and their families being introduced to the crowd at midfield. It could have been his moment. Ryan Lewis, his old roommate, was there, and so was Matt Bushart, the white punter. Mr. Bushart's name was called, to applause. Mr. Jacoby had read in the newspaper Mr. Bushart's saying how much he had enjoyed Southern.
 Other diner owners encourage their customers to become a community. The Red Arrow in Manchester, N.H., a 36-seater owned by Carol Lawrence, who attended the conference, publishes a newsletter about her customers and staff. Her diner, 78 years old, had $1 million in revenues last year, benefiting from staying open around the clock. It gets an extra dose of attention every four years during the New Hampshire primary campaign. Vice President Al Gore used it last winter for a stump speech.
 Dr. Wexler, the high-profile dermatologist, does not have a publicist. But in her climb to the top she has always given free treatments to journalists writing about her. ''I did a $2,500 peel on a Ladies' Home Journal editor,'' she said. ''I did collagen in Michael Musto's lips, and he wrote about it in The Voice. I did Candace Bushnell's collagen for a story in Vogue. I did an acne consultation for a piece by Rebecca Johnson at Vogue, and I gave Simon Doonan a free consultation for a column he did in The Observer.''
 The spoken voice was more valuable to him than the written citation. Example: In 1991, as President Bush was about to decide to end pursuit of Saddam Hussein's forces in Iraq, Gen. Colin Powell was asked to call Gen. Norman Schwartzkopf to see if he agreed. An eyewitness, Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, reported that Powell used the hotline to Riyadh and told the president, ''Norm says he can handle it.'' Question to the dialect lexicographer: What does I can handle it mean?
 Yet the labels conservative and liberal do not fully capture this court. ''Which cases were most visible to the public this year?'' John G. Roberts Jr., a Supreme Court practitioner and and former deputy solicitor general during the Bush administration, asked rhetorically the other day. ''Probably school prayer, abortion, and Miranda, and the conservatives lost all three,'' Mr. Roberts said. ''The conventional wisdom needs to be taken skeptically.''
 With the slightly unnatural aura of hand-colored photographs, these landscapes have a dream-like quality that straddles the border between real and surreal. In fact, they are mostly montages created in the machine, using interactive textures and tones. ''Transition'' superimposes a pair of desolate bushes on a wood-grain texture that approximates a windswept sky, but not so perfectly that one doesn't pause to question what it really is. Nor is color left in its natural state. In ''Blazing Bush,'' for example, certain areas are intensified, as if a selective light had been trained on them, while others are played down. The overall effect is haunting and subtle, and it works much better without glass between image and viewer. Look at the unframed prints in portfolios to get a fuller appreciation of their tonal richness and delicate detail.
 The local newspaper, The Times Herald-Record of Middletown, announced on its front page yesterday that the historians, Roger A. King of Monroe, N.Y., and Robert Brennan of Pine Bush, N.Y., might have found the younger Jefferson's grave in an old Orange County cemetery. The local newspaper, The Times Herald-Record of Middletown, announced on its front page yesterday that the historians, Roger A. King of Monroe, N.Y., and Robert Brennan of Pine Bush, N.Y., might have found the younger Jefferson's grave in an old Orange County cemetery.
 The concept of themed, interactive retailing was pioneered in the 90's when innovative retail operations like Niketown started staging multimedia happenings, and Recreational Equipment Inc., or R.E.I., in Seattle, offered a trail loop for bicycle test drives and a ''rain room'' to try out Gore-Tex slickers.
 For more than a decade, politicians and civic leaders have been looking to volunteers like me to take over the government's role in providing vital services to the poor. Although the movement arguably began in 1988 with the candidate George Bush's invocation of ''a thousand points of light'' as a response to Reagan-era cutbacks in social spending, it has been embraced by the current Democratic administration, which has continued those cutbacks, and culminated in the 1997 President's Summit for America's Future in Philadelphia, where President Clinton and Gen. Colin Powell touted the power of volunteerism. Now George W. Bush has picked up his father's theme of ''a kinder, gentler'' America by pushing ''charitable choice'' -- the provision in the 1996 welfare reform bill that allows faith-based organizations to contract with government to provide social services to the poor. (Al Gore supports it, too, though less vigorously.)
 At that point Mr. Star optioned the book ''Sex and the City,'' by Candace Bushnell. ''I did this show because I was sick of network television,'' Mr. Star said. ''I did 'Melrose Place,' which had a huge audience but no respect. I wanted respect. I couldn't really tell stories in my voice. I couldn't really tell stories that I, myself, wanted to see. And I felt the idea of a comedy about sex was something I really wanted to do.''
 Walking off stage, she was met in the wings by Herb Bernstein, a producer and arranger who had recorded singers like Dusty Springfield, Lesley Gore and Tina Turner. Becoming Ms. Budd's manager, Mr. Bernstein had her sing for a friend of his, Merv Griffin.
 It would be bad because if Gore wins and the Democrats take the House, his spending programs will be negative for the market. And if Bush wins and the Republicans keep control in Congress, his tax program will go through. But it will be too stimulative and result in additional tightening.
 The other 12 fellows were chosen by an anonymous selection committee from 204 applicants from 22 countries: Jonathan Bush, visiting professor, University of Texas School of Law; Joseph Cady, adjunct associate professor of behavioral medicine at the Sophie Davis School of Biomedical Education, City University of New York Medical School; Ileen A. DeVault, associate professor of labor history, Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations; Steve C. Fraser, independent scholar; Walter Frisch, professor of music, Columbia University; Francisco Goldman, novelist; Eiko Ikegami, professor of sociology of the graduate faculty at New School University; Phillip Lopate, Adams Chair professor, department of English, Hofstra University; Anne Mendelson, independent scholar; Claudia Pierpont, independent scholar; Colm Toibin, novelist; and Serinity Young, visiting assistant professor of religious studies, Southern Methodist University.
 The Americans With Disabilities Act, the federal civil rights law dealing with hotels and motels, trains and buses, airports and public arenas, does not cover taxicabs. But at least 14 cities in the United States and 7 in Canada have accessible cabs in operation, according to research by the Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association. These cities include Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Fort Lauderdale, Boston and Las Vegas. A number of them enacted rules requiring these vehicles, almost all since the A.D.A. was signed by President George Bush in 1990. The Americans With Disabilities Act, the federal civil rights law dealing with hotels and motels, trains and buses, airports and public arenas, does not cover taxicabs. But at least 14 cities in the United States and 7 in Canada have accessible cabs in operation, according to research by the Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association. These cities include Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Fort Lauderdale, Boston and Las Vegas. A number of them enacted rules requiring these vehicles, almost all since the A.D.A. was signed by President George Bush in 1990.
 Article on cookie recipes from wives of Presidential candidates Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush features Tipper Gore's ginger snaps and Texas Governor's Mansion Cowboy Cookies adapted from Laura Bush; photo (M) She may have been trying to say that in 1992, women had other options. Instead, her remark created a reactionary cookie contest, the brainchild of Family Circle magazine, which published her chocolate chip recipe and one from Barbara Bush. Readers were asked to vote; the results proved to be a forecast of what would happen in November. Four years later, Elizabeth Dole's pecan roll sugar cookies didn't stand a chance against a reprise of Mrs. Clinton's chocolate chip recipe. And this electoral season, Tipper Gore's Ginger Snaps, plain-Jane ginger and molasses cookies, probably won't hold up against Laura Bush's flashy Texas Governor's Mansion Cowboy Cookies. The Bush cookies are expected to win because they contain that magic ingredient -- chocolate. The surprise is how such rich cookies can be so boring. The sweetness of the Bush cookies overwhelms any other flavor except an occasional bite of chocolate. Mrs. Gore's ginger snap cookies look boring, but they are marginally better. They need more ginger, though. Bland cookies seem appropriate for the current presidential campaign. And it seems fitting, too, that the magazine's recipe for the Bush cookies turns out tough cookies. The recipe Mrs. Bush's office submitted suggested that her cookies be baked for 10 to 12 minutes. Family Circle changed it to 17 to 20. A friend who baked the cookies following the magazine's directions turned out unattractive jawbreakers; the cookies should have soft centers. At 17 minutes in my oven the cowboy cookies were also overdone. Even worse, anyone who followed the Bush recipe as it first appeared on the magazine's Web site may have found their cookies turn to ashes, possibly a small fire. The site's suggested baking time of 17 to 29 minutes has since been corrected. TEXAS GOVERNOR'S MANSION COWBOY COOKIES  Adapted from Laura Bush
 ''The issues facing the industry are huge,'' said Reed Hundt, former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. ''Whether it is Bush or Gore, there will be a whole new crop of decision makers in government in 2001, and these new people will shape the industry.''
 Stark differences in personality and style of two presidential candidates described; George W Bush breezes past tough stuff in effort to remain forever buoyant, and can come across lighter than air; Al Gore, by contrast, fairly bludgeons listeners with his knowledge and can appear aloof; photos (M) Gov. George W. Bush was all set and ready to go from New York City to Detroit on Tuesday when his campaign plane let out an enormous belch, drawing the attention of maintenance workers and stranding him and his entourage on the tarmac at La Guardia Airport. He seemed amused and unalarmed. ''This is an optimistic campaign,'' the Texas governor joked to the reporters who were sitting several rows behind but plenty close enough to see and hear him. Gov. George W. Bush was all set and ready to go from New York City to Detroit on Tuesday when his campaign plane let out an enormous belch, drawing the attention of maintenance workers and stranding him and his entourage on the tarmac at La Guardia Airport. He seemed amused and unalarmed. ''This is an optimistic campaign,'' the Texas governor joked to the reporters who were sitting several rows behind but plenty close enough to see and hear him. Vice President Al Gore, meanwhile, was in Philadelphia, and had just finished a speech on energy and the environment that was chock-a-block with ideas, aspirations, painstakingly emphasized phrases and showy digressions, including a survey of transportation in the 20th century that began with horses, buggies and the environmental hazards they posed. ''Feed lots were crowding out farmland,'' Mr. Gore noted. He then headed to a convention hall to address union workers, effortlessly switching his focus from pollution to occupational safety and quickly establishing that he knew a lot about that, too. If he ever truly relaxed, it was not evident. Then again, the reporters on his plane, Air Force Two, had no glimpse of his cabin up front, and Mr. Gore never did drop by to say hello. Mr. Bush's looseness and confidence may have something to do with his edge over Mr. Gore in most polls, but they also threaten to strain the appeal of levity to voters who undoubtedly want to look up to their president. Mr. Gore's diligence may have something to do with his need to catch up, but it also threatens to strain the appeal of gravity to voters who undoubtedly don't want their president to lecture them all the time. The candidates' days on the campaign trail this week also revealed another potentially crucial difference. Mr. Bush, guarding an apparent lead, let himself focus more intensely on fund-raising than on talking points, and collected about $9.5 million for the Republican National Committee. Mr. Gore was more absorbed in making the argument for his candidacy, and collected only about $1.5 million for the Democrats. Unlike Mr. Gore's fund-raisers, Mr. Bush's were closed to reporters, a strategic decision by Republicans, who said they worried that any discussion of the Texas governor and money served to reinforce their reputation as the party of the rich and to remind voters that Mr. Bush's candidacy has been fueled by an unprecedented sum of contributions. Mr. Bush's aides even played down the tallies: the original estimate of money raised at a Tuesday breakfast of 55 people was $3 million, but the ultimate sum was $4 million. On Thursday, Mr. Bush did not have a single public campaign event, but he held a fund-raiser for the party in Dallas that brought in an estimated $4.5 million. Yet in the same week, he spent an evening in New York with members of the Congress for Racial Equality, once a leading civil-rights organization, now a collection of black conservatives. On the dais with Mr. Bush were people thought to be descendants of Thomas Jefferson and his slave Sally Hemings, as well as Barry Slotnick, the lawyer for Bernhard H. Goetz, the subway shooter. Mr. Bush seemed most comfortable not in front of audiences but one-on-one on his campaign plane, where he sets a tone of easy affability. There is an openness that is not possible on the more formal and restricted Air Force Two. On Monday, as reporters filed on board, the governor was standing in the press section scarfing down pizza and ready for chit-chat and hands-on schmoozing. He placed both paws on one reporter's shoulders, then pinched another on the cheek. Unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore did not banter all that much, but he did talk and talk. He talked about the environment in front of a modernized power plant in Philadelphia and about ''community empowerment'' in a meeting hall in Columbus, Ohio. He talked about the scourge of AIDS and ''Afro-pessimism,'' or the wrong-headed belief that investment in Africa was a losing game. He shared a personal story or two with them, but he also shared mini-tutorials on the evolution of the economy from the dark valley of stagflation in the late 1970's to the current peak of prosperity. He used the word now as a transition into each next point, the way a college instructor proceeding through an outline would. His pupils were standing at the edge of a plush living room, wine glasses in their hands, in poses decidedly less starched than Mr. Gore's language and demeanor. ''Each station celebrates the unique quality of life in Oregon,'' Mr. Gore said. ''One of them has a scarecrow weather vane, bronze rails and other things that are uniquely representative of the rural heritage in that area. Another one, they had a contest where the families participated in making the tiles themselves, and each family had a separate tile and they all come together to make up the stop. And some of them put their baby's footprints in the tile.'' This went on for well over a minute, before Mr. Gore finally said, ''Now, Chicago, of course, is another great national model for mass transit.'' He had returned at last to the present place and time, but it was unclear how many people in the audience were still with him.
 Comment on North Carolina governor's race; Republican Richard Vinroot is eager to link himself with presidential candidate George W Bush; Democrat Mike Easley is less happy about link with Al Gore, since no Democrat has carried state since 1976 (Campaign Briefing) (S) Richard Vinroot, the Republican nominee in this year's governor's race in North Carolina, seldom misses an opportunity to link his candidacy to that of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Bush is running ahead of Vice President Al Gore in most Tarheel State presidential preference polls, and Mr. Vinroot, a former mayor of Charlotte, knows a coattail when he sees it. Richard Vinroot, the Republican nominee in this year's governor's race in North Carolina, seldom misses an opportunity to link his candidacy to that of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Bush is running ahead of Vice President Al Gore in most Tarheel State presidential preference polls, and Mr. Vinroot, a former mayor of Charlotte, knows a coattail when he sees it. ''As Bush goes, so go we,'' Mr. Vinroot likes to say. And where Mr. Bush goes when he shows up in North Carolina, Mr. Vinroot tries to follow. What to do, then, when Al Gore shows up? Mr. Gore flew in to give a morning commencement speech at Tarboro High School, a few miles from Mr. Easley's hometown, Rocky Mount. Mr. Easley did not show. That afternoon, Mr. Gore appeared in Raleigh at North Carolina State University, a jog down the road from Mr. Easley's office. Thus far in his travels about the country, Mr. Gore has not run into many races like that.
 Recently released transcript of Vice Pres Al Gore's contentious sworn interview with Justice Dept official over fund-raising in 1996 election raises questions about his candor under oath; in fact, Gore was tolerably forthcoming as far as depositions go; drawing (M) ''ITHINK the truth is my friend in this,'' Vice President Al Gore said as he released the transcript of a contentious sworn interview with a Justice Department official over fund-raising in the 1996 election. Ordinary folks trying to untangle the 123-page document may wonder how Mr. Gore really treats his friends. That's not to say that Mr. Gore's answers were very different from those in any questioning of a smart, well-prepared witness disinclined to help his adversary.  They were, however, very different from human conversation. ''ITHINK the truth is my friend in this,'' Vice President Al Gore said as he released the transcript of a contentious sworn interview with a Justice Department official over fund-raising in the 1996 election. Ordinary folks trying to untangle the 123-page document may wonder how Mr. Gore really treats his friends. That's not to say that Mr. Gore's answers were very different from those in any questioning of a smart, well-prepared witness disinclined to help his adversary.  They were, however, very different from human conversation. Mr. Gore is not alone in having questions raised about his candor under oath, questions that had House Republicans putting pressure on Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint a special counsel. The independent counsel Robert W. Ray recently concluded that the testimony of First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton on the dismissal of several White House travel office employees in 1993 was at least truthful enough that Mr. Ray did not think he could prove beyond a reasonable doubt that she had lied. Mr. Gore was, in fact, tolerably forthcoming as far as depositions go. At times, he was precise, even a little funny. He knew that on the day of the interview he had been vice president for ''seven years and two months and 28 days.'' He recounted his delight on learning in the spring of 1996 that his schedule would include a luncheon at a Buddhist temple in California. ''This ought to be interesting,'' he said he remembered thinking. ''Little did I know.'' But in the face of an impressive series of documents that suggested the contrary, he stoutly resisted his interlocutors' efforts to make him concede that fund-raising was going on at either White House ''coffees'' (of which he attended either one, according to Mr. Gore, or some 30, according to other reports) or the luncheon at the Buddhist temple. None of this is to suggest that life outside of litigation is an Eden of truth-telling. Mr. Gore was questioned mercilessly about a seemingly harmless courtesy letter to a supporter after a visit to Taiwan. He was made to assess his own truthfulness, sentence by sentence. ''No, I was actually glad I was not with them on the rest of the voyage,'' he testified. And, he continued, ''the statement that the 'meetings with the government and business leaders were fascinating' appears to be an overstatement, as does the description of the visit to the Fo Kuang Shan facility as being 'almost overwhelming.' '' So too ''the statement that it was 'the most enjoyable trip I have ever taken.' '' The entire thing was a tissue of lies or, as Mr. Gore put it, ''within the customary bounds of this sort of communication.''
 Hotline Internet tip sheet reports George W Bush leading for president in 24 states, Al Gore in 9 (S) Gov. George W. Bush led in 24 states, worth 263 electoral votes. Vice President Al Gore led in 9 states, worth 157 electoral votes.
 Mr. Bernson was responding to a warning by the Los Angeles police of the potential for ''a level of activity'' at least as intense as the violent protest that disrupted a meeting of the World Trade Organization in Seattle last December. Responding to those concerns, the council approved a plan to cordon off protesters in a fenced-in parking lot, and the Secret Service revised plans for lodging Vice President Al Gore in a nearby hotel. The American Civil Liberties Union has filed suit against the restrictions. The jittery mood was a counterpoint to the placidity of the campaign elsewhere. As has become almost pro forma in the campaign, another multi-billion-dollar spending plan was put forth by a presumptive nominee: Mr. Gore unveiled an energy plan that he said would authorize $148 billion over 10 years to improve mass transportation and decrease dependence on oil. ''I have never been afraid to take on big oil,'' Mr. Gore said, an obvious dig at his rival, Gov. George W. Bush, a former oilman. Mr. Bush, however, said Mr. Gore was fooling no one, as a member of an administration that has seen a 50-cent rise in the cost of gasoline in recent months. If Mr. Nader's words threatened to liven the race up a bit, so did the ruling on Tuesday by the United States Supreme Court, striking down a Nebraska law that banned a procedure known as a partial-birth abortion. Mr. Gore used the decision to remind voters of Mr. Bush's opposition to abortion rights. ''His views about choice are really quite extreme,'' the vice president said.
 Documents in the court records show that when President George Bush lowered payroll withholding rates in 1992, Block contacted its refund loan customers to show them how to increase their withholding back to the old levels. Linda MacDougall, a Block spokeswoman, explained that many customers want large refunds, regarding them not as a lost opportunity to use their money sooner, but as ''their annual bonus check'' from the government.
