 Vice Pres Al Gore wins endorsements from American Federation of Teachers and National Education Assn; backing is important symbol of support from Democratic Party's traditional base and significant organizing tool for coming months (M) After months of supportive speeches, fat donation checks and thousands of hours of volunteer campaign work, the two national teachers' unions formally endorsed Vice President Al Gore for president today in separate votes. After months of supportive speeches, fat donation checks and thousands of hours of volunteer campaign work, the two national teachers' unions formally endorsed Vice President Al Gore for president today in separate votes. For Mr. Gore the backing is an important symbol of support from the Democratic Party's traditional base and a significant organizing tool for the coming months. But while the vice president will try to use the endorsements to show that his education agenda reflects the opinions of classroom experts, his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, will undoubtedly accuse Mr. Gore of being in the unions' pockets and uninterested in true school reform. ''He needs more than unions,'' said Mindy Tucker, a campaign spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, a Republican. ''He needs the support of parents and school board members and people in local communities that make the decisions that affect our schools.'' Mr. Gore wants to provide preschool for every 4-year-old, give teachers signing bonuses to work in difficult schools and pump federal money into school construction, among other ideas totaling $115 billion over a decade. Mr. Bush would spend $13 billion and focus attention on holding low-performing schools accountable by imposing financial penalties and heightening scrutiny of test data, particularly among minority students. Among the chasms between the candidates are their positions on providing vouchers, financed by taxpayers, for tuition in private schools, an issue that alone might have been enough to decide the union endorsements. Mr. Bush refrains from using the word ''vouchers,'' but would let students at failing schools take $1,500 of government money to a private school. Mr. Gore opposes vouchers, as do the unions. At the biennial convention of the American Federation of Teachers here today, Nat LaCour, the union's executive vice president, ticked off issue after issue, like increasing teacher salaries and providing better health care for children. On each one, Mr. LaCour said, Mr. Gore was a friend of the union's one million members, ''not Mr. Bush.'' Speaker after speaker lavished praise on the vice president, who is scheduled to speak here on Wednesday and at the convention of the 2.5 million-member National Education Association on Thursday in Chicago. Several Texas teachers told their colleagues that Mr. Bush's accomplishments in schools have been exaggerated. Finally, one man recommended no endorsement, saying that the Clinton administration's trade policies had expanded child labor overseas, but the endorsement was overwhelming on a voice vote. At the N.E.A. convention in Chicago, Mr. Gore received 89 percent of the votes, cast by secret ballot. ''In the search for ideas to improve public education, Al Gore knows where to look first,'' said Robert Chase, the president of the N.E.A. ''He looks to teachers.''
 ''I think we Pacific Northwesterners ought to tell them Easterners to get the hell out of our area,'' said Larry Paulson, a rancher in his 40's, at the session here last week. ''Clinton, Gore and whoever else is managing things back there: Leave us alone!'' With strong support from environmental groups, Vice President Al Gore has said he would go even further, by extending the ban to include roadless areas of the Tongass National Forest in Alaska, the nation's largest, and by explicitly banning logging in all areas deemed off limits to roads.
 Another goal of executive actions these days, of course, is to aid Vice President Al Gore's presidential bid. It was Mr. Clinton who signed the order earlier this year granting increased protection to 250,000 acres of federal land in Oregon and Washington State. But it was Mr. Gore who announced the creation of the Cascade-Siskiyou and Hanford Reach National Monuments, an act that pleased environmentalists. Over the course of his seven and a half years as president, Mr. Clinton has signed an average of about one executive order or other policy-making declaration a week, or 450 in all, according to the Office of Management and Budget. That far exceeds the executive actions taken by former Presidents George Bush and Ronald Reagan, whose orders riled Congressional Democrats just as much as Mr. Clinton's have angered Republicans on Capitol Hill. Days after Mr. Clinton took office in 1993, he told Donna E. Shalala,  secretary for health and human services, to overturn former President Bush's moratorium on federal financing of research involving fetal tissues from induced abortions. Lawmakers have little doubt that the next president, whether it is Mr. Gore or Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, will continue the pattern of past presidents.
 Alabama recently enacted a law that will bring its salaries up to the national average by 2007 (provided that tax revenues remain flush). The governors of California and New York are essentially engaged in a bidding war, offering tuition reimbursements, home loans and incentives for advanced certification. Vice President Al Gore, the presumptive Democratic nominee for president, has suggested strong involvement by the federal government, with $5,000 or $10,000 signing bonuses for teachers who agree to work in hard-to-staff schools.
 Law enforcement officials say Vice Pres Al Gore projected two different personalities during April 1999 interview with federal investigators probing 1996 election campaign financing irregularities: a confident master of detail and a defensive witness who could not recall basic facts; say Gore was so meticulous in recall of some matters that they doubted his vague responses to questions about his campaign finance activities (M) In his April interview with federal investigators, two very different Al Gores seemed to be present, law enforcement officials say. One was a confident master of detail, and the other was a defensive witness who could not recall basic facts about his fund-raising activities in the months before the 1996 election. At the outset, Mr. Gore remembered with precision how long he had served as vice president and as a senator from Tennessee. ''I've been vice president for seven years and two months and 28 days,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Before that, I was a member of the United States Senate for eight years and 18 days.'' In his April interview with federal investigators, two very different Al Gores seemed to be present, law enforcement officials say. One was a confident master of detail, and the other was a defensive witness who could not recall basic facts about his fund-raising activities in the months before the 1996 election. At the outset, Mr. Gore remembered with precision how long he had served as vice president and as a senator from Tennessee. ''I've been vice president for seven years and two months and 28 days,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Before that, I was a member of the United States Senate for eight years and 18 days.'' But later in the April 18 interview, Mr. Gore said he did not know whether the now-infamous luncheon that he attended at a Buddhist temple in California was a fund-raising event. He disputed the suggestion that White House coffees were used as fund-raising events by the Democratic Party -- although millions of dollars flowed from the people who attended them. And the vice president said he thought he had attended only one White House coffee when documents showed that he had attended 23. Law enforcement officials said that Mr. Gore was so meticulous in his recall of some matters (at one point describing himself as a ''stickler to a fault'' who sometimes corrected the grammar of his campaign letters) that they doubted his vague responses to questions about his campaign finance activities. That contradiction fueled investigators' skepticism about Mr. Gore's truthfulness. Robert J. Conrad Jr., the head of the Justice Department's campaign task force, recommended that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate the vice president's veracity during the four-hour interview. On June 23, after he ordered his lawyers to release copies of the 123-page transcript of his interview, Mr. Gore told reporters, ''I think the truth is my friend in this.'' What follows is a status report on the significant matters in the Gore inquiry. THE ISSUE -- On April 29, 1996, Mr. Gore attended a luncheon organized by John Huang and Maria Hsia, both of whom were Democratic fund-raisers, at the Hsi Lai Temple, a Buddhist monastery near Los Angeles in Hacienda Heights, Calif. The luncheon with about 100 community leaders was one of the first campaign finance controversies to embroil the vice president, who was invited to the temple by a leader of the group, which is based in Taiwan. The event raised the issue of whether the temple had held a political fund-raiser in violation of its tax-exempt status as a religious institution and whether temple monastics were illegally reimbursed for contributions. There was also the question of whether Mr. Gore knew it was a fund-raiser. Initially, Mr. Gore said in an October 1996 interview with National Public Radio that the luncheon was a ''community outreach'' event. But in January 1997, a spokesman for the vice president said Mr. Gore ''knew it was a finance-related event.'' THE INVESTIGATION -- Investigators found that Mr. Gore routinely attended fund-raisers and community outreach events organized by the Democratic National Committee. Some documents suggested confusion among Mr. Gore's staff because the vice president initially planned to attend two events in a single day in Los Angeles, one a fund-raising luncheon and the other a visit to the temple. The two stops were melded into one because of time constraints. Ms. Reno decided against appointing an independent counsel to review  Mr. Gore's fund-raising, although he was not questioned about the temple event until last April. Justice Department prosecutors brought criminal charges against two fund-raisers involved in the temple luncheon. Mr. Huang pleaded guilty for his role in soliciting about $159,000 in donations from people who attended the event and from temple monastics. In an appearance before a House committee, Mr. Huang testified that he had no evidence implicating Mr. Gore in any wrongdoing. THE VICE PRESIDENT'S COMMENTS -- In one of the most caustic exchanges of his April interview with prosecutors, Mr. Gore angrily denied that he had been told by aides that the temple event was a fund-raiser. ''I sure as hell don't recall having -- I sure as hell did not have any conversations with anyone saying this is a fund-raising event,'' Mr. Gore testified. UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS -- Mr. Conrad is said to be dissatisfied with some of Mr. Gore's answers. Several documents indicate that Mr. Gore's staff knew that the purpose of the luncheon was to raise campaign contributions. Because of the discrepancy between Mr. Gore's responses and some of the documents, Mr. Conrad has recommended that a special counsel be appointed to investigate the matter further. THE ISSUES -- Mr. Gore's attendance at White House coffees, which were used by the White House in 1995 and 1996 to help the Democratic Party raise millions of dollars in campaign contributions. From November 1995 to August 1996, the White House organized 103 coffees. Guests contributed $26.4 million, and of that total $7.7 million was contributed by guests within one month of attending a coffee, usually held in the White House Map Room. But Mr. Conrad, who was appointed by Ms. Reno in late December, decided to ask Mr. Gore questions about the coffees. Mr. Gore disputed Mr. Conrad's suggestion that White House coffees were used as ''fund-raising tools'' by the Democratic Party. Mr. Gore replied, ''That is absolutely my impression.'' Mr. Conrad asked if it was true that Mr. Gore had served as host of 23 White House coffees and sat in with President Clinton at 8 others. ''Would that be an accurate statement?'' Mr. Conrad asked. Later, Mr. Gore said he could not recall attending any coffees. ''This was on the president's side of things,'' he said. ''That's my memory and impression.'' Mr. Gore said it ''was not my practice to go to any of these coffees.'' He added, ''There may have been one that I attended briefly, perhaps because some of the invitees were known to me and wanted to say hello.'' Two days after the interview, Mr. Gore's lawyer, James F. Neal, acknowledged in a letter to Mr. Conrad that Mr. Gore misunderstood the question, and thought it dealt only with ''White House coffees.'' Mr. Neal wrote that according to the vice president's schedule, Mr. Gore had attended 4 White House coffees and he had acted as host of 21 coffees in the Old Executive Office Building. UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS -- The discrepancies between the documents and Mr. Gore's hazy recollection of his role in the coffees have prompted Mr. Conrad to recommend that Ms. Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate the matter. THE ISSUE -- From December 1995 to April 1996, Mr. Gore made 45 fund-raising telephone calls from his West Wing office in the White House. The calls raised the issue of whether Mr. Gore may have violated the Pendleton Act, an 1883 civil service law, which bars elected officials from using federal property to raise campaign contributions. The law was designed to prevent officeholders from pressuring their subordinates into making political donations. Mr. Gore made his calls from his White House office. Mr. Clinton made similar calls from his White House quarters, which is not considered official government property. Among those Mr. Gore called was Robert Johnson, chairman of Black Entertainment Television Holdings. In one document disclosed by a House committee, a call sheet prepared by the Democratic Party, Mr. Gore was told to ask Mr. Johnson ''to write $30K for the media campaign.'' In an interview with agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation,  Mr. Johnson said he took Mr. Gore's call and then wrote a check to the Democratic Party for $30,000. Later, a Democratic Party finance officer noted on a computerized record of the vice president's fund-raising: ''$30K in.'' THE INVESTIGATION -- In 1997, Ms. Reno absolved Mr. Gore of any wrongdoing in connection with the phone calls. She found that Mr. Gore's calls were intended to raise money only for general party purposes, a category known as soft money. She concluded that Mr. Gore did not realize that part of the money was funneled into hard-money accounts that were used for Clinton-Gore re-election activities but were restricted by federal election laws. In 1998, Ms. Reno's findings were challenged when investigators obtained a Nov. 21, 1995, memorandum written by David M. Strauss, then Mr. Gore's deputy chief of staff. On the memorandum were Mr. Strauss's handwritten notes that suggested Mr. Gore might have known that some of the money raised by his calls was allocated to direct re-election activities. In a series of interviews with prosecutors, four participants in the meeting, including Leon A. Panetta, the former White House chief of staff, recalled that Mr. Gore was present for a discussion of how the money was to be allocated. But seven or eight others told investigators  they could not recall a discussion about money raised by phone calls going to the restricted hard money accounts. MR. GORE'S COMMENTS -- When interviewed by prosecutors on Nov. 11, 1998, Mr. Gore said he was sometimes inattentive and missed parts of the fund-raising meetings. According to F.B.I. notes on the interview, Mr. Gore said he ''drank a lot of iced tea during meetings, which could have necessitated a restroom break.'' UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS -- In December 1998, Ms. Reno cleared Mr. Gore of wrongdoing. In reaching her decision, she rebuffed recommendations from six senior aides and relied instead on the advice of a single trusted adviser, Lee J. Radek, the chief of the Justice Department's public corruption unit. But in the last several weeks, Mr. Conrad, urged on by the F.B.I., concluded that Mr. Gore's truthfulness about the phone calls should also be examined by an outside prosecutor.
 Endorsements for Gore  The two national teachers' unions, voting at their respective conventions, formally endorsed Vice President Al Gore for president.
 Two Sides of Gore  Law enforcement officials said they saw two very different Al Gores in an April interview, one who was a stickler for details and another who offered vague responses to questions on campaign finances.
 In fact, as a missile defense has emerged as an important difference between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush in the presidential campaign, many intelligence officials have complained that what is supposed to be a coldly analytical process has evolved into a roiling political debate. ''We didn't like the Soviets, but we roughly understood them to be extremely cautious,'' said Leon S. Fuerth, Mr. Gore's national security adviser. ''We never have had the depth of understanding about what makes the North Koreans tick to give us that confidence.''
