 Jodi Rebecca Rosen and Seth Lawrence Gorenstein were married last evening. Rabbi Matthew Gerwirtz officiated at Oheka, the Otto Kahn house in Cold Spring Hills, N.Y. Mrs. Gorenstein, 25, is the associate in the community relations department of American Express in New York, where she helps coordinate the company's charitable contributions. She graduated from the University of Michigan. She is the daughter of Arlene Rosen of New York and Samuel D. Rosen of Huntington, N.Y. The bride's father is a partner in the New York office of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker, a law firm. Her mother is a client management director at ClientLogic, a direct marketing company in Weehawken, N.J. Jodi Rebecca Rosen and Seth Lawrence Gorenstein were married last evening. Rabbi Matthew Gerwirtz officiated at Oheka, the Otto Kahn house in Cold Spring Hills, N.Y. Mrs. Gorenstein, 25, is the associate in the community relations department of American Express in New York, where she helps coordinate the company's charitable contributions. She graduated from the University of Michigan. She is the daughter of Arlene Rosen of New York and Samuel D. Rosen of Huntington, N.Y. The bride's father is a partner in the New York office of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker, a law firm. Her mother is a client management director at ClientLogic, a direct marketing company in Weehawken, N.J. The bridegroom, 30, produces television commercials at Grey Worldwide, the advertising agency in New York. He graduated from Boston University. He is the son of Barbara and Herbert Gorenstein of Philadelphia. The bridegroom's mother retired as a substitute teacher for the Philadelphia elementary schools. His father is an accountant at Seligman, Cupersmith, Wilensky & Company, an accounting concern in Cherry Hill, N.J.
 Vice Pres Al Gore denounces Republican-controlled Congress as 'do-nothing' and challenges Gov George W Bush to 'make one phone call' to instruct Republican leaders to pass major pieces of stalled legislation, interview; tries to tie Bush tightly to Republican lawmakers and to legislative stalemate on array of issues (M) Vice President Al Gore today denounced the ''do-nothing-for-people Congress'' and challenged Gov. George W. Bush to ''make one phone call'' to instruct Republican leaders to pass major pieces of stalled legislation. Setting out the themes he will strike in a seven-state campaign swing next week, Mr. Gore in an interview tried to tie Mr. Bush tightly to the Republican-controlled Congress and to the legislative stalemate on an array of issues. Vice President Al Gore today denounced the ''do-nothing-for-people Congress'' and challenged Gov. George W. Bush to ''make one phone call'' to instruct Republican leaders to pass major pieces of stalled legislation. Setting out the themes he will strike in a seven-state campaign swing next week, Mr. Gore in an interview tried to tie Mr. Bush tightly to the Republican-controlled Congress and to the legislative stalemate on an array of issues. ''Now is the moment when those of us who want to lead this country must stand up and be counted,'' Mr. Gore said. ''People deserve to know where we stand on the key issues now being blocked by the Republican leadership of Congress at the behest of the special interests.'' Mr. Gore went on to name four issues that Congressional Democrats hope to ride hard to regain control of the House: an increase in the minimum wage, cleanup of toxic waste sites, a prescription drug benefit and regulation of health maintenance organizations. ''My opponent has spoken in very general terms about the kind of candidate he will be, but he has been completely silent on these key issues,'' Mr. Gore said in a phone call from Air Force Two. ''The question,'' he said, ''is whether or not George Bush will call the Republican leadership and tell them to pass a real patients' bill of rights. Many moderate Republicans want that. Independent voters want it. Democrats certainly want it. The special interests and the G.O.P. leaders in Congress do not. We are just one phone call away from giving the medical decisions back to the doctors.'' Mr. Gore plans to ride the same theme all next week -- just as Congress returns to Washington -- in an attempt to get voters to view Mr. Bush, the Republican Congress and the Republicans' large campaign contributors as one big triangle. The Texas governor has managed to distance himself from the Congress by running as a ''compassionate conservative.'' That implicitly sets Mr. Bush apart from the conservatives former Speaker Newt Gingrich brought into the majority in 1994. And in some cases it is easier to run against the Republicans in Congress than against Mr. Bush. ''Governor Bush could call Senator Lott and fix this with one telephone conversation,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Bush's aides called Mr. Gore's demand that the Texas governor step into the legislative debate a sign of the Democrat's own weaknesses. ''This is an amazing display of a lack of leadership for the sitting vice president to call on the governor of Texas to pass legislation his administration has failed to get done,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore's new tack builds upon the ideas he began airing several weeks ago when he started asking ''whose side are you on'' and depicting Mr. Bush and the Republicans in Congress as siding with powerful business interests over consumers. Mr. Gore today kept hammering away at his refrain of just one phone call. Turning to a prescription drug benefit, he said, ''If Governor Bush is willing to stand up to the big drug companies all he has to do is make one phone call and tell the leadership to pass this legislation and America's seniors will be able to get help.'' Mr. Gore said that as president he would veto the Republicans' version of a prescription drug bill. Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have sharp philosophical differences on some of these issues. While Mr. Gore wants an expansive new prescription drug benefit added into Medicare, Mr. Bush generally supports the concept of the House Republicans. They recently passed a bill that would give subsidies and incentives to private insurers to offer prescription drug policies to the elderly. Mr. Gore and the Democrats back a $1 increase in the minimum wage across two years. Mr. Bartlett said Mr. Bush favored an increase in the minimum wage but wanted states to have the right to opt out of it if they thought the wage increase would slow job creation. Mr. Gore backs the more wide-ranging version. Mr. Bartlett said Mr. Bush wants more people covered than the Senate does but differs somewhat with the House provisions on a right to sue companies. Mr. Gore's aides circulated a long list of campaign contributions to Republicans, noting that business groups opposed to a minimum wage increase had given $2.6 million to Republican Congressional candidates and party committees for the 1998 Congressional campaign. They also highlighted donations from the insurance industry, saying Republican committees and candidates had taken more than $8.6 million in contributions from ''anti-patients' bill of rights forces'' since 1997.
 David Kocieniewski On Politics column on recent actions and posturings by New Jersey Gov Christine Whitman that lead him to believe she hopes for Republican vice presidential nod or, if George W Bush is elected president, a high-ranking post in his administration (M) Some of the governor's staff members have been quietly pointing out what a valuable asset Mrs. Whitman might be to the presumptive Republican Presidential nominee, George W. Bush -- either as a vice presidential running mate or, should he win the White House, as a high-ranking member of his administration. Perhaps. But with Mr. Bush leading in the polls and the Republican Convention later this month in Philadelphia, just an hour from the governor's day job, Mrs. Whitman's name is being uttered in a lot of parlors. And most of the people talking about a George W. administration as if it were a rotisserie baseball league know that the realities of New Jersey politics mean that Mrs. Whitman's biggest accomplishments as governor are almost certainly behind her. ''I just asked her about all the speculation and she said she just wants to be the best governor she can be,'' Mr. McDonough said. ''If George Bush were to offer something, she'd give it consideration. But she doesn't have her sights set on anything.''
 Judges Named by Bush Are Viewed as Moderate  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has appointed justices who have been a moderating influence on the state's Supreme Court, which is often regarded as among the most conservative and pro-business in the country. The appointments might offer some insight into what Mr. Bush would do in Washington. Vice President Al Gore is seeking to tie Gov. George W. Bush tightly to the Republican-led Congress and blame him for the legislative stalemate on major issues.
 Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic contender for the presidency, today declined to say how he thought the administration should respond to the failed test. ''I'll wait until we receive a report from the military and from Secretary Cohen,'' he said in an interview. His Republican competitor, Gov. George W. Bush, who has called for a more ambitious plan that could be deployed in space, said he would press forward with a vigorous missile defense plan. ''While last night's test is a disappointment, I remain confident that given the right leadership, America can develop an effective missile defense system,'' Mr. Bush said in a prepared statement.
 Prescription drugs are fastest-growing part of nation's health-care bill; Vice Pres Gore and Republican presidential rival George W Bush are pushing competing plans to help the elderly pay for prescription drugs; Bush wants private insurers to run any prescription-drug benefit plan, while Gore wants government to run program; meanwhile, drug companies are coy about how drug prices are set; few people pay full retail prices; photo (M) Perhaps no issue touches as many lives as the cost of medication, which is why it is consuming the political landscape this year. Last week, Vice President Al Gore attacked drug manufacturers, accusing them of price gouging. The week before, the House of Representatives approved a Republican-backed plan to give subsidies to insurance companies that offer prescription coverage, a concept favored by the drug makers.
 Interestingly, the rules of the ''Big Brother'' show state that ''You must not now be a candidate for public office and must agree not to become one until after the initial broadcast of all programs in which you appear.'' Too bad. I can't think of a better way to learn what we really want to know about Al Gore and George W. Bush than by throwing them into the ''Big Brother'' house for 90 days with eight putatively ordinary folks. Perhaps voter turnout in November would be higher if, as on ''Survivor'' and ''Big Brother,'' a vote for a candidate were actually a vote against him. Interestingly, the rules of the ''Big Brother'' show state that ''You must not now be a candidate for public office and must agree not to become one until after the initial broadcast of all programs in which you appear.'' Too bad. I can't think of a better way to learn what we really want to know about Al Gore and George W. Bush than by throwing them into the ''Big Brother'' house for 90 days with eight putatively ordinary folks. Perhaps voter turnout in November would be higher if, as on ''Survivor'' and ''Big Brother,'' a vote for a candidate were actually a vote against him.
 Maureen Dowd Op-ed column contends Democrats yearn for consistency while Vice Pres Gore struggles to define himself; suggests Gore's biggest problem is that people really do not like him (M) First Al Gore had his alpha coaching. Then Richard Gephardt gave lawmakers warrior lessons, screening clips from the movie ''Gladiator'' at the Capitol before the recent Medicare clash with Republicans. First Al Gore had his alpha coaching. Then Richard Gephardt gave lawmakers warrior lessons, screening clips from the movie ''Gladiator'' at the Capitol before the recent Medicare clash with Republicans. The Democrats' very own Mutant Master is getting ready to show off his latest metamorphosis at the Los Angeles convention. Mr. Gore must reintroduce himself to an electorate already suspicious of his serial reintroductions. It's tricky, because the question is the answer. Who is Al Gore? Al Gore is the man who keeps remaking Al Gore. The Fiery Populist went after the pharmaceutical front group, Citizens for Better Medicare. Oops. Turns out Mr. Gore's message guru, Carter Eskew (who made a fortune on ads for Big Tobacco), pitched the group to handle its TV advertising before he joined the Gore campaign. Democrats watch Mr. Gore flopping and yearn for consistency. ''Gore struggles to get into the place he wants to be,'' says the California Democratic strategist Bill Carrick, ''while Bush is this Southern-fried-Tom-Dewey-stay-out-of-traffic-don't-say-anything-controversial-run-for-an-hour-in-the-middle-of-the-day-and-I-have-to-get-to-the-ranch-by-the-weekend.'' Mr. Gore's biggest problem is that people don't like to like him, even when they like him. He comes across as a man who calculates every gesture. He even checked with Mr. Eskew to see if it would look bad if he baby-sat for his grandson instead of joining his wife and daughter at the Million Mom March. How amazing that Mr. Gore can't simply body surf the rising economic tide. Writing about the demand for luxury goods, The Washington Post reports that orders for yacht charters are up 400 percent. There's a huge back order on Patek Philippe women's bracelet watches, selling for $6,250, and men's gold calendar watches, selling for $26,500. Former President George Bush told The Times's Frank Bruni on Friday that he thinks his son will prevail, not necessarily because of his charms, but for the same reason the father lost to Mr. Clinton. ''I think people kind of like change, like the idea of change from time to time,'' he said.
 Bush Terminal in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn is a 5-million-square-foot complex of buildings that have sat underutilized on the waterfront since the 1960's, when containerized ocean shipping replaced labor-intensive methods of loading and unloading ships. Bush Terminal was also called Industry City because it was one of the first industrial parks in the nation. Industry has gone elsewhere, but the current owner, a private partnership named Industry City Associates, and the brokers who represent them are trying to convert it to a technology campus. This includes cutting vertical shafts called risers in the buildings, so that each tenant will have multiple connections to power and telecommunications cables. The decision to start converting Bush Terminal to a telecommunications center was made last year after observing the growth of the industry in Manhattan, said  Bruce B. Federman, a partner in Industry City Associates.
 After the deficit gloom of the 1980's, that number is so huge that it invites Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to engage in a war of  promises. Up to a point, that is healthy. A surplus of more than $4 trillion ought to spark debate about options whose price tags have until now scared off all but the most intrepid of politicians. Yet the voters cannot become intoxicated by the numbers to the point of believing that it is possible to have tax relief plus hugely expensive new programs and significant debt reduction all at the same time. The important task remains choosing policy targets wisely. After the deficit gloom of the 1980's, that number is so huge that it invites Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to engage in a war of  promises. Up to a point, that is healthy. A surplus of more than $4 trillion ought to spark debate about options whose price tags have until now scared off all but the most intrepid of politicians. Yet the voters cannot become intoxicated by the numbers to the point of believing that it is possible to have tax relief plus hugely expensive new programs and significant debt reduction all at the same time. The important task remains choosing policy targets wisely. Then there is another factor squeezing down the size of the usable surplus that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have to argue over. Budget estimates assume that spending on most existing federal programs outside Social Security and Medicare -- covering everything from scientific research to law enforcement -- will remain unchanged. In fact, reasonable spending growth and Congress's reluctance to let several temporary tax credits expire will eat up $600 billion, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal research group. The upshot is that by this reckoning the next president and Congress will have slightly less than $1 trillion of the original $4.2 trillion to pay for new programs or tax cuts. This information helps frame the discussion of tax and spending proposals being put forth by the presidential candidates and by many Congressional candidates, as well. On the Democratic side, Mr. Gore proposes to cut taxes by about $500 billion over 10 years, creating subsidies for college tuition, individual retirement accounts, child care, individual health coverage, nursing-home care, energy conservation, low-wage workers and married couples. He would spend about $250 billion on prescription drugs for Medicare enrollees and about $300 billion for transportation, energy projects, medical coverage for low-income families and education. Mr. Bush would cut taxes by more than $1 trillion over 10 years. He also proposes to increase defense, health and other domestic spending by more than $200 billion. His plan to divert part of the payroll tax to create private Social Security accounts would eventually draw on general tax revenues by an unknown amount that could run into the hundreds of billions.
 Jack E Cohen letter responds to Thomas L Friedman's July 7 column, which suggested Vice Pres Gore select Pres Clinton as his own vice-presidential running mate; admits notion tops his own idea that Clinton is cinch to be secretary of state in Gore administration (M) Thomas L. Friedman (''A Modest Proposal,'' column, July 7) has one-upped me with his proposal that Al  Gore select Bill Clinton as his vice-presidential running mate. Here I've been telling all my friends and relatives, and whoever wants to listen, that Bill Clinton is a cinch as the next secretary of state, no matter who wins the presidency. Thomas L. Friedman (''A Modest Proposal,'' column, July 7) has one-upped me with his proposal that Al  Gore select Bill Clinton as his vice-presidential running mate. Here I've been telling all my friends and relatives, and whoever wants to listen, that Bill Clinton is a cinch as the next secretary of state, no matter who wins the presidency.
 Still, how they react is their business. As Richard N. Haass, a Brookings Institution scholar and former official in the Bush Administration, noted recently, any ''effort to assert or expand U.S. hegemony will fail. Such an action would lack domestic support and stimulate international resistance, which in turn would make the costs of hegemony all the greater and its benefits all the smaller.'' ''If the U.S. is going to use its power over time it's got to be committed and consistent,'' said Robert Zoellick, a former top official under President Bush and now a top adviser to his son. ''The strategy the U.S. applied to Mexico needs to be expanded to the western hemisphere at large.''
 Richard L Berke article on Warren Christopher's effort to compile list for Vice Pres Al Gore of potential vice presidential running mates; cites lack of obvious candidates; describes Christopher's interview technique; photos (M) Now Vice President Al Gore has dispatched Christopher on what is, in its way, one of the most challenging assignments he has ever taken on: to sort through the weakest Democratic field in modern memory and find the few men or women who could be a next vice president of the United States -- in short, to create the List. Because there is a lack of obvious candidates, Christopher's task is a far more formidable one than he faced eight years ago, when he oversaw Clinton's search for those who might make a vice president. Of course, that means Gore's ultimate choice is harder than Clinton's was. And yet there may be no more consequential decision for Gore: after what seem like interminable reinventions and remakes, the vice president is still struggling to ignite his campaign. It may be that the only way Gore can win in November is if he successfully reintroduces himself at the party's convention in Los Angeles next month. That can only happen if he picks the right running mate. Now Vice President Al Gore has dispatched Christopher on what is, in its way, one of the most challenging assignments he has ever taken on: to sort through the weakest Democratic field in modern memory and find the few men or women who could be a next vice president of the United States -- in short, to create the List. Because there is a lack of obvious candidates, Christopher's task is a far more formidable one than he faced eight years ago, when he oversaw Clinton's search for those who might make a vice president. Of course, that means Gore's ultimate choice is harder than Clinton's was. And yet there may be no more consequential decision for Gore: after what seem like interminable reinventions and remakes, the vice president is still struggling to ignite his campaign. It may be that the only way Gore can win in November is if he successfully reintroduces himself at the party's convention in Los Angeles next month. That can only happen if he picks the right running mate. It is a long way from identifying prospects to finding the right match. Gore's presence on the ticket eight years ago did not, by itself, win Clinton the White House. But it helped resurrect a presidential nominee who, before the Gore announcement, was stuck in the polls behind President Bush -- and in some surveys, was even trailing Ross Perot. The tableau of Clinton and Gore and their families standing side by side outside the governor's mansion in Little Rock signaled to the country that this ticket was young and vibrant -- and not wedded to the timeworn tradition that a running mate's sole value is someone who can balance the ticket geographically. Gore could use that kind of magic. But even were he to dare go for a spine-tingling choice, the problem he faces is that there is a dearth of spine-tingling choices. Republicans eagerly reel off a host of governors and up-and-comers in Congress with compelling biographies, from Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma to Senator John McCain of Arizona and Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska to Representative John Kasich of Ohio to Elizabeth Dole. Ask Democrats their favorites, and there is, almost always, a moment of silence. Then they end up resurrecting the names of people who have been passed over before. One close friend of Gore's, a figure in Democratic politics for decades, is downright unsettled. ''Names come up that may be sound but there are no home runs in the crowd. Who is out there who would lead people to say, 'Al Gore strikes a home run'? For the life of me, I can't imagine who it is.'' Al Gore disputes that there is no future Al Gore. ''There are quite a number of people out there who are at least as ready for the job as I was eight years ago,'' he told me recently. But then, conceding that the next vice president might take some molding, he went on to say, ''The question is how you grow into the job.'' Eight years ago, when Christopher began his talent search for Clinton, job-ready talent abounded: Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey. And there was a centrist, international-minded Southern senator named Gore. His name first made Christopher's V.P. list in April 1992. Clinton was in Tallahassee for a campaign event at Florida A&M (students there questioned his explanations for his experimentation with marijuana and his Vietnam draft status), and at his hotel there one morning he met secretly with Christopher and Mickey Kantor, the campaign chairman, for a vice-presidential brainstorming session. Clinton's closest aide, Bruce Lindsey, wandered in and out as Clinton and company tossed out names and came up with a list of 38, including 15 that were designated high priority. (Gore was on the prime list from the start.) It was at that meeting that Clinton first emphasized the importance of not being locked in to traditional concerns about ticket balancing, as Michael Dukakis had in picking Senator Lloyd Bentsen four years earlier, when the campaign boasted about a Boston-Austin axis. (A lot of good it did: Dukakis lost Texas.) When Christopher first interviewed Gore in late May 1992 at the United Methodist Building in Washington, across the street from the Supreme Court, Gore, then a senator, was putting the final touches on his book ''Earth in the Balance.'' Discussing that meeting with Gore, Christopher says he was ''impressed by his intellectual equipment and his high personal standards.'' Others probably would not have been intrigued if Gore showed them corrections he'd made on the galleys, but Christopher was. And he says he appreciated, too, that Gore did not immediately jump at the possibility of being vice president. At that session, Gore, responding to Christopher's usual query, suggested others who might be tapped as Clinton's running mate. Gore says some of those same names are on his list today. He would not name names, however, explaining, ''It's too radioactive right now.'' Gore expressed no such qualms when Christopher tracked him down in Rio, where he was attending an environmental conference. There was one proviso: Gore asked for 24 hours to think over whether he wanted to be a finalist. Some Clinton advisers wondered whether Gore -- who long nursed presidential ambitions of his own -- was playing too hard-to-get. Christopher, having seen people make wrongheaded decisions when they were abroad, approved of his prudence. Gore, of course, did not change his mind. He allowed his name to be put forth, as did the four others on the list: Senator Bob Graham of Florida, Senator Harris Wofford of Pennsylvania, Representative Lee Hamilton of Indiana and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska. Clinton met secretly with each of these contenders, mostly at the Capital Hilton, a few blocks from the White House. On June 30, Gore was spirited through a back door for what had been planned as an hourlong session, the length allotted for all the finalists. Clinton and Gore started talking at 10 p.m. and were still chatting well past 1 a.m. They got so comfortable that eventually they both stretched out on the floor, their backs against two couches as they faced one another. The next morning, Clinton kept his counsel, leaving even Christopher sniffing for clues. But judging by the length of the meeting, he figured Gore had shot to the top of Clinton's mental list, or close to it. Gore had no doubt. Asked last month when he knew the job was his, he replied, ''That night -- if I wanted it.'' A little more than a week later, the Clintons and Gores introduced themselves to the nation in Little Rock, the most enduring scene of the 1992 campaign. And one that Gore desperately wants to recreate. Ask Gore how he will pick a suitable partner, and he provides a response that makes the process sound so utterly logical -- and so easy. ''There is one criterion that overshadows all the others by far,'' he says, ''and that is, Who has the clear ability to become president on a moment's notice should that need ever arise?'' There is a great deal beyond that one criterion, as Gore well knows -- there is the whole equation of pluses and minuses that is any politician's life, and another equation of costs and benefits that a choice might bring to a presidential ticket. Senator Richard Durbin of Illinois is probably the favorite of his Democratic colleagues in the Senate, and he is a skilled politician who could help Gore carry his must-win state. But Gore has a decent shot at Illinois anyway. Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri, the Democratic leader, is a time-tested politician who is popular with labor and could help carry a vitally important state. But he is the ultimate Washington insider -- and what he really wants is to win back the House so he can be speaker. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts may be closest to the Gore model: he has an impressive biography and he is agile on the stump. But the last place Gore needs help is the Northeast. Few of those most widely discussed would bring to Gore something Gore brought to Clinton in 1992: a sense of flair and the future. Voters back then could instantly envision Gore running for president in eight years. Many of the current prospects will be well into their 60's and may seem too old to run in 2008. Gore is now 52. But eight years hence, Graham will be 72; Gov. Jim Hunt of North Carolina, 71; Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, 75; and Gephardt, 67. There are appealing prospects in their late 40's, but they are virtually unknown nationally: Gov. Tom Vilsack of Iowa, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Senator Russell Feingold of Wisconsin. A close Gore aide was mulling the choices -- or lack thereof -- one recent night when he came up with the only combination that sounded imaginative, and familiar. ''Could we pick Clinton?'' he asks. (The answer: the Constitution does not prevent a president from being elected vice president.) Part of the quandary is that there is no one who solves all of Gore's needs. He wants someone to zip up his persona. But after eight years in Clinton's shadow, he does not want someone with so much zip that the person will overshadow him. He wants a combative partisan who can fearlessly run down Bush in the campaign. But he wants someone who, as vice president, would not make waves or be a threat. He wants someone who can help him carry a battleground state. But he does not want to be accused of picking someone for purely political reasons. He wants someone no one is thinking of to provide some electricity at the convention. But he does not want someone who is so untested that he or she falls flat off the political stage. That leaves Gore searching for, well, another Gore. Bill Daley, in an interview just before he was named Gore's campaign chairman, said two of his choices would be Clinton appointees: Robert Rubin, the former treasury secretary, and Bill Richardson, the energy secretary. (That was before anyone knew Richardson would have to answer for sky-high gas prices as well as for the disappearance of nuclear secrets at the Los Alamos weapons lab.) Daley also mentioned the former Senate Democratic leader George Mitchell, and his successor, Tom Daschle of South Dakota. The only relatively young, attractive prospect that Daley or anyone talks about is Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana, who is 44. But he has the misfortune of seeming like a young Gore clone. They are both sons of senators; they both attended the same Washington prep school. Moreover, Bayh falls into the uninspired category of ''safe choice.'' There just are not that many young Democrats ready for the national stage. The Republicans don't have that problem, thanks in large part to Ronald Reagan. His presidency spurred Republicans to enter politics; it was something of a cause. Many of those Republicans have moved up the ladder to become governors and people on Bush's prospect list. But a Democratic farm team never materialized during the Reagan years -- or the Clinton years. Clinton has so dominated the national stage that there has been little room for anyone to emerge, especially with Congress under Republican rule. ''I was inspired to get into this business because of the role models there were,'' says Leon Panetta, the former California congressman who was a chief of staff for Clinton. ''They're missing now. That's one of the problems Al Gore is having in looking for someone.'' Another consideration is that when it comes time for Gore to announce his choice -- probably just before the Democratic convention in mid-August -- Bush will have already made his pick at the Republican convention. So if Bush picks a woman, for example, Gore may feel compelled to as well. The nightmare scenario in the vice president's camp is that Bush, with more choices, will pick such an attention-grabber as his No. 2 that Gore will be especially hard pressed to come up with someone dynamic. Gore insists that he's not interested in springing a splashy surprise. That may be because he really doesn't think it matters -- or because there are no splashy candidates and he is trying to lower expectations. ''I don't think the drama has more than transitory value,'' he says. ''It needs to feel right.'' Others, too, it appears, have shelved self-effacement. Gore campaign aides say they have been struck by the overt efforts by Senator Kerry and Secretary of Energy Richardson to win Gore over. Even prospects who insist that they are not interested happily make a case for their candidacies. Gov. Gray Davis of California says he promised his state's voters that he would stay put. But the famously ''gray'' governor, whose favorite joke is that he has given charisma lessons to the vice president, sounds suspiciously as if he is putting his name forward when he counsels: ''America is not looking for a rock star or a Hollywood figure. They want a solid, tested leader.'' So what is Gore to do? he needs someone with whom, most of all, he is comfortable, or as Christopher put it, ''Chemistry weighs very heavily.'' The last thing voters want to see is an awkward Al Gore standing beside an awkward running mate. He should take a lesson from Clinton and not worry so much about geographic balance. John Kennedy's pick of Lyndon Johnson in 1960 was the last time a running mate delivered a big state (Texas) -- and a victory in November. Gore was not ready to talk in any kind of detail about his choices or his way of arriving at them. What he did seem eager to do was convey that he was relaxed about the process. At the conclusion of our interview, Gore had a question for me. ''How old are you?'' he asked. ''Older than 35?''
 LUMIA THEATER STAGE II ''Cooee: The Call of the Bush.'' July 9, 15 and 16 at 8 p.m. Tickets: $10, suggested donation. 179 Broadway, Long Branch. (732) 229-3166.
 Issue of judicial appointments percolates in presidential race after 5-4 vote by US Supreme court rejecting Nebraska law banning doctors from performing partial-birth abortions, and after Vice Pres Al Gore warns Gov George W Bush would if elected appoint conservatives to court hostile to abortion rights; Bush's record in Texas shows he has appointed justices with moderating influence on state's Supreme Court, often regarded as among most conservative and pro-business in country; has appointed four of court's nine justices and has been political patron for fifth; even those who not support Bush say while his appointees are regarded as conservative, they are not fiercely ideological; photo (M) It was, after all, appointees of Gov. George W. Bush who took the lead on the issue. And it was the governor himself who had pushed into law the Texas Parental Notification Act, which required minors to inform their parents before seeking an abortion. In recent weeks, particularly after the United States Supreme Court's 5-to-4 ruling that rejected a Nebraska law prohibiting doctors from performing a procedure that opponents call partial-birth abortion, the issue of judicial appointments has percolated into the presidential race. Vice President Al Gore, the presumptive Democratic nominee, seized on the close vote to warn that Mr. Bush, if elected, would appoint conservative Supreme Court justices hostile to abortion rights. But a look at Mr. Bush's record in Texas shows that he has appointed justices who have had a moderating influence on the Texas Supreme Court, often regarded as among the most conservative and pro-business in the country. He has appointed four of the court's nine justices and has been a political patron for a fifth, Harriet O'Neill, who wrote the majority opinion in the parental notification case. Even those who do not support Mr. Bush say that while his appointees are regarded as conservative and business-oriented, they are not fiercely ideological. What insight, if any, Mr. Bush's appointments in Texas offer into what he might do in Washington is debatable. The scrutiny and pressure surrounding a nomination to the United States Supreme Court far exceed those accompanying an appointment to the Texas court. Mr. Bush, who opposes abortion, has offered only vague descriptions of his model justices, though, tellingly, he has cited two of the leading conservatives on the Supreme Court, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas,  for praise. On the campaign trail, Mr. Bush has said he wants justices who strictly interpret the Constitution. He also has promised not to apply any ideological litmus tests, including one on abortion, even though many of the social conservatives who support him are eager to overturn Roe v. Wade. Clay Johnson, a top aide to Mr.  Bush, said he believed the selection process for justices would undoubtedly be different in a Bush presidential administration than it has been in Texas. ''But I think he would be looking as he did at the state level for people who are interpreters of the law as opposed to makers of the law,'' Mr. Johnson said. In Texas, Supreme Court justices are elected statewide to six-year terms, but early retirements allowed Mr. Bush to reshape the court. And if anything, the Bush appointees seem in keeping with his campaign theme of ''Big Tent Republicanism.'' Mr. Bush's first appointee, James A. Baker, was a state appellate judge and a longtime political ally of the Bush family. (He is no relation to the former United States secretary of state.) His second, Greg Abbott, was a highly regarded state judge in Houston who has been paralyzed since an accident 16 years ago. His third, Deborah G. Hankinson, was a teacher-turned-defense lawyer. And his fourth, Alberto R. Gonzales, is one of Mr. Bush's most visible Hispanic allies, having served as the governor's general counsel and as Texas secretary of state. The governor appointed Justice O'Neill to a lower court in 1995 and in 1998 she won a seat on the high court with his blessing. All of Mr. Bush's appointees are Republicans and all have since been elected except Mr. Gonzales, who is expected to be elected easily in November. In separate interviews this week, Justice Hankinson, Justice Gonzales and Justice Abbott all described a similar interview process with Mr. Bush, who is not a lawyer, and a few aides. None were asked about specific issues like abortion. (In fact, until the parental notification opinion, the court had never had to directly address abortion.) Instead, they said, the governor asked open-ended questions about judicial philosophy to determine how they might view their roles as justices. ''I told him I thought it was very, very critical that judges not bring an agenda to the bench,'' said Justice Hankinson, whom Mr. Bush appointed as an appellate judge in 1996, then to the State Supreme Court a year later. Debbie D. Branson, president of the Texas Trial Lawyers Association, a group that has been critical of the court and Mr. Bush over the years, said the court is ''still not where we'd like them to be'' on consumer issues and other damage claims. But Ms. Branson agreed that the Bush appointees had started the process of moving the court back to the center. Mr. Bush took office in January 1995, and his first opportunity to influence the court came that summer when Justice Bob Gammage, a Democrat, announced he would retire. Mr. Gammage had attacked the state's system of electing judges as corrupt and blamed the court for favoring big business, particularly insurance companies. But in an interview this week he called Mr. Bush's appointees fair and nonideological even as he pointed out that the law is not the governor's expertise. By the Supreme Court's 1998-99 term, the liberal judicial watchdog group Court Watch found that Mr. Bush's appointees were ''eliminating the excesses of the G.O.P. old guard.'' A Court Watch study determined that the court was showing  more sympathy for plaintiffs. Chief Justice Thomas R. Phillips, a leading conservative who took office in 1988, acknowledged that in recent years ''there's been sort of a middle course,'' but he said it was in keeping with national trends. To some degree, he noted, the bitter ideological fights over tort law had been fought before the Bush appointees arrived. ''We have put aside our personal viewpoints and endeavored to do our job as judges -- that is, to interpret and apply the Legislature's will as it has been expressed in the statute,'' Justice O'Neill wrote for the majority, which included Justice Baker, Justice Hankinson, Justice Gonzales and Justice Craig Enoch, a Republican elected in 1992. Chief Justice Philips voted with the majority but did not concur with all the points in the opinion. Of Mr. Bush's appointees, only Justice Abbott dissented. Yet Mr. Pojman and Mr. Kral agree that the court's opinion has not shaken their support of Mr. Bush. ''If Bush does what he says and picks justices who stick to the original intent of the Constitution, we'll be in great shape,'' Mr. Pojman said. ''Governor Bush worked hard for the passage of a law that is intended to reduce the number of abortions in Texas and involve parents in this major decision by their minor daughters,'' Ms. Edwards said. ''If the law needs to be strengthened or changed for that intent to be carried our, then Governor Bush would support that.''
 The catalyst was, apparently, a decision by the Philadelphia branch of Act Up, the gay advocacy group, to take up South Africa's cause and start heckling Vice President Al Gore, who was in the midst of his primary campaign for the presidency. The banners saying that Mr. Gore was letting Africans die to please American pharmaceutical companies left his campaign chagrined. After media and campaign staff looked into the matter, the administration did an about-face.
 What got Mr. Podeswa through was what he calls his ''monomaniacal'' nature: ''I'm like a dog with a bone,'' he said. ''I wouldn't let go.'' But his persistence seems to have paid off. He now has a first-look deal with Alliance Atlantis, an independent distribution and production company and one of the principal backers of ''The Five Senses,'' and he is set to adapt and direct Anne Michaels's acclaimed novel, ''Fugitive Pieces,'' about the legacy of the Holocaust, for the Toronto-based Serendipity Point Films. He is also adapting Catherine Bush's first novel, ''Minus Time,'' about the relationship between a young girl and her astronaut mother, for the screen.
 One reason the administration pursued missile defense was to protect Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, against charges that the Clinton administration was soft on defense. Even those political gains have been dissipated. Republican supporters of missile defense are likely to criticize the Clinton administration's management of the antimissile program.
 As expected, Vice President Al Gore received overwhelming endorsements from the two national teachers unions and enormous ovations when he visited their conventions. Mr. Gore spoke first to the American Federation of Teachers in Philadelphia, then flew to Chicago to address the National Education Association. As expected, Vice President Al Gore received overwhelming endorsements from the two national teachers unions and enormous ovations when he visited their conventions. Mr. Gore spoke first to the American Federation of Teachers in Philadelphia, then flew to Chicago to address the National Education Association. The teachers are part of a large labor coalition backing Mr. Gore candidacy, and have been energized by his staunch opposition to vouchers, which would allow public money to be used for private-school tuition. His opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, supports them.
