 Much is riding on whether such efforts succeed. While President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore have heralded the educational possibilities of the Web, most of what has been labeled instruction in cyberspace is supplemental at best -- SAT training, college counseling and virtual field trips.
 Democratic officials say former Sen Bill Bradley will end months of silence and appear alongside Vice Pres Al Gore in a week to voice his 'enthusiastic support' for the man who trounced him in bitterly contested primary; appearance would come at time when Gore is working hard to unify party in time for national convention in August (M) Ending months of silence, former Senator Bill Bradley plans to appear alongside Vice President Al Gore next week to voice what Democratic officials described as his ''enthusiastic support'' for the man who trounced him in the bitterly contested Democratic presidential primaries last spring, Democratic officials said last night. Ending months of silence, former Senator Bill Bradley plans to appear alongside Vice President Al Gore next week to voice what Democratic officials described as his ''enthusiastic support'' for the man who trounced him in the bitterly contested Democratic presidential primaries last spring, Democratic officials said last night. The appearance comes just as Mr. Gore is working hard to unify the party in time for the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles next month, the event many Democrats are counting on to give his campaign a lift going into the home stretch this fall. In recent days, Mr. Gore has been trying to energize the Democratic base in his public appearances by using such tactics as attacking the oil and pharmaceutical industries. Smoothing things over with Mr. Bradley would be an important step in energizing the party, many Democrats say. A cloud of bitterness has hung over the relationship between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bradley since Mr. Bradley quit the race in March without having carried a single state. Some Democrats contend that friction has hurt Mr. Gore's ability to present a united front for the party. Mr. Bradley was furious with what he considered Mr. Gore's dishonest attacks on his campaign agenda, particularly his proposal for universal health care. At the news conference where he announced his withdrawal from the race, Mr. Bradley said he would support the vice president, but he refused to use the word ''endorse.'' He also said he would not release the roughly 400 delegates he had won until the party's convention, raising the possibility that he might start policy fights with the vice president's camp. And he chided Mr. Gore for a hard-edged campaign style, a criticism the Republicans have repeatedly echoed in recent months. ''I hope that he'll run a better campaign in the general election,'' Mr. Bradley said of Mr. Gore at the time. Mr. Bradley's unequivocal support could help take the edge off Republican assertions that Mr. Gore is a dirty fighter and dishonest politician who will do or say whatever it takes to win. And because Mr. Bradley received much support from Republicans and independents, he could help Mr. Gore woo swing voters who are likely to determine the outcome in closely contested states. Discussions about when Mr. Bradley would campaign with Mr. Gore had been going on for several months, primarily between Tony Coelho, the former head of the Gore campaign, and John Roos, a fund-raiser and confidant to Mr. Bradley. William M. Daley, who replaced Mr. Coelho and has a good relationship with Mr. Bradley, picked up the negotiations when Mr. Coelho quit last month. With Mr. Gore starting to draw starker contrasts between himself and his expected Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, this seemed like the right time for the two former rivals to appear together, an aide to Mr. Gore said. ''We're beginning to ramp into the convention,'' he said. ''It's a good time for all Democrats to come together and focus on the task at hand. The differences between Gore and Bradley are minuscule compared to the miles of differences between them and George W. Bush.'' The aide continued, ''Both Gore and Bradley were in favor of improving our health care system, and George W. Bush has not offered anything of substance.''
 Tiger trainer and retired circus star Gunther Gebel-Williams has had cancerous brain tumor removed; Texas barbecue impresario Don Strange, in New York to open temporary barbecue beachhead at Rock Center Cafe, comments on painted cows arrayed in Rockefeller Center as part of citywide art event called Cow Parade 2000; Theoni V Aldredge, who designed costumes for 1960 production of Gore Vidal's play The Best Man, is designing costumes for play's 40th anniversary revival; photos (M)
 But at times, the intersection of health and politics has been less than smooth: when Geri Barish, the executive director of Hewlett House, made a radio commercial for George W. Bush this year, it did not sit well with some people. Soon afterward, Democrats moved to cut her county salary, which was part of their payroll, saying she should be paid by the Health Department. Last week, County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, said he would find money for her somewhere in the county budget.
 ''Goblet'' is even longer than ''Acheson: The Secretary of State Who Created the American World,'' the book George W. Bush started carrying around last year when questions arose about his intellectual firepower. (It is doubtful that Mr. Bush read any 752-page novels in his youth. When asked to name his favorite childhood book, he once mentioned ''The Willie Mays Story,'' which he later admitted was not actually a book. His other responses have included his fourth-grade history text and ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar,'' which was written the year after he graduated from Yale.)
 Gore Hits Bush on Medicare; Bradley to Offer His Support  Vice President Al Gore sharply contrasted his Medicare proposals with those of Gov. George W. Bush. Democratic officials said Bill Bradley would offer Mr. Gore his ''enthusiastic support'' next week. PAGE A14
 Bradley to Appear With Gore  Bill Bradley plans to appear with Vice President Al Gore next week to show support for the man who trounced him in the Democratic primaries, party officials said. Mr. Gore, speaking to an audience of elderly people, drew a sharp contrast between his Medicare proposals and those of Gov. George W. Bush.
 Mr. Huang, in an appearance before a House committee investigating campaign finance issues, testified that he knew of no wrongdoing by Mr. Clinton or Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Huang said Mr. Riady told him about a 10-minute limousine ride that Mr. Riady shared with President Clinton in the 1992 campaign.
 A CHANGE IN VACATION PLANS  While political operatives and journalists fish for information about the status of Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma in the Republican vice-presidential sweepstakes, Mr. Keating is actually set to go fishing in Alaska next week. And it turns out that he was supposed to have been accompanied by the man charged with helping Gov. George W. Bush of Texas select a running mate, former Defense Secretary Richard B. Cheney. A few days ago, Mr. Keating called Mr. Cheney and offered to stay home, lest their trip set too many tongues to wagging. But Mr. Cheney had already decided he was too busy to go. Even so, the initial arrangements for the trip, made before Mr. Cheney had assumed his role in the Bush campaign, demonstrated the many connections and long friendship between Mr. Cheney and Mr. Keating. Mr. Cheney has other Oklahoma ties: he is chief executive of the Halliburton Company, a Texas-based energy company that has operations in Oklahoma; and he was the national fund-raising chairman for the memorial in Oklahoma City for the victims of the 1995 bombing there. A CHANGE IN VACATION PLANS  While political operatives and journalists fish for information about the status of Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma in the Republican vice-presidential sweepstakes, Mr. Keating is actually set to go fishing in Alaska next week. And it turns out that he was supposed to have been accompanied by the man charged with helping Gov. George W. Bush of Texas select a running mate, former Defense Secretary Richard B. Cheney. A few days ago, Mr. Keating called Mr. Cheney and offered to stay home, lest their trip set too many tongues to wagging. But Mr. Cheney had already decided he was too busy to go. Even so, the initial arrangements for the trip, made before Mr. Cheney had assumed his role in the Bush campaign, demonstrated the many connections and long friendship between Mr. Cheney and Mr. Keating. Mr. Cheney has other Oklahoma ties: he is chief executive of the Halliburton Company, a Texas-based energy company that has operations in Oklahoma; and he was the national fund-raising chairman for the memorial in Oklahoma City for the victims of the 1995 bombing there. DIVERSITY ON THE DAIS  In an effort to emphasize diversity, the Republican National Committee has picked three members of Congress -- a Hispanic, an African-American and a woman -- for leadership roles at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia. They are Representatives Henry Bonilla of Texas, J. C. Watts of Oklahoma and Jennifer Dunn of Washington. Each will help preside over the convention and deliver a speech. While the Bush campaign said yesterday that the appointments symbolized Mr. Bush's desire for the party to become more inclusive, the Gore campaign dismissed the appointments as being more symbolic than substantial. Others named to leadership positions are Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, Senator Trent Lott, the majority leader, and Gov. George E. Pataki of New York.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, addressing senior citizens center outside Chicago, draws sharp contrast between his Medicare proposals and those of Gov George W Bush, branding Bush the candidate of powerful industries; Gore says he would devote $339 billion to shoring up Medicare during next decade and add a new prescription drug benefit for all beneficiaries; photo (M) Asking repeatedly ''Whose side are you on?,'' Vice President Al Gore today drew a sharp contrast between his Medicare proposals and those of Gov. George W. Bush. He branded Mr. Bush, his likely Republican opponent, the candidate of powerful industries. Mr. Gore lectured with charts and graphs at a suburban senior citizens'  center, seeking to put a debate over Medicare, the popular Great Society health insurance program for the elderly, at the forefront of the campaign agenda. Asking repeatedly ''Whose side are you on?,'' Vice President Al Gore today drew a sharp contrast between his Medicare proposals and those of Gov. George W. Bush. He branded Mr. Bush, his likely Republican opponent, the candidate of powerful industries. Mr. Gore lectured with charts and graphs at a suburban senior citizens'  center, seeking to put a debate over Medicare, the popular Great Society health insurance program for the elderly, at the forefront of the campaign agenda. He said he would devote $339 billion to shoring up the program during the next decade and adding a new prescription drug benefit for all Medicare beneficiaries. Mr. Bush, he said, had allotted ''not one dime in his proposal for extending, strengthening, adding to Medicare. Not a penny.'' Time and again, Mr. Gore directed pointed and detailed questions at Mr. Bush, who rarely talks about Medicare. The governor has put forward broad principles -- but little detail -- for creating more competition between private and public health plans to overhaul Medicare for the retirement of the baby boom generation. Turning to Medicare questions for which Mr. Bush has not provided specific answers, Mr. Gore asked whether Mr. Bush supported raising the eligibility age, or raising premiums, or sending more recipients to health maintenance organizations. ''If Medicare is important to you, these questions are something you should know the answer to,'' Mr. Gore told the audience of local elderly residents. ''And that's why the big pharmaceutical companies are supporting Governor Bush,'' Mr. Gore said. ''That's why the big oil companies are supporting Governor Bush. That's why the big polluters are supporting Governor Bush. That's why the H.M.O.'s and insurance companies are supporting Governor Bush.'' Today's debate about Medicare was a sign of a new stage in the Gore campaign. This spring he repeatedly denounced Mr. Bush's policy proposals as ''risky.'' Then he stepped back and detailed some new policy proposals of his own. Now he is trying to start drawing the contrasts between his own ideas and those of Mr. Bush. The Bush campaign for its part accused Mr. Gore of practicing the politics of class warfare. ''Governor Bush's campaign is focused on bringing people together, while Al Gore is trying to pit one group of Americans against another,'' a Bush spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said today. ''We always knew the latest version of Al Gore the positive wouldn't last long.'' The Bush campaign also called Mr. Gore and President Clinton obstacles to keeping Medicare solvent because last year all four of Mr. Clinton's appointees to a bipartisan, 17-member group opposed its chairman's ideas for overhauling the health care program. ''Al Gore's charts and graphs can't hide the fact that the Clinton-Gore administration opposed bipartisan Medicare reform and they submitted a budget to cut Medicare spending by $70 billion,'' said another Bush spokesman, Dan Bartlett, pointing to some savings Mr. Clinton had proposed for the program in his 2001 budget. Mr. Bush would not support those reductions, Mr. Bartlett said. But along with those savings, Mr. Clinton has also called for adding an expensive new prescription drug program. Mr. Gore's slightly different version of the proposal would cost $255 billion over a decade. Mr. Bush has criticized the Clinton administration for opposing the Breaux plan. And Mr. Bush's broad concepts generally mirror those of the majority on the commission. Mr. Gore has taken a different approach, shying away from the efforts to turn more of the program over to private insurers. He would use $40 billion of the expected budget surplus and $75 billion of savings in interest payments from paying down the national debt to extend the life of Medicare until 2030. He would also enact nearly $30 billion in savings. Mr. Gore told his audience today that he had opposed the Medicare commission's report because he felt it would raise the eligibility age, lead to higher premiums and push more people into H.M.O.'s. Mr. Bartlett, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said the governor supported the concepts of the Breaux commission. But he said Mr. Bush had not said where he stood on the eligibility age, and he said the governor did not believe that the Breaux plan would lead to premium increases. Mr. Bush has not set out his own Medicare plan but instead named six principles for change. He has said there should be no rise in payroll taxes. And he wants Medicare to offer every recipient a ''choice of plans including the option of purchasing a plan that covers prescription drugs.'' He has said Medicare must cover expenses for low-income elderly. His aides say Mr. Bush has earmarked $5 trillion over five years for shoring up Social Security and Medicare, including a provision for some kind of prescription drug benefit.
 Democratic Party opens public hearings on its platform in Chicago with tightly scripted display of party unity, hearing from a parade of witnesses who endorse Vice Pres Gore's positions on almost every major campaign issue (M) The Democratic Party opened public hearings on its platform here today with a tightly scripted display of party unity, hearing from a parade of witnesses who endorsed Vice President Al Gore's positions on almost every major campaign issue, including gun control, the economy, health care, education and the environment. The daylong hearing provided further evidence that Mr. Gore, who easily defeated former Senator Bill Bradley in the primaries, will not face the kind of bitter policy divisions that have bedeviled Democratic presidential nominees of the past. The Democratic Party opened public hearings on its platform here today with a tightly scripted display of party unity, hearing from a parade of witnesses who endorsed Vice President Al Gore's positions on almost every major campaign issue, including gun control, the economy, health care, education and the environment. The daylong hearing provided further evidence that Mr. Gore, who easily defeated former Senator Bill Bradley in the primaries, will not face the kind of bitter policy divisions that have bedeviled Democratic presidential nominees of the past. Democratic officials intend to release a draft of the platform on Friday. And they made it clear that they expected it to be a clear articulation of Mr. Gore's vision rather than the kind of ideological treatise he might feel compelled to run away from. Mary Leigh Blek, a registered Republican from Orange County, Calif., who helped organize the Million Mom March for gun control earlier this year, typified their tone. Ms. Blek, without explicitly endorsing Mr. Gore, complained that the leadership of the Republican Party had not heard the voices of mothers who want stronger gun laws.
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed article humourously proposes that since Vice Pres Gore's next, and maybe last, best chance to re-energize his presidential campaign will come with his selection of his vice-president, he should choose Bill Clinton as his running mate; says Clinton is still most popular, interesting and entertaining politician in country, and one who drives Republicans most crazy (M) With the Democratic Convention around the corner, I would like to join those offering advice to Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Gore's next, and maybe last, best chance to re-energize his campaign will come with his selection of his vice-presidential running mate, and I know whom he should choose. With the Democratic Convention around the corner, I would like to join those offering advice to Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Gore's next, and maybe last, best chance to re-energize his campaign will come with his selection of his vice-presidential running mate, and I know whom he should choose. No, really, think about it for a moment. Bill Clinton, with all his detractors, is still the most popular and interesting politician in the country, and he is a far better campaigner, debater and all-around politician than any of the no-name Democratic governors whose names have been bandied about as possible running mates for Mr. Gore. While many voters won't admit it, they would love to vote for Mr. Clinton again. He has kept us entertained in this age of microchips and markets, and there is no Democrat who drives Republicans more crazy. Without blinking an eye, he takes 50 percent of all the Republicans' best ideas and then accuses them of being extremists for wanting the other half. What other Democrat can get away with that? Think of what Mr. Clinton could do to energize the Gore campaign: He would certainly help Mr. Gore overcome his problem with women voters, and, have no doubt, Mr. Clinton, who knows every issue inside out, would destroy any Republican vice-presidential candidate in a debate. For that matter, Mr. Clinton could eat George W. Bush for breakfast in a debate and not even know he ate him. And, be honest, who does a funeral better than Bill Clinton? That's the vice president's most important task. Mr. Clinton also solves another problem. He's already had his background -- not to mention his body parts, body fluids and DNA -- checked by everyone from Paula Jones to the F.B.I. So Mr. Gore wouldn't have to worry about any surprises coming out of his closet -- like draft-dodging, pot-smoking, philandering or land speculating -- since the Clinton closet has already been opened and emptied twice over. How many potential vice-presidential candidates can say they've survived an impeachment inquiry? We're talking vetted here, folks. Though Mr. Clinton may be disbarred in Arkansas (isn't that an oxymoron?), he has never been convicted of anything. That should count for something. There is no question that Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton get along, so there are no worries there, and there is also no question that Mr. Clinton would love the job. First of all, he wouldn't have to move to that Potemkin house in New York but could spend four more years in government housing at the vice president's residence on Massachusetts Avenue. Second, it would give Mr. Clinton a job, now that he appears to be on the verge of losing his license to practice law. And being vice president has got to be more fun than being on the board of Disney. I mean, whom would you rather report to -- Al Gore or Michael Eisner?
