 But from that modest beginning came more precocious things. By his senior year at Harvard, Mr. Cherny was writing speeches for President Clinton. A week after graduation, he became a senior speech writer for Vice President Al Gore. At 23, he edited a big-thought magazine for the Democratic Leadership Council, the party's leading centrist organization. And at 24, he wrote a book describing the new politics of the new economy. As platform director, Mr. Cherny joins the ranks of other platform writers with silky prose and grand ideas who later became leading policy makers within the party. In 1984, it was Susan Estrich, who managed the 1988 Dukakis campaign. In 1992, it was Bruce Reed, now a top domestic policy adviser to Mr. Clinton. And in 1996, it was Mr. Reed and Elaine Kamarck, who is now policy director for the Gore campaign. Mr. Baer commissioned Mr. Cherny to write speeches for Mr. Clinton during his final semester at Harvard. After graduation, he moved to Washington to write for Mr. Gore, an author and former reporter whom Mr. Cherny found to be a perfectionist about language. And what if there is a Gore administration? Mr. Cherny says he wants to return to California, finish law school and become a criminal prosecutor. ''When the convention approves the platform, my job is done,'' he said. But the hesitation in his voice suggested that he senses this will not be his last stint in Washington.
 Democrats are unsettled, even gloomy, about outlook for Vice Pres Al Gore; Gov George Bush's supporters, while confident, concede it is too soon for Democrats to dispair (M) He may be Al Gore's most ardent booster, but President Clinton sounded rather tentative this week when he was asked about the vice president's prospects in November. ''It's still more likely than not that he will win,'' Mr. Clinton said. He may be Al Gore's most ardent booster, but President Clinton sounded rather tentative this week when he was asked about the vice president's prospects in November. ''It's still more likely than not that he will win,'' Mr. Clinton said. Once again this week, it seemed that Al Gore could not catch a break: One national poll even had him 13 points behind Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Gore found himself again confronted by questions over whether the Justice Department would investigate his fund-raising practices. And Ralph Nader was elected the nominee of the Green Party, leaving Democrats to fret that he would steal votes from Mr. Gore's base. All this occurred within days after Mr. Gore named a new campaign chairman. But even Bush loyalists concede that Democrats should not despair -- at least not yet. No one should underestimate Mr. Gore's potential political potency: Voters may, in the end, give him credit for helping preside over the longest economic expansion in the nation's history. He is a disciplined, if lackluster, campaigner who is known for performing best in adversity. He displayed that ability when he toppled former Senator Bill Bradley in the primaries. Now, he plans to zero in on Mr. Bush's support of a rather unpopular but enormous tax cut, as well as the governor's stands on Social Security and Medicare. Another advantage for Mr. Gore is that no one questions his competence to make decisions and to grasp issues -- and to understand how to navigate the often befuddling world of government and politics in Washington. If voters find they are not sufficiently confident of Mr. Bush's preparedness for the Oval Office -- or his heft on the issues -- they could turn to Mr. Gore by default. There is truth to the spin from the Gore camp that the public has yet to focus on the presidential race. In an ABC News/Washington Post poll conducted in mid-June, only 13 percent of expected voters said they were following the race very closely. The reality is that many voters may be waiting for the conventions or the fall debates to learn more about the contenders and settle on a choice. That could be a plus for Mr. Gore, who has far more extensive experience as a debater and is steeped much more deeply in national and international issues. (One danger is that the high expectations for Mr. Gore in debates could work against him if Mr. Bush performs unexpectedly -- and reassuringly -- well.) One of Mr. Gore's biggest problems is, simply, that voters seem to like Mr. Bush more and think the vice president is too politically calculating and relentlessly ambitious. But Gore aides said they hoped to turn that into a virtue by convincing voters that as president he would channel that determination and energy into his policy agenda. Another often neglected reality is that the race may be closer than it now looks. Despite Mr. Gore's troubles in winning over loyal Democrats, in the end the likelihood is that most Democrats will side with him and most Republicans will side with Mr. Bush, leaving the contest to turn on a relatively narrow swath of swing and independent voters. Rather than dwell on current polls, Democrats can take heart that in three of the last five presidential elections, the candidate behind in the polls at this point won in November: Ronald Reagan in 1980, George Bush in 1988 and Bill Clinton in 1992. It could be, of course, that Mr. Gore will never climb out of his rut in the polls and that the electorate has settled early on Mr. Bush. As one top Gore aide put it, voters ''might decide that they like the other guy better and that's that.'' In an interview on a flight from Cleveland to Austin, Tex., on Wednesday, Mr. Bush was careful not to be overconfident -- or to raise expectations for himself. ''He's a sitting vice president with an economy that seems like it's doing pretty well,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He's going to be very difficult to beat. I am not the favorite. Nor is he. I think it's going to be a very close race. I do.'' ''The polls that show Bush ahead are extremely soft and misleading,'' said Mike Murphy, who was a top strategist for the primary campaign of Senator John McCain. Referring to Medicare and Social Security, he said, ''Gore has a muddy bag full of ugly wedge issues and he knows how to use them. It's very possible that this race will snap back to near even after the conventions.'' ''The seminal events of this campaign have yet to occur,'' said Carter Eskew, one of Mr. Gore's closest advisers. ''There's been a lot of early auditioning, but the race has not been engaged. We continue to believe that this race is ultimately going to be over stewardship of the economy and stewardship of the prosperity.'' For all their public confidence, some Gore advisers privately worry that Mr. Gore should be far ahead in the polls right now -- not lagging -- given the robust economy and the fact that all seems well in the world. They are concerned that as Mr. Bush reaches out to moderates, Mr. Gore is still having trouble winning over reliable Democratic voters. At their weekly meeting, top campaign strategists in Nashville last week mulled over what could be going wrong. Everyone seemed to have a suggestion: Some aides concluded that Mr. Gore was coming off as too liberal and needed to be even more aggressively reaching out to moderates. But, participants said, there was also a discussion of what some strategists think is Mr. Gore's fundamental problem: that people do not seem to like him as much as they like Mr. Bush. Democrats may be uneasy, but they are not panicking because they can still make quite a plausible case for Mr. Gore. And the news media may be allies here: If the vice president demonstrates any glimmer of a comeback, he is bound to draw upbeat coverage (outsized perhaps) depicting him as on the rebound. That is because the news media, by nature, thrive on the dramatic -- and a comeback meets that standard. ''This is a very winnable race for him,'' said Fred Yang, a Democratic pollster. ''Bush still hasn't proven that he can take the heat. And Gore seems to shine the most when the pressure is on.'' Former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York said he was confident that both the healthy economy and Mr. Gore's deep command of issues would assure him victory. It is certainly true that on many of the most important issues, voters rate the Democrats more capable than Republicans. ''On the big policy issues, I think Gore wins,'' Mr. Cuomo said. ''By the time the debates are over, Bush is not going to be able to dominate on any of these issues. The obvious issue is: 'Didn't these people produce the biggest and best economy in modern history?' And Gore has an edge on the gravitas issue. It will be: 'Who is intelligent enough and who is competent enough to keep us going the way we've been going?' '' But some Republicans simply refuse to buy the possibility of a Gore triumph. ''There's very little that worries me about him,'' said Gov. John Engler of Michigan, who is working closely with the Bush campaign. ''He's going to put together a scorched-earth operation. And he's going to slash and burn.'' And Governor Bush, in a slip of the tongue, apparently was so confident at an event earlier this month that he dispensed with the formalities -- like the actual election. ''As president,'' he declared, ''I'm here in Knoxville, Tennessee, to tell America I'll set a new tone in Washington.''
 A reprint of recipes for Tipper Gore's Ginger Snaps and Laura Bush's Texas Governor's Mansion Cowboy Cookies, as originally run in Family Circle. A reprint of recipes for Tipper Gore's Ginger Snaps and Laura Bush's Texas Governor's Mansion Cowboy Cookies, as originally run in Family Circle.
 ''It is hard for me to figure out why administration officials, from President Clinton and Vice President Gore on down, keep insisting that they are interested in ousting Saddam and yet not one official of this administration has been willing to take even the most minimal steps towards that end,'' Senator Sam Brownback, a Republican from Kansas, said at a Senate subcommittee hearing on Wednesday that was attended by several opposition leaders. After meeting with the opponents on Monday, Vice President Al Gore voiced strong support for their goal. And late last week, officials said they were trying to schedule military training courses for as many of the 140 as possible, starting in the fall. The opponents' demands are being echoed by Republicans here and are turning Iraq into an issue in the presidential campaign between Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Bush has vowed to take a tough stand against Mr. Hussein, and some of his advisers have called for actively supporting the seizure of Iraqi territory.
 Gov. George Ryan says he never expected the national attention he has received for declaring a moratorium on the death penalty in Illinois. Mr. Ryan found himself in the media spotlight recently  as a counterexample to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who was presiding over his 135th execution in five years. Mr. Ryan is by no one's description a maverick. A pharmacist by training, he has spent nearly 30 years in state politics, first as a member of the Illinois Legislature, then as the Republican leader and speaker of the House, then for two terms as lieutenant governor and two terms as secretary of state, until he won election as governor in 1998. Gov. George Ryan says he never expected the national attention he has received for declaring a moratorium on the death penalty in Illinois. Mr. Ryan found himself in the media spotlight recently  as a counterexample to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who was presiding over his 135th execution in five years. Mr. Ryan is by no one's description a maverick. A pharmacist by training, he has spent nearly 30 years in state politics, first as a member of the Illinois Legislature, then as the Republican leader and speaker of the House, then for two terms as lieutenant governor and two terms as secretary of state, until he won election as governor in 1998. That high standard calls into question the record of other death penalty states. For death penalty supporters like Governor Bush and Vice President Al Gore, Mr. Ryan's cautious approach is a rebuke to their own blindness to the system's mistakes. He has instructed the nation on the only morally coherent position for supporters of capital punishment to take, and that is that no execution can go forward when there is abundant evidence that innocent people have been put on death row.
 Miles to Go in Campaign, Amid Gloom and Confidence  It is no secret that even with 130 days to go before the election, Democrats are unsettled, even gloomy, while Republicans are confident. Could the presidential race be over barely after it started? One national poll had Vice President Al Gore 13 points behind Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. But even Bush loyalists concede that Democrats should not despair -- at least not yet.
