 The group has been lining up support for eliminating the moratorium from senators like Kay Bailey Hutchison, Republican of Texas, and John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana. Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, who was a chief proponent of the ban when it was imposed in 1996, has signaled a softening in his stance. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the probable Republican presidential nominee, also favors individual quotas. ''This tool vests fishermen with an incentive to conserve the fishery, eliminates such bureaucratic restrictions as minimum size limits and season closings and reduces dangerous operating conditions,'' Mr. Bush wrote in an April 28 letter to Ms. Hutchison.
 Indeed, in Dr. Postol's view, Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen and Lt. Gen. Ronald T. Kadish, the head of the Pentagon's ballistic missile office, are ''technically illiterate'' about missile defense. Condoleezza Rice, the chief foreign policy adviser for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, is ''not interested in the truth.'' Leon S. Fuerth, the national security adviser for Vice President Al Gore, is ''uninformed and shows no interest in becoming informed.''
 That leaves no compelling reason for ordering construction other than the perception that doing so might shield Al Gore from Republican attack. Partisan political considerations should not drive such an important defense decision.
 National Governor's Assn holds 92 annual meeting, State College, Pa, amid air of partisanship; meeting is dominated by presidential politics; Republicans, who outnumber Democrats 2-1, are upbeat; say Gov George W Bush is shoo-in to win presidential election in November; photo (M) At every opportunity, they boasted that one of their own, George W. Bush of Texas, was a shoo-in to win this year's presidential race. At every opportunity, they boasted that one of their own, George W. Bush of Texas, was a shoo-in to win this year's presidential race. Democrats, not to be outdone, insisted that Vice President Al Gore would turn things around once the nominating conventions are over later this summer and voters are able to focus on the fall election. So confident was the Bush campaign that it did not send an envoy to brief Republicans -- neither Mr. Bush nor his brother Jeb, the governor of Florida, made an appearance. Mr. Gore sent William M. Daley, his new campaign manager, to reassure and assuage Democrats. Why would the post-convention focus improve Mr. Gore's standing, when 9 out of 10 national polls have had him trailing Mr. Bush by 5 to 10 points for several months? ''The voters are with us,'' he said, ''and when people focus on what they want, Al Gore will win.'' Did the Democratic governors, by predicting a post-convention collapse of the Bush campaign, see a parallel with the 1988 campaign of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts? Mr. Dukakis, a Democrat, led Governor Bush's father by a substantial margin for months but faltered after the conventions. ''I wouldn't necessarily say that,'' replied Gov. James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina, a Democrat. ''What I do say is that when people finally focus on what counts and what they want, Al Gore will be president.'' Gov. Parris N. Glendening of Maryland, a Democrat, argued that Mr. Gore would win not only because of his stands on the issues but also because he was a ''proven leader,'' experienced in handling both domestic and foreign issues. ''Contrast that to the less-than-stellar performance and experience of George W. Bush,'' Mr. Glendening said. If there was any anti-Bush argument that hit home with Republicans, the assertion that Mr. Bush was not up to handling the White House job was it. They devoted most of an hourlong news conference to arguing otherwise. Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, prominently mentioned as a possible  running mate for Mr. Bush, said the Texas governor was an experienced leader because he had served as chief executive of one of the nation's largest states and understood how to ''practice the politics of what works.'' Mr. Gore does not understand that governing principle, Mr. Ridge added, because he has never been in an executive position. On the issue of supplying pharmaceuticals to the elderly and poor, Mr. Ridge said, Mr. Gore sees it as ''you're either for the drug companies or for senior citizens.'' First, the general was asked again whether he would accept an offer to be Mr. Bush's running mate or possibly run for president himself at some point, given his popularity with Republicans and Democrats alike.
 The Republican candidate for Senate, Rick A. Lazio, represents Suffolk County, on the state's eastern stretch of suburban life, Long Island. The Democrat, Hillary Rodham Clinton, moved from the White House to Chappaqua, in suburban Westchester. And the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush, is running as a social moderate and fiscal conservative -- in other words, he's positioned himself as the candidate of suburbia. FOR instance, the city vote remains solidly Democratic, but now that it accounts for as little as 29 percent of the statewide vote (down from 41 percent in 1960), Mrs. Clinton and Al Gore will need to do well upstate and in the suburbs even if they get overwhelming support in the city.
 Debate over tax cuts shifts from whether to what kinds, with projections of federal budget surplus rising and Democrats and Republicans in election-year mode; Republicans continue pressing for bigger reductions than most Democrats will support, but Democrats are joining them in backing cuts to greater degree than year or even six months ago; recent break with party ranks by nearly third of House Democrats to repeal federal estate tax noted; Vice Pres Al Gore's doubling of proposed tax-cutting package to $500 billion over 10 years, moving him closer to $1.3 trillion offered by Republicans, cited; recent announcement by Pres Clinton that he would agree to $250 billion, 10-year tax-cut for married couples on Republican terms if Congress passes bill to add prescription drug coverage to Medicare noted; likely outcome of Senate vote to repeal federal estate tax and to reduce taxes on nearly all married couples discussed (M) Vice President Al Gore doubled his proposed tax-cutting package a few weeks ago, to $500 billion over 10 years, moving him closer to the $1.3 trillion plan offered by his Republican rival for the presidency, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Democrats generally remain solidly opposed to broad-based tax-cutting packages of the type proposed by Mr. Bush in his presidential campaign.
 For that reason, several advisers to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, are urging him to support a system that edges back toward President Ronald Reagan's ''Star Wars'' dreams rather than President Clinton's limited defense. Mr. Clinton's plan, one of Mr. Bush's advisers said, was designed to ''come up with the smallest possible program to meet the standard, and it never had a strategic context.'' It was chiefly intended, he argued, to protect Vice President Al Gore from the charge of being too soft on defense.
