 Republican National Committee campaign advertisement reiterating Gov George W Bush's broad goals for education assessed; photo (M) Resuming its advertising campaign on behalf of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas after a brief hiatus, the Republican National Committee has begun running a 30-second commercial reiterating Mr. Bush's broad goals for education. For the new spot, California, Nevada and New Hampshire have been added to 17 other states, from the Pacific Northwest to New England, where the Republicans have been buying commercial time. ON THE SCREEN -- Mr. Bush, in an open-necked shirt, speaks directly into the camera. His voice and that of an announcer provide the narrative for a montage of portraits of schoolchildren that includes shots of Mr. Bush mingling with students in classrooms and at school functions. Resuming its advertising campaign on behalf of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas after a brief hiatus, the Republican National Committee has begun running a 30-second commercial reiterating Mr. Bush's broad goals for education. For the new spot, California, Nevada and New Hampshire have been added to 17 other states, from the Pacific Northwest to New England, where the Republicans have been buying commercial time. ON THE SCREEN -- Mr. Bush, in an open-necked shirt, speaks directly into the camera. His voice and that of an announcer provide the narrative for a montage of portraits of schoolchildren that includes shots of Mr. Bush mingling with students in classrooms and at school functions. SCRIPT -- Mr. Bush: If we really want to make sure no child gets left behind in America, we need the courage to raise standards in our schools. We need more accountability and more discipline. And we need to stop promoting failing children to the next grade and giving up on them. Announcer: George Bush raised standards. Tests scores soared. Texas leads the country in academic improvement. Mr. Bush: It's easy just to spend more. Let's start by expecting more. Announcer: Learn more about the Bush blueprint for accountability, high standards and local control. ACCURACY -- Raising educational standards was one of the first issues the governor staked out during the primaries, and he has augmented his advocacy with a series of proposals to increase federal education spending, including a $2.3 billion plan to strengthen math and science education and $2.9 billion to upgrade teacher training. The reference to improvements in standards and pupil performance in Texas is based partly on the results of the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills test. The campaign says that average scores have improved in each of the last four years and that the percentage of minority students who have passed the test rose to 69 percent in 1999 from 38 percent in 1994. The Gore campaign, however, challenged Mr. Bush's record, contending that Texas's average SAT scores remain among the lowest in the country and that some children's rights groups rank the state near the bottom as a place to raise a family. SCORECARD -- This issue advertisement, paid for in part with the soft money donated to the parties in unrestricted amounts, is supposed to refrain from electioneering. But like all of the spots that the Democratic and Republican parties are running this year, it does not try to disguise its intention to convince people to vote for Mr. Bush. Like many of the advertisements produced by the Bush campaign, the party's commercial spotlights the affable candidate, espousing the values he has labeled compassionate conservatism. The script is filled with words like ''courage,'' ''discipline'' and ''standards,'' all meant to convey a highly moral core to a benevolent policy.
 Mr. Giuliani also took time yesterday to dampen speculation that he might run for governor in 2002, saying, ''I am not thinking about the governorship.'' Since the mayor dropped out of the Senate race, citing his prostate cancer diagnosis two months ago, he has insisted that he wants to enjoy his remaining 17 months as mayor. He also told reporters yesterday that he had no interest in the job of United States attorney general if George W. Bush were  elected president.
 Editorial urges Gov George W Bush to stand up to Republican Party's militant right wing and select vice presidential running mate who is pro-choice on abortion issue; sees move strengthening ticket with suburban moderates The conventional wisdom that the Republican ticket can never include a pro-choice vice-presidential candidate seems to be eroding. That is a good sign for the party's long-ignored moderate wing and for those who would like to see the Northeast play a stronger role in the G.O.P. The party's expected nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, ought to look closely at this chance to show that he has the spine to stand up to the intimidators from the religious right, a faction that exerted an outsized influence during his father's administration. By selecting a pro-choice running mate, Mr. Bush would also be pulling the party more into alignment with suburban moderates who in numerical terms are more important to the G.O.P. than the anti-abortion movement. As Richard Berke reported in The Times, most lists of pro-choice running mates include Governors Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and George Pataki of New York. The presidential nominee's brother Jeb Bush, who is governor of Florida, said he was dreaming of a ticket with Gen. Colin Powell, who is pro-choice. Such is General Powell's popularity that his selection would silence all but the most militant pro-lifers. The conventional wisdom that the Republican ticket can never include a pro-choice vice-presidential candidate seems to be eroding. That is a good sign for the party's long-ignored moderate wing and for those who would like to see the Northeast play a stronger role in the G.O.P. The party's expected nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, ought to look closely at this chance to show that he has the spine to stand up to the intimidators from the religious right, a faction that exerted an outsized influence during his father's administration. By selecting a pro-choice running mate, Mr. Bush would also be pulling the party more into alignment with suburban moderates who in numerical terms are more important to the G.O.P. than the anti-abortion movement. As Richard Berke reported in The Times, most lists of pro-choice running mates include Governors Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and George Pataki of New York. The presidential nominee's brother Jeb Bush, who is governor of Florida, said he was dreaming of a ticket with Gen. Colin Powell, who is pro-choice. Such is General Powell's popularity that his selection would silence all but the most militant pro-lifers. No doubt Mr. Bush will hear warnings that anti-abortion forces could desert the party and even disrupt the convention if he defies them. Bolder advisers might argue that in his recent appearances, including his visit to the N.A.A.C.P. convention, Mr. Bush has attempted to reach beyond normal Republican territory. His political statements on education and Social Security also show Mr. Bush attempting to label himself as a more flexible and independent-minded kind of Republican. A pro-choice running mate would reassure swing voters who worry that Governor Bush is a pleasant man with a secret hard-line agenda. Such voters would surely be impressed if Mr. Bush could get Pat Robertson and others in the Christian right to hold still for a running mate with some pro-choice credentials.
 Rep Dan Burton urges Justice Department to question Vice Pres Al Gore about remark he made on videotape of Dec 1995 White House fund-raising event; tape shows both Pres Clinton and Gore and contains two apparent references to James T Riady, Indonesian businessman who did not attend event but whose large contributions to Democratic Party are subject of federal probe of campaign finance abuses; Burton's investigators say it was Gore who was taped, but not shown, mentioning Riady to Arief Wiriadinata, who illegally contributed $455,000 to Democrats (M) Representative Dan Burton urged Justice Department lawyers today to question Vice President Al Gore about a remark that he made on a videotape of a White House coffee in December 1995. The videotape is sensitive because it shows both President Clinton and Mr. Gore and contains two apparent references to James T. Riady, an Indonesian businessman who did not attend the coffee but whose large contributions to the Democratic Party are the subject of a federal investigation of campaign finance abuses. Representative Dan Burton urged Justice Department lawyers today to question Vice President Al Gore about a remark that he made on a videotape of a White House coffee in December 1995. The videotape is sensitive because it shows both President Clinton and Mr. Gore and contains two apparent references to James T. Riady, an Indonesian businessman who did not attend the coffee but whose large contributions to the Democratic Party are the subject of a federal investigation of campaign finance abuses. On the tape of the event, which took place on Dec. 15, 1995, in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, Mr. Gore addresses Arief Wiriadinata, an Indonesian gardener who illegally contributed $455,000 to the Democratic Party earlier that year, Mr. Burton's investigators said. The vice president apparently mentions Mr. Riady, the investigators said. Mr. Gore is heard telling Mr. Wiriadinata that political issue television advertisements, paid for by large contributors to the Democratic Party, should be shown to Mr. Riady, Mr. Burton's investigators said. Mr. Riady did not contribute any money to the Democrats in either 1995 or 1996. Mr. Gore is not seen on the tape saying those words, but Mr. Burton and committee staff's lawyers have concluded that it is the vice president's voice. ''Given the vice president's apparent location in the room, and the apparent location of Mr. Wiriadinata, it is a reasonable assumption that Vice President Gore was making this suggestion to Mr. Wiriadinata,'' Mr. Burton wrote today in a five-page letter on the subject to Attorney General Janet Reno. ''It would indeed be extraordinary for the vice president to suggest showing political issue advertisements to an Indonesian billionaire who lives in Jakarta, Indonesia.'' Jim Kennedy, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said, ''Wait until Dan Burton finds out that when you play the tape backwards it says, 'Paul is dead.' '' Mr. Burton, an Indiana Republican, is the chairman of the House Committee on Government Reform, which has investigated campaign finance abuses since 1997 and has had the videotape since late that year. It was unclear why the committee is pursuing the issue of Mr. Gore's comment now, but Mr. Burton intends to ask several witnesses about the matter at a hearing scheduled for Thursday. Last week the committee's investigators subpoenaed the original of the videotape from the White House and reviewed it on Monday at the F.B.I. laboratory in Quantico, Va., to ensure the accuracy of the words attributed to Mr. Gore. Committee investigators say the vice president's remark raises a question about what he may have known about any relationship between Mr. Wiriadinata and Mr. Riady. The committee referred the videotape to the Justice Department last December, but Mr. Gore was not asked about it during his interview with federal investigators last April 19 or in four previous interviews. A White House official said that, after listening to the tape, aides to Mr. Gore were not convinced that Mr. Riady's name was used by the vice president. ''People say the V.P. is using a two-syllable name, like Dotty or Godfrey, and not a five-syllable phrase like Mr. Riady,'' the official said. Earlier, the official suggested more definitively that Mr. Gore had used the name ''Godfrey'' during the remark. A Houston lawyer, Lee Godfrey, had attended the same coffee. In April, Mr. Gore told investigators that he had seen Mr. Riady only ''twice in my life.'' The first time was during a trip to Malaysia, and the second time was ''when he was in Betty Currie's office preparing to go in to see the president with a couple of other people.'' Mr. Burton suggests seven questions for Ms. Reno's investigators to ask Mr. Gore about the incident. One of them is: ''If the vice president made a suggestion about showing tapes to Mr. Riady, what did he know about Mr. Riady that would lead him to make this suggestion in the presence of Mr. Wiriadinata?''
 Why Mr. Torricelli chose this time to enter the race is also up for debate, although he has been interested in the office for years. Those who have spoken to Mr. Torricelli say he is looking ahead to November and calculating that Vice President Al Gore will lose the presidential race.  That would make him eager to leave Washington and run for governor, they say. And, better to signal his interest now than to spring it on Mr. McGreevey and the rest of the party after the election results are in.
 Critics of Mr. Buchanan say his vision of the Reform Party would, in effect, pick up where the Christian Coalition left off, but his mission could receive substantial lifts in the months ahead. His efforts, for example, would no doubt be aided if Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the all-but-named Republican nominee, chose a running mate who favored abortion rights, alienating staunchly conservative Republicans.
 AL GORE and George W. Bush talk a lot about education in the presidential campaign. Yet the federal role in education seems minor, 7 percent of school budgets. Are the candidates misleading the voters? AL GORE and George W. Bush talk a lot about education in the presidential campaign. Yet the federal role in education seems minor, 7 percent of school budgets. Are the candidates misleading the voters? Mr. Clinton's strategy took shape prior to the 1992 election. As Arkansas governor, he tried to influence President George Bush's education policy. In 1989, representing the governors, Mr. Clinton negotiated with Mr. Bush's domestic policy aides to establish ''Goals 2000,'' a call for higher standards. In negotiations with President Bush's staff, Governor Clinton fruitlessly sought financing to get poor children more ready to learn. In a joint press conference, Mr. Bush and the governors agreed that added money was desirable but said, ''We understand the limits imposed on new spending by the Federal deficit.''
 Mr. Cuomo's and Mr. Pataki's offices did not return calls today seeking comment. Mr. Cuomo has said he might run for governor, though there has been talk of his taking another high-level Washington job if Vice President Al Gore wins the presidency. Mr. Cuomo has said that plenty of time remains for him to decide about 2002 and that he is perplexed by Mr. McCall's early start.
 Vice Pres Al Gore takes his presidential campaign to Memphis to highlight his crime prevention package, including call for constitutional amendment opposed by Clinton administration that would guarantee certain rights to crime victims; Sens Jon Kyl and Dianne Feinstein, who sponsored such an amendment, cite Gore's failure to back it in past; photo (M) Ms. Johnson was one of more than a dozen victims, relatives of victims and law enforcement officers who told their stories today to Vice President Al Gore as he sought to highlight a package on crime prevention that he is proposing in his presidential campaign. In addition, the amendment Mr. Gore proposes would give victims the right to be heard at sentencing, the right to be included in any public proceedings related to the crime, the right to restitution from a convicted offender and the right to a trial without unreasonable delay. ''The accused criminals have all kinds of rights, and we all understand why that is important,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But here is the point: When those rights are enshrined in the Constitution and the rights of victims are not, whenever the two come into any kind of a conflict, it is not even a close contest. The victims are put in the back seat and sometimes even ignored.'' The amendment, part of the victims' bill of rights that Mr. Gore proposed today, would allow victims to leave work to attend legal proceedings, much the way jurors are excused from work. Mr. Gore said his measure would cost $685 million over 10 years and would be paid for with money from the projected budget surplus. Senator Jon Kyl, the Arizona Republican who, with Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, has sponsored such an amendment, said in a conference call with reporters today that Mr. Gore had ''been AWOL from this fight.'' The briefing by Mr. Kyl, who said he was irked that Mr. Gore was trying to get credit for something that the administration had blocked, was arranged by the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. The senator said the administration had insisted that the rights of criminals would never be ''subservient'' to the rights of victims. ''They basically said that in the case of a tie the defendant always had to win,'' Mr. Kyl said. ''It bothers me now that Al Gore is trying to use this politically and in a fraudulent way, because he's never been helpful.'' Being tough on crime is a central piece of the New Democrat approach to policy that Mr. Gore -- and President Clinton, for that matter -- has long embraced. Both support the death penalty. ''I want to be a law enforcement president,'' Mr. Gore said today. The Democratic National Committee began running a television commercial last week in 17 states that shows Mr. Gore promoting the constitutional amendment and victims' rights. He says, among other things, that victims should have the right to speak at the trial of the accused. Years ago, Mr. Gore supported another proposed constitutional amendment, the Equal Rights Amendment. He was not in Congress when that amendment was passed in 1972, but, after the states failed to ratify it, he did vote in 1983 for the amendment to be revived. ''I've always been very reluctant to support a constitutional amendment,'' Mr. Gore told the victims who were gathered here at Rhodes College today by the Gore campaign. ''I think that our founders did a great job, but they anticipated that there would be times when we would have to amend their handiwork, and this is one such time. I feel very strongly about it.''
 More Scrutiny for Gore  Representative Dan Burton urged Justice Department lawyers to question Vice President Al Gore about a remark that he made on a videotape of a White House coffee in December 1995. Editorials: A pro-choice chance for Mr. Bush; cell phones and safety; the struggle over certified teachers; leaving environmental law alone.
 Correction of July 18 article, which misstated results of USA Today/CNN Gallup poll on presidential race in some copies: Gov George W Bush led Vice Pres Al Gore 48 percent to 46 percent in 2-way race Because of an editing error, a report in the Campaign Briefing column yesterday about a USA Today/ CNN Gallup poll on the presidential race misstated the results in some copies. In a two-way competition, Gov. George W. Bush led Vice President Al Gore 48 percent to 46 percent. (The figures 45 percent and 43 percent were their showings in a four-way competition that included Ralph Nader and Pat Buchanan.) Because of an editing error, a report in the Campaign Briefing column yesterday about a USA Today/ CNN Gallup poll on the presidential race misstated the results in some copies. In a two-way competition, Gov. George W. Bush led Vice President Al Gore 48 percent to 46 percent. (The figures 45 percent and 43 percent were their showings in a four-way competition that included Ralph Nader and Pat Buchanan.)
 Maybe the Republicans aren't in fact suggesting that we should forgo the chance of peace in the Middle East because it might force George W. Bush to cut taxes by only $1.26 trillion instead of $1.3 trillion. But they are, quite deliberately, encouraging American voters in the delusion that we are being excessively generous to the world. And in so doing they are indeed making a trade-off -- not the pretended trade-off of foreign aid for Social Security, but a very real trade-off of foreign lives for American votes.
 Rep Richard A Gephardt seemingly takes self off list of possibilities for Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate, news conference; leaves door open slightly (M) Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri today took himself off the list of possibilities for Vice President Al Gore's running mate. Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri today took himself off the list of possibilities for Vice President Al Gore's running mate. At a news conference called to discuss tax bills, Mr. Gephardt, who has been courted by the Gore camp in recent weeks, said his priority was to stay put as the Democratic leader -- and lead his party to retake control of the House. (And, he hopes, become the next speaker.) But, even as his aides insisted he had no interest in a spot on the ticket, Mr. Gephardt left the door slightly ajar, a point that was noticed by Gore aides. Pressed at another point to ''say more firmly'' that he would not join the ticket, he said: ''Well, I'm for Al Gore. You know that. I have supported him from the beginning of this campaign, almost. And I think he'd make a great president of this country. And I hope that he wins.'' Mr. Gephardt -- who had considered taking Mr. Gore on in the primaries this year -- emphasized that his heart is on Capitol Hill. That said, voters should be reminded of what a senator from Tennessee named Al Gore told Larry King on CNN in February 1992: ''I have no interest in being vice president of the United States.'' William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, explained the feint: ''People who say, 'I have a much more important job. I'm in the United States Senate.' Give me a break!'' Mr. Daley said in an interview before he was plucked from Mr. Clinton's cabinet to run the campaign. ''This is the second most important job in the nation.''
 Hillary Rodham Clinton presents her plan to extend health insurance to millions of Americans, including 1.1 million New Yorkers; plan hews closely to one proposed by Vice President Al Gore and could not be further in details and scope from ill-fated program she helped mastermind in early 1990's; would expand existing government program to insure children by loosening eligibility requirements and giving poor adults similar benefits (M) Hillary Rodham Clinton presented her plan yesterday to extend health insurance to millions of Americans, including 1.1 million New Yorkers. Her plan, which hews closely to the one proposed by Vice President Al Gore, could not be further in details and scope from the ill-fated program she helped to mastermind in the early 1990's. Hillary Rodham Clinton presented her plan yesterday to extend health insurance to millions of Americans, including 1.1 million New Yorkers. Her plan, which hews closely to the one proposed by Vice President Al Gore, could not be further in details and scope from the ill-fated program she helped to mastermind in the early 1990's. Mr. Gore has made similar proposals. His and Mrs. Clinton's plans differ mostly in their generosity. Her  proposals for establishing eligibility are a bit more lenient.
 An ally and longtime friend of former President George Bush, Mr. Coverdell was the chief liaison in the Senate to the presidential campaign of Mr. Bush's son, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''Paul's soft-spoken, hard-working ways will be sorely missed by all of us who knew him and loved him,'' Governor Bush said in a statement released through his campaign office. It was during this time that he first met President Bush, who was then United States delegate to the United Nations, and the encounter led to a lifelong friendship. Mr. Coverdell was a frequent visitor to Kennebunkport, Me., Mr. Bush's vacation home, despite his professed incompetence on the links and aboard a fishing boat. ''I'm not a golfer,'' he said during a recent interview. ''And I tangled up his fishing reel.'' In a statement today, former President Bush said, ''Paul Coverdell was one of the kindest and most decent men I met in my entire life.'' He served as state chairman for the Georgia Republican Party from 1985 to 1987. In 1989, one year after Mr. Bush was elected, Senator Coverdell was rewarded for his loyalty and was named director of the Peace Corps, a position which cemented his interest in foreign affairs. Last year, his loyalty to the Bush family led to his selection as Senate liaison to Governor Bush's campaign.
 Gov George W Bush extolls importance of fatherhood and proposes program to coax fathers toward responsibility, panel discussion, Milwaukee; plan would let federal money go to groups that use religion in their efforts to unite fathers with their families; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush extolled the importance of fatherhood today, lamenting the prevalence of children growing up without the guidance of both parents and saying he would direct the federal government to spend more money to coax fathers toward responsibility. Gov. George W. Bush extolled the importance of fatherhood today, lamenting the prevalence of children growing up without the guidance of both parents and saying he would direct the federal government to spend more money to coax fathers toward responsibility. But part of Mr. Bush's prescription, allowing the money to go to groups that use religion in their efforts to unite fathers with their families, illustrated a philosophy that has raised questions about the separation of church and state. Mr. Bush talked about this approach during a panel discussion at a private agency in Milwaukee, Faith Works, which incorporates religion into its efforts to rehabilitate fathers with drug and alcohol problems and guide them into schools and jobs. ''Faith does work,'' Mr. Bush said in Milwaukee this morning, before he headed here for several campaign events. ''It's a powerful concept. It's not a government concept, by the way. It recognizes that there are powers greater than mankind.'' Mr. Bush also said that while the federal government should do its part to help finance such efforts it should recognize ''programs that exist in spite of government, that help people who may be coming out of prison, to help them find work, but also remind folks of the importance of being a dad.'' A description of Mr. Bush's proposed policy distributed by his campaign aides said that most of the money would be directed by the federal Department of Health and Human Services toward groups, including those affiliated with churches, that help low-income fathers find work and promote being responsible parents. Mr. Bush's proposal and the setting in which he unveiled it, an inner-city agency that serves many African-Americans, were intended to bolster his portrayal of himself as a different kind of Republican with special concern for underprivileged people. The event also underscored the occasional exhortations by Mr. Bush, who considers himself a devout Christian, for Americans to rediscover the benefits of more traditional mores. So did the words of one of the other panelists. Vice President Al Gore has also advocated a role for religious organizations in providing social services, with certain caveats. But he has not pushed this approach as aggressively as Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush left Milwaukee and arrived here around midday to address the National Conference of State Legislatures. Later, Mr. Bush attended a dinner here that was expected to raise about $3 million for the Republican Party.
 GORE TRAILS BUSH IN ARKANSAS  Bill Clinton and Al Gore carried Mr. Clinton's home state of Arkansas by comfortable margins in 1992 and 1996. But a new Mason-Dixon poll conducted for The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette raises some doubts whether Mr. Gore can continue the streak. It has Gov. George W. Bush of Texas ahead 46 percent to 40 percent, with 11 percent undecided. ''A very disconcerting poll for Democrats,'' crowed Mr. Bush's Arkansas chairman, Senator Tim Hutchinson. Mr. Gore's chairman, state Attorney General Mark Pryor, countered: ''It's encouraging for Gore because most of the undecided voters will back him.'' The poll, conducted July 13 through 15, covered 622 likely voters and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.
 Sen John McCain, who has been busy on campaign trail on behalf of host of Congressional candidates since abandoning his presidential race in Mar, plans to lead his old campaign team and some 60 journalists to Republican National Convention; holds wide range of activities he plans for convention are not aimed at overshadowing what he holds is clearly Gov George W Bush's event, interview; Bush's advisers hold McCain's star power will benefit Bush by drawing attention of independent voters (M) ''I'm trying very hard not in any way to offend any of the Bush people or overshadow what is clearly Governor Bush's event,'' Mr. McCain said in an interview Monday at his Senate office, where he arrived illuminated by a CNN camera light. Advisers to Gov. George W. Bush profess not to be offended in the slightest. They say that Mr. McCain's star power can now only benefit them, by drawing the attention of independent voters. If there is to be any dissent at the convention, which begins on July 31, it is not likely to come from the scrappy Arizonan who used to say of Governor Bush that ''if he's a reformer, I'm an astronaut.'' Mr. McCain said that even when he appeared in Philadelphia on July 30 at a planned ''shadow convention,'' which will also feature antagonists of the right like the comedian Al Franken, he will promote Mr. Bush as devoted to ''reform of education, of the military, of our strategic posture nuclear-weapons-wise, health care, etc.'' Though they have spoken a few times by telephone, Governor Bush and Senator McCain have not appeared together since May 9, when Mr. McCain endorsed his former opponent in Pittsburgh. But Mr. McCain said in the interview that he intends to campaign alongside Mr. Bush after the convention and again in September and October. Still, Mr. McCain seemed at times less than thrilled with his bridesmaid's role. He looked down and spoke softly when asked to describe his level of enthusiasm for Mr. Bush's candidacy. ''My enthusiasm is very high,'' he said. In the interview, he became animated only when discussing the high points of his campaign, which he recalled with ''nostalgia and pleasure.'' In his subdued tones, Mr. McCain praised Mr. Bush as running ''an increasingly centrist campaign.''  From Mr. Bush's perspective, the benefits of comity are obvious. According to public polls, Mr. McCain remains more popular than Mr. Bush or Vice President Al Gore, as the senator's aides are quick to point out. He is particularly beloved by the swing groups of independent and undecided voters needed by both candidates. Representative Thomas M. Davis III, who is leading the Republican drive to retain the House, said that even party regulars clamor for  Mr. McCain. ''Now that he's no longer a threat, they've kind of embraced him,'' he said. ''He's everywhere from Florida to Mississippi to New Hampshire. He's the man.'' Mr. McCain said that he wants comity because he is a loyal Republican. ''I was very concerned about, and should be concerned about, giving the appearance of being a bad loser,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I don't think that's helpful to me, to Governor Bush, or to the party. And frankly, I didn't want to be a bad loser.'' After dropping out of the race, Mr. McCain formed a political action committee, Straight Talk America, to promote his agenda. He is creating a Center for Conservative Reform to add some intellectual heft to it. His aides acknowledge that the PAC could serve as the basis for a future presidential bid, should Mr. Bush stumble. But while Mr. McCain said, after a long pause, that he did not know if he would ever run for president again, he called the prospect unlikely. He said he did not want to be picked as vice president and did not expect to be. Mr. McCain's aides studied how failed Republican nominees, including Ronald Reagan in 1976, approached the party's conventions. But they took more cues from the supportive role that Gen. Colin L. Powell played in 1996. After first receiving the go-ahead from the Bush camp, Andrew Card, the co-chairman of the convention, invited Mr. McCain to speak during a meeting on June 20. He said he told Mr. McCain that he was seeking ''political celebrities,'' not politicians. Mr. McCain does not plan to deliver anything like the jeremiad at the 1992 convention by Patrick J. Buchanan, who rallied the party to religious and cultural ''war'' and helped sink the re-election bid of Mr. Bush's father. Mr. McCain's speech at 10:30 on the convention's second night, will be devoted to Mr. Bush's chosen theme, ''Strength and Security With a Purpose,'' and will probably not even mention the senator's signature issue, campaign finance reform, aides said. No one asked Mr. McCain to show his speech to the convention organizers ahead of time, according to all parties, but he plans to do so. Mr. Card said that, while Mr. McCain's bus trip was not part of the plan for the convention, there was ''no danger'' of Mr. Bush's being upstaged. Mr. McCain will not even be in the audience when Mr. Bush accepts the nomination. He plans to leave on the convention's third day, Wednesday morning -- a sign not of pique, organizers and supporters insist, but of self-abnegation.
