 These days a world-class zoological achievement is just one more item on a list of new downtown attractions that are helping Indianapolis shine. Public and private investment downtown totaled $3 billion in the 1990's, and an additional $1.5 billion worth of projects will open over the next two years. Much of the construction, including a minor league baseball park, a new arena for the Pacers basketball team, a $14.5 million botanical garden next to the zoo and a new 165,000-square-foot headquarters for the Indiana Historical Society, came during the tenure of Mayor Stephen Goldsmith, who is now a top domestic-policy adviser in the presidential campaign of Gov. George Bush of Texas. Mr. Goldsmith's successor is Bart Peterson, the first Democratic mayor here in decades. Mr. Peterson called Amali's birth ''a great success story for our zoo and a great international attraction.''
 Strong showing by Ralph Nader, Green Party presidential candidate, could pose threat not only to Vice Pres Gore in presidential race, but also to Repr Mark Udall, Democratic incumbent seeking second term from Congressional district near Boulder, Colo, which has sent Democrat to Washington in every election since 1974; Green Party candidate is Ron Forthofer (M) This year, the streak may be in jeopardy, and in many respects, the challenge facing Representative Mark Udall, who is seeking a second term, mirrors a problem that Vice President Al Gore has encountered in his quest for the presidency: both could lose the election because of a Green Party candidate siphoning Democratic votes. In Mr. Gore's case, a strong showing by the Green Party nominee, Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate who draws strong support from the left, could swing an otherwise close presidential election to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the all-but-named Republican nominee. Mr. Nader is especially popular in California, a state that Mr. Gore could ill afford to lose and still win the White House.
 Vice Pres Al Gore will ply Mississippi River and Great Lakes in boat after Democratic convention in Los Angeles in August; water route will take him on political showboat through industrial Midwest and some of most contested states in November election (S) Vice President Al Gore plans to ply the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes in a boat after the Democratic convention in Los Angeles next month, campaign officials said today. The water route will take Mr. Gore on a political showboat through the industrial Midwest and some of the most contested states in the November election. It is not clear where the boat tour will begin, but Mr. Gore and his floating entourage are expected to make stops in Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois and Missouri. Vice President Al Gore plans to ply the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes in a boat after the Democratic convention in Los Angeles next month, campaign officials said today. The water route will take Mr. Gore on a political showboat through the industrial Midwest and some of the most contested states in the November election. It is not clear where the boat tour will begin, but Mr. Gore and his floating entourage are expected to make stops in Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois and Missouri. The idea is to try to take advantage of the momentum that presidential candidates traditionally gain after their conventions. The formula was a huge success for Bill Clinton and Mr. Gore after the 1992 convention, when they rode a bus with their wives across small-town America -- and secondary media markets -- where presidential candidates seldom visit in the heat of a campaign. This year's Democratic convention runs from Aug. 14 through 17, putting the boat trip in one of the slowest news cycles of the year. That means Mr. Gore will probably not face much competition from other news events for attention, but it also means many voters will be on vacation and tuned out of the campaign. Mr. Gore's advisers said they expected the trip to yield upbeat pictures of a relaxed candidate talking with real people in the heartland. Such events can generate enormous and generally positive local media coverage. His aides said it was unclear whether Mr. Gore's vice-presidential nominee would accompany him on the trip. If that person has a connection to any of those Midwest battleground states, a joint appearance would be likely. The Gore camp is looking to the next several weeks as its chance to try to catch Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in the polls. There is talk, officials said, of Mr. Gore's announcing his vice-presidential selection in early August to cut into the momentum that Mr. Bush is expected to receive from the Philadelphia convention, which begins on July 31. Mr. Gore will try to build on the stir after the announcement with a preconvention swing that takes him into Los Angeles, but the details have not been worked out. The Gore campaign has been looking to this period as a time for Mr. Gore to seize the attention, energize his supporters and establish himself as his own person. Because Mr. Gore has had difficulty establishing his own identity apart from President Clinton, the Gore team has scheduled the president and Hillary Rodham Clinton to speak on the convention's opening night. It intends to devote the remaining days to Mr. Gore.
 Editorial defines broad principles that ought to govern choice of potential tax cuts proposed by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; says threshold question that needs to be asked is whether tax cuts of any kind are best way to bring about economic growth as well as progressive policy goals like expanded health care (M) If there is anything as inevitable as death  and taxes, it is the fact that the presidential candidates will be debating tax policy. Certainly the differing proposals by both Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore to cut taxes will keep the issue before the voters. Later in the campaign, we will be looking at the details of their plans. But at this early stage, we feel it would be useful to define some broad principles that ought to govern the choice of potential tax cuts. The threshold question that needs to be asked is whether tax cuts of any kind are the best way to bring about economic growth as well as progressive policy goals like expanded health care. If there is to be a tax cut, it should make the tax code more simple, fair and progressive. Progres-sivity is a time-honored principle often forgotten in  the political debates. But since the beginning of this century, Americans have consistently embraced the principle that calls for the wealthy to pay proportionately larger shares of their income in taxes. The tax system became less progressive after the tax cuts of President Ronald Reagan and more progressive after tax increases under Presidents George Bush and Bill Clinton. The latest Treasury estimate is that the top fifth of American families accounts for 56.7 percent of American family income but 65.1 percent of total federal tax revenues. The top 1 percent accounts for 14.8 percent of total income and 20.1 percent of tax revenues. These rates do not make for an excessively progressive tax system. If there is anything as inevitable as death  and taxes, it is the fact that the presidential candidates will be debating tax policy. Certainly the differing proposals by both Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore to cut taxes will keep the issue before the voters. Later in the campaign, we will be looking at the details of their plans. But at this early stage, we feel it would be useful to define some broad principles that ought to govern the choice of potential tax cuts. The threshold question that needs to be asked is whether tax cuts of any kind are the best way to bring about economic growth as well as progressive policy goals like expanded health care. If there is to be a tax cut, it should make the tax code more simple, fair and progressive. Progres-sivity is a time-honored principle often forgotten in  the political debates. But since the beginning of this century, Americans have consistently embraced the principle that calls for the wealthy to pay proportionately larger shares of their income in taxes. The tax system became less progressive after the tax cuts of President Ronald Reagan and more progressive after tax increases under Presidents George Bush and Bill Clinton. The latest Treasury estimate is that the top fifth of American families accounts for 56.7 percent of American family income but 65.1 percent of total federal tax revenues. The top 1 percent accounts for 14.8 percent of total income and 20.1 percent of tax revenues. These rates do not make for an excessively progressive tax system. In the years since then, however, many more tax breaks have been introduced. Faced with a Republican Congress, President Clinton has been a master at expanding the role of the federal government, not by spending programs but by tax credits for child care, education and other activities. Now both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have moved in the direction of more tax breaks. The Texas governor calls for new tax credits for long-term health care, education, health insurance, charitable giving and adoptions. Mr. Gore proposes tax credits for health insurance premiums, after-school care, college tuition and retirement savings. All these proposals make the tax code more complex, adding to the billions it already costs taxpayers simply to prepare their forms. Rather than indiscriminately handing out more tax incentives, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush should consider simplifying the code and achieving the lower tax rates they think the voters are demanding in an across-the-board but progressive way.
 Gore and Bush Speak On TV News Programs  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush gave voters a chance for the first time to make a side-by-side comparison as the two sat for hourlong interviews on network television. Using an Incumbent's Strategy  Gov. George W. Bush has been taking a low-key approach to campaigning lately. The style and schedule are deliberate, reflecting the campaign's strategic confidence that he can mold his image by carefully choreographing television images in battleground states. It is almost as if he is running a modified version of an incumbent's Rose Garden strategy. Campaigning on the Water  Vice President Al Gore plans to ply the Mississippi River and the Great Lakes in a boat after the Democratic convention in Los Angeles, campaign officials said. The idea is to take advantage of the momentum that presidential candidates traditionally gain after their conventions. Green Party Role in Colorado  The challenge facing Representative Mark Udall of Colorado mirrors a problem that Vice President Al Gore has encountered in his quest for the presidency: Both could lose the election because of a Green Party candidate siphoning off Democratic votes. In Mr. Gore's case, a strong showing by Ralph Nader could swing an otherwise close election to Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Udall faces Ron Forthofer, in a district where many Democratic voters feel the party has abandoned them.
 Candidates 'Debate'  Two television interviews give voters the first side-by-side comparison of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Candidates 'Debate'  Two television interviews give voters the first side-by-side comparison of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, who have yet to meet face-to-face in presidential debate, give voters a chance to make side-by-side comparison as they sit for hourlong interviews on network television; third-party candidates Ralph Nader and Patrick J Buchanan also appeared on talk shows; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have yet to meet face-to-face in a debate, but they gave voters a chance today for the first time to make a side-by-side comparison as the two sat for hourlong interviews on network television. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have yet to meet face-to-face in a debate, but they gave voters a chance today for the first time to make a side-by-side comparison as the two sat for hourlong interviews on network television. Neither candidate revealed anything about his vice-presidential selection process. Mr. Bush said that while Gen. Colin Powell was not interested in the vice presidency, he might accept another post. Speculation has centered on secretary of state. The questioning highlighted some stark differences between the candidates, for example on Social Security, the death penalty and abortion. The side-by-side comparison also showed that Mr. Gore's 25 years in public office left him with a deep familiarity with issues, but also with a lengthy record that could be examined for consistency. The interviews also underscored the political needs of each candidate as the campaign headed toward the  conventions. Mr. Bush, who leads in the polls, seemed content to keep the conversation vague, a posture that could allow voters to read what they want to into him. Mr. Gore, on the other hand, has been eager for direct debates with Mr. Bush. His advisers contend that once voters can compare Mr. Gore's grasp of policy and his center-left positions with what they say is Mr. Bush's right-wing bent, Mr. Gore will win the election. At the same time, the third party candidates, Ralph Nader and Patrick J. Buchanan, also appeared on talk programs. Mr. Nader said on CBS's ''Face the Nation'' that he was not worried about siphoning votes from Mr. Gore, even if it could cost Mr. Gore the presidency. ''I wouldn't be running if I were worried about taking votes away from Al Gore or George W. Bush,'' Mr. Nader said. ''Nobody is entitled to votes. They have to earn them.'' On the same program, Mr. Buchanan was asked whether Mr. Bush might choose a running mate who favored abortion rights. ''Mr. Bush is blowing smoke,'' Mr. Buchanan said. ''He would have an explosion at his convention.'' Mr. Gore underwent scrutiny of his Social Security plan. Mr. Russert said repeatedly that Mr. Gore's proposal was based on a rosy assumption that anticipated budget surpluses for the next 40 years. Mr. Gore said his plan would keep the Social Security trust fund sacrosanct and, by eliminating the national debt by 2012, would help extend the life of the entitlement program. Mr. Russert noted that the Clinton-Gore budget for 2000 had proposed increasing the money for Social Security by investing some of the budget surplus set aside for Social Security ''in corporate equities or other private financial instruments.'' Mr. Russert described the difference between the two candidates' approaches this way, ''You want the government to invest in the market; George Bush wants individuals to invest.'' Mr. Gore said he did not support that proposal, even though it was in the administration's budget, and he called it a trial balloon. The vice president said Mr. Bush's plan for privatizing part of Social Security would be a ''catastrophe.'' ''What he wants to do is to divert 16 percent of the money that's going into the trust fund and put it into the stock market now,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Bush has not specified an amount that he would allow individuals to invest in the market from their Social Security payroll tax. Mr. Bush refused to answer whether, under his plan, the government would protect individuals against any losses. ''A safe return -- the safest of all investment vehicles -- yields about twice what the Social Security Trust is getting today,'' Mr. Bush said. ''There's going to be a lot of discussions about the particulars of the plan,'' Mr. Bush said. Asked whether he agreed with the details of one of the proposals on Capitol Hill to overhaul Medicare, Mr. Bush said, ''I believe the next president must put Republicans and Democrats in a room and say, 'Let's reform Medicare.' '' When asked if the Republican Congress should accept a deal with President Clinton to cut the marriage penalty in exchange for funding Medicare to cover prescription drugs, Mr. Bush said: ''That's up to this current Congress and this current president. What the people need to know about me is that this is where I'm going to lead the Congress when I become the president.'' Mr. Russert highlighted some of the changes that Mr. Gore has made on various issues over the years. Mr. Gore, who favors abortion rights, was asked if he believed that life began at conception. ''No,'' he said. Asked when life did begin, Mr. Gore said, ''There is a developmental process during which the burden kind of shifts over time,'' citing the first trimester of a pregnancy as being different from the third, but not pinpointing a time when he thought life began. Mr. Russert pointed out that, in 1987, Mr. Gore had opposed federal funding for abortions for poor women and had called abortion ''arguably the taking of a human life.'' Mr. Gore acknowledged that he had changed his position, saying he did so about 15 years ago. ''I talked to a lot of women who taught me about the kinds of circumstances that can come up and the kinds of dilemmas that women can face,'' he said. ''I've come to the very deep conviction that a woman's right to choose must be protected regardless of the woman's income.'' Of a vote that he had cast that would define the term ''person'' to include the unborn, Mr. Gore said, ''That was a very odd procedural vote.'' On the death penalty, Mr. Gore said he did not support a national moratorium on executions for the 21 federal prisoners who are on death row. But he said he did support the moratorium on the death penalty in Illinois ''based on the extraordinary number of errors'' found in those cases. Mr. Gore had been quoted as saying that with the death penalty, ''there are always going to be some small numbers of errors.'' Today Mr. Gore said he wanted zero errors but sometimes because of human imperfection, even jury verdicts ''sometimes produce a mistake.'' But he said he was unaware of any involving the trials of the 21 federal death-row inmates. He also hinted that any state with questionable executions would do well to consider a moratorium. He did not mention Texas, however, a state that has the highest number of executions. Because of Mr. Gore's position on the death penalty, he has refrained from criticizing Mr. Bush's record on executions. Since Mr. Bush took office in 1995, Texas has executed 137 people, more than twice as many as the next highest state, Virginia. Mr. Bush has said that he was certain that every execution in Texas had been warranted, that the inmates had been guilty and had had full access to the appeals process. Today, Cokie Roberts directed him to the case of Odell Barnes, who was executed in March even though several questions had been raised about his case. He was convicted of raping and murdering Helen Bass, a 42-year-old nurse who was his mother's best friend. Mr. Barnes went to his death insisting that he had had a sexual relationship with Ms. Bass but that he had not killed her. ''Well, I don't remember the specifics of Odell Barnes,'' Mr. Bush said. ''You know, and I'm not castigating it. I wish you would have given me a chance to bring the full dossier so that I could have discussed it in detail with you.'' Mr. Bush concluded: ''If you ask me whether or not I think we've ever executed an innocent person, my answer to you is no, I don't believe so. And I've reviewed every single case. And I spend a lot of time on them, as do a lot of courts and lawyers and a board of pardons and paroles.'' Mr. Gore was asked about a recent Supreme Court decision that said the Boy Scouts could exclude gay members. Mr. Gore said he had not read the opinion and offered none of his own. Mr. Russert posed a series of questions on the investigations into Mr. Gore's financial activities in the 1996 campaign. Mr. Gore said Mr. Russert was ''beating a dead horse.'' Asked if his visit to a Buddhist temple in 1996 was a fund-raising event, Mr. Gore said, ''I believe it was not,'' adding, ''There was no request for funds, no money changed hands.''
 Gov George W Bush takes low-key approach to presidential campaigning, running a modified version of incumbent's Rose Garden strategy, which makes him appear to be governing rather than campaigning; his style and schedule are deliberate, reflecting campaign's confidence that he can mold his image by carefully choreographing television images in battleground states; aides say method has produced good results, putting him ahead in many crucial states and made him competitive in ones Democrats had counted on (M) Out on the campaign trail, Gov. George W. Bush appears to be barely breaking a sweat these days. Town hall meetings where large audiences are free to ask questions vanished months ago when Senator John McCain of Arizona, a master of spontaneity, disappeared from the presidential race. Now audiences rarely get to ask Mr. Bush anything. Out on the campaign trail, Gov. George W. Bush appears to be barely breaking a sweat these days. Town hall meetings where large audiences are free to ask questions vanished months ago when Senator John McCain of Arizona, a master of spontaneity, disappeared from the presidential race. Now audiences rarely get to ask Mr. Bush anything. Mr. Bush's signature campaign events are small panel discussions that more resemble seminars on social services. Ostensibly, the sessions are about new policy proposals. But Mr. Bush's aides say they are just as much about mood, emotion and image. As the once troubled teenagers and single mothers who make up the panels tell Mr. Bush how they have overcome hardship, he responds with emotive language, words and phrases like ''love'' or  ''loving family'' or ''willing heart.'' The style and schedule that Mr. Bush is keeping is deliberate, reflecting the campaign's strategic confidence that he can mold his image by carefully choreographing television images in battleground states. That is not to say that Mr. Bush is not working hard. His days are filled with fund-raisers, policy meetings and interviews with reporters. He is putting the last touches on his convention speech, and is in the final phase of choosing a running mate. Still, Mr. Bush's style could not be more different from that of his opponent, Vice President Al Gore, who is generally running behind in the polls and has longer, more event-packed campaign days. Mr. Gore takes question after question from larger audiences, showing off a detailed knowledge of subjects like immigration law and the history of Medicare. But while the presidential race is only now moving into the critical convention period, Mr. Bush and his aides say his method of campaigning has produced good results. It has put him ahead in many crucial states and made him competitive in ones the Democrats had counted on. At Bush headquarters in Austin, Tex., the staff keeps a blue and red color-coded electoral map that shows which way each state is leaning. Bush aides right now have a panorama showing Mr. Bush leading in states that are worth a combined 345 electoral votes and Mr. Gore leading in states worth a combined 92 electoral votes. The map shows states representing 101 electoral votes up for grabs. A candidate needs 270 to win the presidency. ''The good news is I'm leading some of the polls,'' Mr. Bush told state Republican officials gathered in Austin last week. ''The bad news is the election isn't tomorrow.'' So confident are the Republicans that after running about $5 million in advertisements promoting Mr. Bush's Social Security proposals, they let the Democrats spend about $14 million in key states on commercials promoting Mr. Gore and Democratic issues without responding. ''The race stayed the same,'' one Bush adviser said. The Republican Party is readying a new advertising campaign to lead into the Republican National Convention in two weeks. Mr. Bush's aides attribute the state of the presidential race partly to a series of missteps by Mr. Gore over a rocky spring. But they also point to Mr. Bush's turn to a policy-oriented campaign style after the primaries ended. That was when he needed to erase the bitterness of his fight with Senator McCain and soften the hard conservative edges he had created for himself. ''Candidates tend to repeat the successes of the past,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I found that ideas do drive campaigns.'' Mr. Bush is using the same phrases he did more than a year ago, that he is a ''compassionate conservative,'' that he wants to fight the ''soft bigotry of low expectations'' for minority students in public schools, that he wants to rally ''the armies of compassion.'' The groundwork for the policy offensive was set more than a year ago. Mr. Bush named three senior advisers for policy: Lawrence B. Lindsey for the economy, Stephen Goldsmith for domestic affairs and Condoleezza Rice for national security. He also assembled a large think tank under the leadership of Josh Bolten, who had worked in the administration of Mr. Bush's father. The first speeches on education and health care and the environment put Mr. Bush squarely on Democratic turf with reading programs for poor areas and tax credits to help people who lack health insurance. Then came broad proposals to reshape Social Security and rethink nuclear policy. They skipped all of the devilish details. But Mr. Bush's aides say they showed voters that Mr. Bush was willing to take risks. These latest proposals may seem small, but aides say Mr. Bush is using the ideas to shape his image. In a year in which no issue is dominating, a Bush adviser said, ''issues are important but they are important as reflections of broader values and keys into a candidate's leadership.'' He said independent swing voters ''are not taking their stands on individual issues, but their feelings about what values the candidate reflects.'' Normally, a result is that in swing state after swing state, evening news programs show Mr. Bush surrounded by winsome minority children or troubled teenagers or poor-but-determined single mothers talking of hopes for building a better life. Only rarely is the script interrupted the way it was on Friday in New Jersey when a minister challenged Mr. Bush about the death penalty. The dynamics of the presidential race could well change by the fall. Mr. Gore's aides say that a vice president traditionally does not come out from under the shadow of the president until the party convention. And they argue that the public still favors Democratic positions on issues, that Mr. Gore is better under pressure and that he will shine when the candidates meet in debates. The governor promised today that he would not lie back and let Mr. Gore criticize his positions and his Texas record. ''I'm a good counterpuncher,'' he said on the ABC program ''This Week.'' ''I am.''
 Mr. Archer said Medicare would not be affected because the budget surplus would allow additional general tax revenues to go to Medicare in place of the revenue lost from repeal of the tax. He suggested that Republicans were ready to make the debate an issue in the election, noting that it was Vice President Al Gore who had cast the deciding vote, in his role as tiebreaker in the Senate, to implement Mr. Clinton's 1993 budget plan.
 A common assumption was that it would not be clear until Tuesday, the eve of Mr. Clinton's scheduled departure for Japan, whether the talks are ''going in the right direction or not,'' the official added. Only then would the White House decide whether the talks were ripe enough to warrant keeping Mr. Clinton at Camp David and sending Vice President Al Gore to the meeting in Okinawa of the leaders of the world's major industrial nations. Mr. Clinton is scheduled to leave on Wednesday to join other leaders there and meet the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin.
