 Mr. Coverdell is also Senate liaison for Gov. George W. Bush, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, and had spent the last few weeks preparing for the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia.
 BUSH LEAD GETS SMALLER -- Three new polls taken over the weekend indicate that Gov. George W. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore is narrowing. A CBS News survey shows Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore 43 percent to 41 percent, down from his 47-to-39 edge in May. A Zogby poll has Mr. Bush holding a 45-to-41 lead, compared with a 47-to-39 edge a month ago. And a USA Today/ CNN Gallup poll has Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore 45 to 43, compared with 50 to 41 a week ago. The CBS poll covered 596 adults and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points, meaning the Bush lead was statistically insignificant. Significantly, however, Mr. Bush's potential voters were more likely than his rival's to say they supported him enthusiastically. And when people who leaned to Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore were added to those firmly committed, Mr. Bush led 46 to 43. When Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party and Ralph Nader of the Green Party were added to the poll, Mr. Bush beat Mr. Gore 42 to 37, and Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan got 4 percent each. In the Zogby poll, which surveyed 890 likely voters and had a three percentage point sampling error, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore 43 to 37 when other candidates were added, with Mr. Nader getting 6 percent and Mr. Buchanan 3 percent. In the USA/CNN poll, which surveyed 1,063 registered voters over the weekend and has a four percentage point error margin, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore 45 to 43 when other candidates were added, with Mr. Nader picking up 5 percent and Mr. Buchanan 3 percent. The USA/CNN poll showed Mr. Gore gained support from women and independents in the past week, apparently helped by the endorsement of former Senator Bill Bradley. BUSH LEAD GETS SMALLER -- Three new polls taken over the weekend indicate that Gov. George W. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore is narrowing. A CBS News survey shows Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore 43 percent to 41 percent, down from his 47-to-39 edge in May. A Zogby poll has Mr. Bush holding a 45-to-41 lead, compared with a 47-to-39 edge a month ago. And a USA Today/ CNN Gallup poll has Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore 45 to 43, compared with 50 to 41 a week ago. The CBS poll covered 596 adults and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points, meaning the Bush lead was statistically insignificant. Significantly, however, Mr. Bush's potential voters were more likely than his rival's to say they supported him enthusiastically. And when people who leaned to Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore were added to those firmly committed, Mr. Bush led 46 to 43. When Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party and Ralph Nader of the Green Party were added to the poll, Mr. Bush beat Mr. Gore 42 to 37, and Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan got 4 percent each. In the Zogby poll, which surveyed 890 likely voters and had a three percentage point sampling error, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore 43 to 37 when other candidates were added, with Mr. Nader getting 6 percent and Mr. Buchanan 3 percent. In the USA/CNN poll, which surveyed 1,063 registered voters over the weekend and has a four percentage point error margin, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore 45 to 43 when other candidates were added, with Mr. Nader picking up 5 percent and Mr. Buchanan 3 percent. The USA/CNN poll showed Mr. Gore gained support from women and independents in the past week, apparently helped by the endorsement of former Senator Bill Bradley. A BOOST FOR BOTH CANDIDATES -- Outside interest groups combined highly visible television advertising with below-radar phone calls, direct mail and radio to play a powerful role in Al Gore and George W. Bush's primary election victories, a new nonpartisan elections study, ''Getting Inside the Outside Campaign,'' has found. The study, financed by the Pew Charitable Trusts, found that in the Democratic race, labor unions provided Mr. Gore with crucial support in his contest with former Senator Bill Bradley, particularly in the leadoff Iowa caucuses. On the Republican side, the study found that conservative groups battered Senator John McCain of Arizona, particularly in South Carolina, helping Mr. Bush rebound from a crushing defeat in New Hampshire. Correction:  July 19, 2000, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, a report in the Campaign Briefing column yesterday about a USA Today/ CNN Gallup poll on the presidential race misstated the results in some copies. In a two-way competition, Gov. George W. Bush led Vice President Al Gore 48 percent to 46 percent. (The figures 45 percent and 43 percent were their showings in a four-way competition that included Ralph Nader and Pat Buchanan.) Because of an editing error, a report in the Campaign Briefing column yesterday about a USA Today/ CNN Gallup poll on the presidential race misstated the results in some copies. In a two-way competition, Gov. George W. Bush led Vice President Al Gore 48 percent to 46 percent. (The figures 45 percent and 43 percent were their showings in a four-way competition that included Ralph Nader and Pat Buchanan.)
 Although American officials previously said quietly that President Clinton's itinerary could be modified, the White House continued to declare today that he has no intention of delaying his trip to a meeting of the leaders of the leading industrial nations in Okinawa or of sending Vice President Al Gore in his place.
 Gov George W Bush appears to be giving true consideration to selecting a vice presidential running mate who supports abortion rights; his overtures to politicians who favor abortion rights, such as Governors Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and George E Pataki of New York, have decidedly scrambled Vice Presidential field; can afford luxury of choice since conservative stalwarts seem most intent on winning back White House, but advisers are fearful that liberal stance may infuriate Roman Catholic Church and Christian Right and is not worth risk (M) When Gov. George W. Bush is asked what he is looking for in a running mate, he talks about things like preparedness to be president and compatibility. But he never mentions one factor that several advisers say is hovering over the entire  process: abortion. This is the first presidential campaign in which the Republican candidate truly appears to be weighing whether to pick a No. 2 who supports abortion rights. Mr. Bush has that luxury because conservative stalwarts do not seem to mind. Many, like Pat Robertson, are so eager to win back the White House that they are willing to go along (albeit grudgingly) with just about anyone. When Gov. George W. Bush is asked what he is looking for in a running mate, he talks about things like preparedness to be president and compatibility. But he never mentions one factor that several advisers say is hovering over the entire  process: abortion. This is the first presidential campaign in which the Republican candidate truly appears to be weighing whether to pick a No. 2 who supports abortion rights. Mr. Bush has that luxury because conservative stalwarts do not seem to mind. Many, like Pat Robertson, are so eager to win back the White House that they are willing to go along (albeit grudgingly) with just about anyone. Even so, Mr. Bush's overtures to politicians who favor abortion rights, namely Governors Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and George E. Pataki of New York, has decidedly scrambled the selection of a running mate. Several advisers to Mr. Bush said, for example, that Mr. Ridge would be at the top of the list were it not for his stand on abortion. Mr. Ridge is from an important state, has an impressive biography and, perhaps most importantly, gets along quite well with Mr. Bush. But one after another, Bush advisers expressed skepticism that the Pennsylvania governor would be picked. Mr. Bush is expected to make a decision in the next week or so. Of course, the only way to know is to get into Mr. Bush's head. That did not deter some advisers from predicting that he would settle for someone who is safely anti-abortion, like Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma, Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska or Senator Fred Thompson of Tennessee. ''I'd love to see it,'' said a Bush adviser who thinks Mr. Ridge would make an ideal running mate but is not worth the risk. ''But why would you throw a monkey wrench into the gears of your base?'' He and other Bush loyalists said they were especially worried that choosing Mr. Ridge would infuriate the Catholic church, which they consider as much of a concern as the Christian Right. Indeed, a CBS News Poll released today found that about a third of Mr. Bush's supporters said they would be less likely to vote for him if he picked a running mate who supported abortion. They would not vote at all -- or defect to Patrick J. Buchanan, the abortion opponent who is seeking the nomination of the Reform Party. Mr. Ridge, in an interview, questioned Mr. Buchanan's potency. ''I don't think he's going to be factor,'' he said, ''And he's not about to push Governor Bush.'' Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida said in an interview that an abortion rights position should be ''no disqualifier'' for his brother. His choice favors abortion rights: Colin L. Powell. (But Bush aides said General Powell has made his disinterest clear.) Indeed, a minority of Bush advisers take issue with those who say Mr. Bush is less inclined to take a risk. They argue that because Mr. Bush is entering his convention ahead in the polls, he has more leeway to pick an abortion rights running mate. ''There are people who would say, 'Good for Bush!' '' said one Bush adviser who is pushing for Mr. Ridge. Yet in the case of Mr. Ridge, several Bush advisers explained that the dangers were far deeper than the conventional wisdom that religious conservatives would squawk and perhaps frustrate efforts at harmony at the party's national convention that opens late this month. They would squawk. But some advisers to Mr. Bush -- even ones who favor Mr. Ridge -- said the deeper concern was over the reaction from the Catholic church because the Pennsylvania governor is Catholic. ''They would not be able to hold functions in Catholic settings; Catholic colleges, Catholic high schools, Catholic institutions,'' said a Bush adviser who otherwise said Mr. Ridge would make the best choice. ''Every city that you were to go to, there would be bishops and cardinals who would protest.'' One Republican operative who recently discussed the selection process with Mr. Bush said, ''I don't think he's afraid of the Christian Right.'' While Democrats grouse that Mr. Bush has a deeper bench of prospects than Al Gore, the vice president has the advantage of not having any single issue looming over his short list. It could be, of course, that while his advisers are wrestling with the possibilities, Mr. Bush really never intended to pick an abortion rights candidate. Some advocates say Mr. Bush consideration of candidates who support abortion rights has been a shell game intended to stroke his friends and placate abortion right supporters. At first glance, that seemed to be what was happening when Mr. Bush met with Mr. Pataki on Friday. After all, no Bush adviser had dared to predict that the Texas governor could win New York. And Mr. Bush is even friendlier with Mr. Ridge than with Mr. Pataki. But people close to Mr. Bush and Mr. Pataki said today that after the two had their meeting that morning, they privately met again over lunch. And some Bush advisers said the Texas governor appeared to be taking a close look at Mr. Pataki because, though he is Catholic, he has not had difficulties with Catholic leaders in the state as has Mr. Ridge. Mrs. Whitman and other abortion rights Republicans can take heart that Ronald Reagan picked a running mate in 1980 who -- unlike Mr. Reagan -- had opposed a constitutional prohibition against abortion. George Bush, the running mate, had little choice but to emphasize that he opposed abortion. But he squirmed a bit at his joint news conference with Mr. Reagan: ''Please do not try to keep reminding me of differences I had,'' Mr. Bush implored. Fortunately for the Reagan-Bush ticket, the questions eventually subsided.
 Bush on a Running Mate  Gov. George W. Bush said for the first time that he was closing in on choosing a running mate. Gore Closing the Gap  Vice President Al Gore called attention to a new CNN/USA Today poll that showed him trailing Gov. George W. Bush by only two points, 43 percent to 45 percent.
 Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush join national debate over death penalty, dueling over hypothetical question of what to do in case of pregnant woman facing execution; Gore says that the issue would be one of abortion rights and that he would allow woman to decide whether execution should be delayed, allowing her option of whether or not to give birth; Bush says he would support postponing execution since second life is involved; photo (M) The national debate over the death penalty took an odd turn today when Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas each discussed what to do in the hypothetical case of a pregnant woman facing execution. For Mr. Gore, the issue was one of abortion rights: he would let the woman decide whether the execution should be delayed, allowing her the option of whether or not to give birth. The national debate over the death penalty took an odd turn today when Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas each discussed what to do in the hypothetical case of a pregnant woman facing execution. For Mr. Gore, the issue was one of abortion rights: he would let the woman decide whether the execution should be delayed, allowing her the option of whether or not to give birth. For Mr. Bush, who has presided over more executions than any other governor in the country, it was a matter of pointing to the compassion in his conservatism. He said he would support postponing such an execution ''because there's a second life involved.'' The question first came up on Sunday in an interview with Mr. Gore on the NBC News television program ''Meet the Press.'' The vice president, who backs the death penalty,  was asked whether he would support it if the condemned prisoner happened to be pregnant. Mr. Gore replied that he was unfamiliar with the issue and would have to examine it. At a news conference today shortly after rallying his troops in Nashville, where his presidential campaign makes its headquarters, Mr. Gore said he favored allowing a pregnant woman to choose whether to delay her execution until she gave birth. At an earlier news conference in Little Rock, Ark., Governor Bush tweaked Mr. Gore for his answer in the television interview, saying he was ''surprised, frankly,'' that the vice president had needed time to think about the matter. Mr. Gore addressed the subject after flying here to his home state today, armed with new poll numbers showing his race with Mr. Bush growing tighter. He continued his attack on Mr. Bush's record in Texas and, in casting his own candidacy in classic Democratic terms as a fight for the disadvantaged, made personal reference to his childhood. This theme, populist in nature and Democratic by tradition, dovetails with the policy formulations Mr. Gore has been developing over the last several weeks, particularly as he rails against the ''special interests'' like big oil that he says Mr. Bush is serving. This was officially Commerce Secretary William M. Daley's first day  as Gore campaign chairman, and, in a Nashville briefing with campaign workers from around the country  that was closed to reporters, the vice president pointed to a new CNN/USA Today poll that showed him trailing Mr. Bush by only 2 points, 43 percent to 45 percent; that was considerably closer than last month's CNN poll, which had Mr. Gore trailing by 12 points. A new CBS poll also showed Mr. Gore narrowing the race to 2 percentage points, 41 percent to 43 percent; in mid-May, Mr. Gore trailed in that poll by 8 points. After lunch with his mother and a  conference with campaign strategists, Mr. Gore greeted the dozens of workers who staff his Nashville headquarters. Standing on a chair, surrounded by the mostly college-age crowd, he adopted the language that his 26-year-old daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, uses to reach her under-30 audiences. In appealing to their sense of idealism, Mr. Gore warned the young workers to avoid the ''ironic detachment'' that afflicts the cynical. He said some people became detached because they were afraid that if they gave their hearts to something, they would only be let down. At his news conference later in the day before he flew on here to Memphis, Mr. Gore was asked how he would square his criticism that Mr. Bush had mismanaged the state budget in Texas with his earlier assertions that Mr. Bush was a weak governor who had little power. ''What power he does have he has used to ill effect,'' Mr. Gore replied. He called Mr. Bush's budget a ''two-page ditty'' that served only the special interests. In defense of his record as governor, Mr. Bush has often noted that the people of Texas re-elected him in 1998 with nearly 70 percent of the vote. To that, Mr. Gore scoffed today,  ''People in the other 49 states vote in this election.''
 Correction of July 17 article on network television interviews on July 16 with Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush An article yesterday about network television interviews with Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush referred incorrectly in some copies to Mr. Gore's position on the death penalty. He is in favor of it, not opposed. An article yesterday about network television interviews with Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush referred incorrectly in some copies to Mr. Gore's position on the death penalty. He is in favor of it, not opposed.
 Gen. Colin L. Powell and Laura Bush, wife of Gov. George W. Bush, are to speak on the opening night in Philadelphia, while the Democrats have tentative plans to have President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton address the delegates on the first night in Los Angeles.
 In Lardner's acid-etched portrait, ''You Know Me Al: A Busher's Letters,'' Jack Keefe, the letter-writing White Sox pitcher, announces right out that if he had known that Joe Hill, a rival left-hander, had stolen his girl, Violet, ''I would of made Callahan,'' the Sox manager, ''pitch me against him.'' He continues: ''And when he come up to bat I would of beaned him. But I don't suppose you could hurt him by hitting him in the head.''
 Gov George W Bush says he is closing in on selection of a vice presidential candidate; photo (M) With the Republican National Convention two weeks away, Gov. George W. Bush began trying to build excitement about it today in his playful, teasing manner, saying for the first time that he was closing in on his selection of a running mate and letting his advisers dribble out details about a five-day trip he would make to the event. At a news conference this morning in Little Rock, Ark., where he campaigned before heading here, Mr. Bush said he could no longer pretend that he was not busily winnowing the field of vice-presidential possibilities. With the Republican National Convention two weeks away, Gov. George W. Bush began trying to build excitement about it today in his playful, teasing manner, saying for the first time that he was closing in on his selection of a running mate and letting his advisers dribble out details about a five-day trip he would make to the event. At a news conference this morning in Little Rock, Ark., where he campaigned before heading here, Mr. Bush said he could no longer pretend that he was not busily winnowing the field of vice-presidential possibilities. ''The days of saying the list is shrinking and growing are over,'' Mr. Bush said with a broad smile, referring to the coy refrain he had used until this point to answer questions about his deliberations. ''I'm getting closer to a decision.'' The Texas governor shed no light on what that decision would be, but the possible timing of it was made clearer in the details that his advisers released about the trip Mr. Bush would make to Philadelphia, where the four-day convention begins on July 31. Karen P. Hughes, the director of communications for the Bush campaign, said the candidate would leave Austin, Tex., on July 28 and arrive in Philadelphia on Aug. 2, the day before he is expected to formally receive his party's presidential nomination and make his convention speech. Ms. Hughes also said Mr. Bush would probably introduce his running mate in Austin, which suggested that the announcement would come just before he was scheduled to leave town, perhaps in the middle of next week. But she added that nothing was confirmed and that Mr. Bush still had not decided when he would make the announcement. She noted that the Republican presidential nominee had not won any of those states between Texas and Pennsylvania since 1988 but that Mr. Bush believed he could prevail in most or all of them. Ms. Hughes said other states could be added to the trip. At his news conference today, Mr. Bush also repeated a promise he and his advisers had made: that the Republican convention would look, feel and sound unlike previous ones. ''It's going to be a convention that is going to have some new wrinkles to it,'' Mr. Bush said. Immediately after the convention, several of Mr. Bush's advisers said today, the Texas governor would probably travel by train for several days of whistle-stop campaigning. Both Republicans and Democrats, whose national convention will be in mid-August, are working to make the spotlight that these events throw on the political parties and their presidential nominees last as long as possible and matter as much as possible. Vice President Al Gore is expected to include a boat trip through key states in the Midwest after the Democratic convention. Before Mr. Bush's news conference in Little Rock, he unveiled a modest proposal designed to cast himself as an especially compassionate conservative, and he discussed it briefly at a private social services agency where he was flanked by African-Americans. Mr. Bush said that if he were elected president, he would direct the Department of Health and Human Services to encourage states to set up registries for the fathers of children born out of wedlock, but he did not call for new federal spending to be directed explicitly toward that effort. As Mr. Bush campaigned in Arkansas and Wisconsin today, he also continued to raise money for the Republican Party, bringing in an estimated $1.4 million at four events.
