 WELL SET TO ADVERTISE -- The Republican and Democratic national parties reported healthy bank balances on June 30 as they entered the final pre-election stretch. The Republican National Committee reported $53.4 million cash on hand after having raised $86.6 million since Jan. 1. The Democratic National Committee said it had $35 million in the bank; it has raised $64.4 million so far this year. The parties benefited from lucrative fund-raising dinners featuring their leaders. A dinner honoring Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in April brought in $21 million; a Democratic salute to President Clinton a month later yielded $27 million. Both parties said their June 30 figures were the largest ever at this stage of a campaign and promised to use their wealth to finance aggressive television advertising campaigns on behalf of their candidates and issues. WELL SET TO ADVERTISE -- The Republican and Democratic national parties reported healthy bank balances on June 30 as they entered the final pre-election stretch. The Republican National Committee reported $53.4 million cash on hand after having raised $86.6 million since Jan. 1. The Democratic National Committee said it had $35 million in the bank; it has raised $64.4 million so far this year. The parties benefited from lucrative fund-raising dinners featuring their leaders. A dinner honoring Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in April brought in $21 million; a Democratic salute to President Clinton a month later yielded $27 million. Both parties said their June 30 figures were the largest ever at this stage of a campaign and promised to use their wealth to finance aggressive television advertising campaigns on behalf of their candidates and issues. ADS ATTACK BUSH ON ABORTION -- Planned Parenthood will run $2.5 million in television advertising to spotlight Gov. George W. Bush's anti-abortion views, hoping to reach independent and Republican women who support abortion rights. The group says its research suggests that many women respect Planned Parenthood but are leaning toward Mr. Bush. ''We're focusing on those 'compassionate conservative' Republican and independent women who are very pro-choice,'' said Gloria Feldt, president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, the group's political arm. ''They believe us when we tell them about George W. Bush's position. These are the women who elected Bill Clinton twice.'' The first advertisement will run nationally on cable television, beginning on Monday and extending through the Republican National Convention, July 31 to Aug. 3. LEADING UP TO A FUND-RAISER -- The Democratic National Committee plans to cap the end of its national nominating convention in Los Angeles next month by raising $2 million for its candidates. The Republican National Committee is also planning a major fund-raiser near the end of its gathering in Philadelphia. All of the money raised at the Democratic fund-raiser will be spent on advertising and other activities urging voters to support Democratic candidates, from Vice President Al Gore on down. The Republican National Committee has not said how much it expects to raise at its event or how it will be spent. Tickets for the Republican event will start at $1,000.
 Gov George W Bush meets privately with Gov George E Pataki of New York to talk about the vice presidency, and discussion coincides with other signs that Pataki is being looked at for a spot on the Republican ticket (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas met privately this morning with Gov. George E. Pataki of New York to talk about the vice presidency, and Republican officials with ties to Mr. Pataki's office said that the hourlong discussion coincided with other signs that Mr. Pataki is being looked at for a spot on the Republican ticket. None of these officials claimed that Mr. Pataki had emerged as the front-runner in a selection process that has been shrouded in the utmost secrecy, and others expressed skepticism that Mr. Bush would choose him. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas met privately this morning with Gov. George E. Pataki of New York to talk about the vice presidency, and Republican officials with ties to Mr. Pataki's office said that the hourlong discussion coincided with other signs that Mr. Pataki is being looked at for a spot on the Republican ticket. None of these officials claimed that Mr. Pataki had emerged as the front-runner in a selection process that has been shrouded in the utmost secrecy, and others expressed skepticism that Mr. Bush would choose him. They also said that Mr. Pataki's breakfast meeting with Mr. Bush, in a hotel suite in Newark, where Mr. Bush was campaigning, came after Mr. Pataki had received one of the questionnaires that the Bush campaign distributed to possible running mates and after the New York governor had spoken on the telephone several weeks ago with Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary, who is supervising the selection process for Mr. Bush. Later today, after both Mr. Bush and Mr. Pataki had addressed the New York Conservative Party in Manhattan, they ate lunch together in a hotel suite there, Republican officials said. These officials said they did not know if the second meeting was private, or if it concerned the vice presidency. ''There's definitely been a kick-up of activity there,'' said one Republican official, referring to communications between the Bush campaign and Mr. Pataki's office. They also said there was no evidence that Mr. Pataki could help Mr. Bush carry New York State, which is considered nearly a sure winner for Vice President Al Gore. They said that Mr. Bush's meeting with Mr. Pataki this morning, which the Bush campaign made no effort to hide, could simply have been a gesture intended to flatter Mr. Pataki and to project the image that Mr. Bush was open-minded about sharing the ticket with a more moderate Republican. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, confirmed that Mr. Bush and Mr. Pataki talked about the vice presidency this morning, but did not provide details. Until now, Mr. Pataki's name had been mostly absent from Republican officials' speculation. Other names that have been mentioned frequently include Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma, Senators Fred Thompson and Bill Frist of Tennessee, Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, Elizabeth Dole and, more recently, Gov. James S. Gilmore III of Virginia. Mr. Bush has also campaigned frequently and spoken privately with Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, a close friend. But many Republican officials and political analysts say that Mr. Ridge and Mr. Pataki will ultimately be passed over because of their support for abortion rights. But a Republican official with close ties to Mr. Pataki's office said that the party was so solidly behind Mr. Bush that he might be able to afford the choice of Mr. Ridge or Mr. Pataki, and that Mr. Pataki was the less controversial of the two. Unlike Mr. Ridge, the official noted, Mr. Pataki had not been drawn into bitter disputes with the Catholic leaders in his state. Zenia Mucha, a senior adviser to Mr. Pataki, said today that ''the governor has not and will not talk about any private conversations he may or may not have had with Governor Bush.'' And Mr. Bush and Mr. Pataki, in their remarks to the Conservative Party, simply made clear that they shared a friendship and a mutual respect. ''I think the world of George Pataki,'' said Mr. Bush, who attended Yale University at the same time as Mr. Pataki and became governor of Texas the same year that Mr. Pataki became governor of New York. ''He's a really good man.'' ''In fact,'' Mr. Bush added, ''the second best thing that happened in 1994, in November of 1994, was watching the New York returns come in.'' THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE SEARCH FOR NO. 2  Correction:  July 28, 2000, Friday  An article on July 15 about potential running mates for Vice President Al Gore misstated the middle initial of Warren Christopher, who is leading the search. It is M., not G. An article on July 15 about potential running mates for Vice President Al Gore misstated the middle initial of Warren Christopher, who is leading the search. It is M., not G.
 Florida authorities are investigating a letter circulating on Capitol Hill that purports to be from Gov Jeb Bush to Rep Cliff Stearns and argues against bill before Congress to ban gambling on the Internet; governor's office says letter is a forgery and Bush has taken no position on bill; Stearns says he never saw letter (M) The Florida authorities are investigating a letter that purports to be from Gov. Jeb Bush to a Florida member of Congress that the governor's office says is a forgery. The letter, which claims to detail Mr. Bush's position on legislation now before Congress to ban gambling on the Internet, was addressed to Representative Cliff Stearns, Republican of Florida, and dated June 23. Mr. Stearns said in a statement that he never saw the letter. The Florida authorities are investigating a letter that purports to be from Gov. Jeb Bush to a Florida member of Congress that the governor's office says is a forgery. The letter, which claims to detail Mr. Bush's position on legislation now before Congress to ban gambling on the Internet, was addressed to Representative Cliff Stearns, Republican of Florida, and dated June 23. Mr. Stearns said in a statement that he never saw the letter. The letter says Mr. Bush is opposed to the bill on the grounds that it would prevent the state from selling lottery tickets online and would infringe on states' rights. The document has been circulating on Capitol Hill for the past several days and has been used by opponents of the measure as an argument for its defeat. But the letter is a forgery, Mr. Bush's office said today. ''We don't know where it came from,'' said Justin Sayfie, Governor Bush's communications director. ''It is not his position. It is not the governor's signature. It is not his letter. It is not authorized. And it is troubling.'' Mr. Sayfie said that Governor Bush had taken no position on the bill. Neither has Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, an aide said. An official of Shandwick Washington, the Washington subsidiary of Shandwick International, a major public relations firm based in London, got in touch with Governor  Bush's office last month to request a letter stating Mr. Bush's position on the gambling legislation, said Mark Day, a Shandwick spokesman. Shandwick requested that the letter be addressed to a member of Congress, Mr. Day said. Shandwick said it had hoped to get a letter from Mr. Bush stating his opposition to the bill -- as they had from several other governors -- because it would inhibit electronic sales of lottery tickets and infringe on states' rights. Mr. Day said that Shandwick received the letter in late June and immediately began circulating it on Capitol Hill, hoping to generate opposition to the bill. ''We requested of Governor Bush's office, and received, a copy of a letter to members of Congress, which we had every reason to believe originated in the governor's office,'' Mr. Day said. ''It appeared to be on official stationery and contained what appeared to be an official signature. We later learned that the governor's office did not authorize the letter and disavowed it. We immediately stopped using the letter and urged others to do the same. If there's a problem with the letter we believe absolutely we should get to the bottom of it.''
 Photo of Rep Rick A Lazio, Gov George W Bush and Gov George E Pataki at Conservative Party fundraiser, New York City
 Reluctant to Join Gore  Representative Richard A. Gephardt, left, has emerged high on Al Gore's list of possible running mates, people close to the vice president say. But Mr. Gephardt's advisers insist that he wants his name scratched. Bush-Pataki Ticket Explored  George W. Bush met privately with Gov. George E. Pataki of New York to talk about the vice presidency. Letter Is Called a Forgery  The Florida authorities are investigating a letter that purports to be from Gov. Jeb Bush to a Florida member of Congress that the governor's office says is a forgery. The letter claims to detail Mr. Bush's position on legislation before Congress to ban gambling on the Internet. Bush Gives a Hand to Lazio  George W. Bush offered his support for Representative Rick A. Lazio's Senate bid, belittling Hillary Rodham Clinton with a familiar critique before an audience of Conservative Party donors in Manhattan. Correction:  July 18, 2000, Tuesday  An article yesterday about network television interviews with Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush referred incorrectly in some copies to Mr. Gore's position on the death penalty. He is in favor of it, not opposed. An article yesterday about network television interviews with Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush referred incorrectly in some copies to Mr. Gore's position on the death penalty. He is in favor of it, not opposed.
 Correction of July 13 article about Vice Pres Al Gore's speech at NAACP convention An article on Thursday about a speech by Vice President Al Gore at the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. in which he reiterated his policy proposals misstated his position on statistical sampling to adjust the census count. He favors sampling; he does not oppose it. An article on Thursday about a speech by Vice President Al Gore at the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. in which he reiterated his policy proposals misstated his position on statistical sampling to adjust the census count. He favors sampling; he does not oppose it.
 Rep Richard A Gephardt emerges high on Al Gore's list of possible vice presidential candidates, but Gephardt's advisers insist that he is not interested; several Gore advisers agree that there seems to be a dearth of prospects with real appeal (M) Representative Richard A. Gephardt has emerged high on Al Gore's list of possible running mates, people close to the vice president say. But there is a big problem: Mr. Gephardt's advisers insist that he wants his name scratched. In fact, the advisers said a Gephardt emissary today telephoned Warren G. Christopher, who is leading Mr. Gore's search, to tell him that Mr. Gephardt would not fill out a detailed questionnaire about his voting record and would not hand over any financial and personal information because he did not want to be considered. Representative Richard A. Gephardt has emerged high on Al Gore's list of possible running mates, people close to the vice president say. But there is a big problem: Mr. Gephardt's advisers insist that he wants his name scratched. In fact, the advisers said a Gephardt emissary today telephoned Warren G. Christopher, who is leading Mr. Gore's search, to tell him that Mr. Gephardt would not fill out a detailed questionnaire about his voting record and would not hand over any financial and personal information because he did not want to be considered. The advisers to Mr. Gephardt, the House Democratic leader, said he had breakfast with Mr. Gore on Saturday at the vice president's residence here -- at Mr. Gephardt's request -- to tell him personally the reasons why the vice president should not pick him. Mr. Gephardt's resistance underscores the difficulty Mr. Gore may be facing in finding an appealing choice. Several Gore advisers agreed that there seemed to be a dearth of options with sizzle. Mr. Gephardt's demurrals are frustrating an already frustrating search. At his breakfast with Mr. Gore, Mr. Gephardt's main argument was that his selection as the vice-presidential candidate would greatly complicate the Democrats' drive to retake the House. He also argued that if Mr. Gore became president, Mr. Gephardt could be more helpful to him in Congress. It could be, as often happens in presidential politics, that the Gore campaign is floating Mr. Gephardt's name as a trial balloon. Who really knows the vice president's intentions? Probably only Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper; Mr. Christopher, and, maybe, William M. Daley, the campaign manager. Warning of the dangers of all the uninformed speculation, Michael Whouley, one of Mr. Gore's top strategists, said, ''None of the sirens of conventional wisdom have actually had a conversation with Apollo.'' Despite the uncertainty, Mr. Gore's overtures to Mr. Gephardt are being taken seriously enough that they have set off maneuvering among House Democrats over who would fill Mr. Gephardt's job as the House Democratic leader and Speaker-in-waiting if he left. ''I think the leadership in the caucus would rally behind me as acting leader,'' he said in an interview, ''and we would have a very close coordinated relationship with the Gore-Gephardt ticket if that's where all this moves to.'' People close to Mr. Gephardt said he has thought hard about Mr. Gore's entreaties but that they posed a serious quandary for him: would he be more valuable on the national ticket or helping his party try to win back control of the House? And what about his own ambitions? Although he has long had designs on the White House, Mr. Gephardt, who is 59, decided not to take on Mr. Gore for the nomination this year so he could devote his efforts to picking up enough House seats to assure his becoming speaker. Mr. Gore's interest is understandable. Mr. Gephardt has a deep command of the issues and is popular with many constituencies like labor, where Mr. Gore still has to do some fence mending. He could also assure Mr. Gore that the ticket would be more competitive in Missouri. Mr. Gephardt is also a seasoned campaigner who would effectively make a case for the Democrats -- and tear down Mr. Bush. Another problem with Mr. Gephardt was displayed today on CNN. The network was broadcasting excerpts of tense moments between Mr. Gore and Mr. Gephardt in a debate in 1988. In fact, the two had an icy relationship dating back to when they battled each other that year for the Democratic nomination, and both lost to Michael S. Dukakis. But in the last two years, their relationship has warmed appreciably.
 The House passed identical legislation last month. Republican leaders said they would send the measure to the White House promptly and use Mr. Clinton's promised veto --  which the vote today suggested Senate supporters of the bill would be unable to override -- to support their case that voters will not get tax cuts until a Republican becomes president. Gov. George W. Bush, the apparent Republican presidential nominee, supports elimination of the estate tax. His Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, backs a far smaller reduction in it.
 Vice Pres Al Gore campaigns in Michigan, where for many voters he remains an unknown quantity despite his nearly eight years as vice president and a yearlong presidential campaign; Ralph Nader and his anti-corporate third-party candidacy are also siphoning votes from what should be Gore's constituency; photo (M) This is a solidly Democratic, heavily unionized area, the buckle of Michigan's industrial belt. But as in the rest of this state, and much of the industrial Midwest, voters here are skeptical about Al Gore's presidential candidacy. This is a solidly Democratic, heavily unionized area, the buckle of Michigan's industrial belt. But as in the rest of this state, and much of the industrial Midwest, voters here are skeptical about Al Gore's presidential candidacy. And tonight, for three and a half hours, Mr. Gore stood under the hot lights in the sweltering gymnasium of Arthur Hill High School here, patiently answering questions from 200 voters -- many of them undecided -- on the economy, jobs, trade and the insurgent campaign of Ralph Nader. But it was Ms. Redman's questioning that seemed to strike at the heart of the issue. Noting that she was only suddenly aware of his campaign, she told Mr. Gore: ''I wasn't sure I would vote for you. I didn't know if you were strong enough to compete.'' This is one of the areas where Mr. Nader and his anti-corporate third-party candidacy is siphoning votes from Mr. Gore. It may seem odd that Mr. Nader, author of ''Unsafe At Any Speed'' and the longtime nemesis of the auto industry, could make a dent in the support of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.-backed Democratic candidate here. But Mr. Gore, who as Republicans like to say, once proposed elimination of the internal-combustion engine, carries a heavily anti-automobile reputation, too. With Mr. Nader in the race, according to the latest statewide poll by The Detroit Free Press, Mr. Gore trails Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his likely Republican rival, by 12 percentage points. The poll gave Mr. Bush 46 percent, Mr. Gore 34 and Mr. Nader 8. In the same poll two months ago, before Mr. Nader became a factor, Mr. Gore was leading Mr. Bush. The Democrats have spent $1.2 million in television commercials here since then to try to raise Mr. Gore's stock, but to little avail. But Mr. Nader is only part of the problem. Gore backers and analysts say that as the election heats up after Labor Day and Mr. Nader's bare-bones campaign competes for news media attention and on the airwaves, he may become less of a factor. For voters like Ms. Redman, the main concern is that despite Mr. Gore's nearly eight years as vice president and his yearlong presidential campaign, he is still an unknown quantity. The Gore campaign is fully aware that the vice president ''hasn't broken through'' with voters, as one Gore adviser put it. And tonight, he revived one of his favorite campaign venues, the town hall meeting, an open-ended give-and-take with voters that allows Mr. Gore to display his grasp of issues and, more important, to try to convey to voters who he his. While Ms. Redman did not mention President Clinton, Mr. Gore immediately interpreted her concern as one about his toiling in the shadow as a No. 2. He told her that the job of vice president was a ''mixed blessing.'' The ideal person for the job, he told her, was someone who would not care about receiving press attention and who would help ''carry the load when the load gets heavy.'' Ed Sarpolus, who is a longtime political analyst in Lansing and who conducted The Free Press polls, said that despite Mr. Bush's lead across the state, Mr. Gore still leads heavily in this region. But he added that Ms. Redman had given voice to the central obstacle that Mr. Gore had to overcome. ''Gore's problem in Michigan is not the China issue, it's not the labor issue,'' he said of some union concerns. ''It's personality and character because it's tied to Bill Clinton.'' He added: ''When I look at people's angst with Gore, it's not the policies'' that give them pause, but Mr. Clinton's ''moral turpitude,'' he said. ''They will punish Bill through Al. And until Gore separates himself from Clinton, it's the sins of the father being visited on the son.'' Mr. Sarpolus said that Mr. Gore needed eventually to make a clean break with Mr. Clinton, probably after the convention, even though he was relying on the Clinton economy as his biggest selling point. Mr. Gore seems more comfortable training the national discussion on the economy. ''You put your finger on the problem,'' he told a man in a tank top who implored the vice president to ''get more manufacturing jobs back into Michigan.'' But even that man, a union worker who said he earned $23,000 a year, shared a more personal reaction to the vice president as he addressed him. ''You look a lot like my older brother,'' he told Mr. Gore, approvingly. The Gore strategy at this point is to create the chance for the vice president to make these personal connections, which he invariably comes away from successfully, but also to hammer away at his differences with Mr. Bush. Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary, said that Mr. Gore would not be distracted by Mr. Nader, whose name Mr. Gore never uttered during the meeting. Mr. Sarpolus said that Mr. Gore's reference to being ''the woman behind the man'' was probably a useful way to convey his role and his sensibilities to women, who make up the majority of Democratic voters -- even if it did not appeal to male voters, who polls show favor Mr. Bush over the vice president.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column says that if Gov George W Bush's 'compassionate conservatism' is more than a campaign slogan, it must reside in someone like Dylan Glenn, a black Republican and unabashed Bush supporter, who is challenging Rep Sanford Bishop, a black Democrat, in Georgia's Second Congressional District (L) In the packed, sweltering living room of the tiny house that serves as the Dylan Glenn for Congress headquarters, a Louis Farrakhan acolyte is brandishing The Final Call, the Nation of Islam newspaper, and ranting about a Washington conspiracy to rob Georgia's peanut farmers. Listening to him are a couple of dozen angry and weather-beaten black farmers, lifelong Democrats, as well as Mr. Glenn, who wants their vote. Looking down on them all is a regal poster-size photograph of a starchy Barbara Bush, replete with pearls -- but it's not there as a gag. Mr. Glenn is a 31-year-old black Republican, an unabashed George W. Bush cheerleader, who believes he can be elected to Congress by a white-majority district that has never sent any Republican to Washington. In the packed, sweltering living room of the tiny house that serves as the Dylan Glenn for Congress headquarters, a Louis Farrakhan acolyte is brandishing The Final Call, the Nation of Islam newspaper, and ranting about a Washington conspiracy to rob Georgia's peanut farmers. Listening to him are a couple of dozen angry and weather-beaten black farmers, lifelong Democrats, as well as Mr. Glenn, who wants their vote. Looking down on them all is a regal poster-size photograph of a starchy Barbara Bush, replete with pearls -- but it's not there as a gag. Mr. Glenn is a 31-year-old black Republican, an unabashed George W. Bush cheerleader, who believes he can be elected to Congress by a white-majority district that has never sent any Republican to Washington. ''That's the first Black Muslim I've ever seen in southwest Georgia,'' the candidate muses after the meeting, in which he seems to win over his audience, Muslim included, just as I'd seen him win over the all-white staff of a small local telecom business a few hours earlier. Such cross-cultural incongruities abound in Mr. Glenn's race: his campaign coordinator, Lizanne Clay, is a white Jewish Democrat gung-ho for Al Gore. The district itself, Georgia's Second, is one big anomaly. Because Mr. Glenn's opponent, the Democratic Congressman Sanford Bishop, is also black, this is that rare white-majority district in the South, let alone the country, that offers no white choice in its House race. ''The race card is more or less removed from the table,'' says Mr. Glenn. I first met Dylan Glenn a few months ago and was curious to watch him for a simple reason: If Governor Bush's ''compassionate conservatism'' is more than a campaign slogan, it must reside in someone like Mr. Glenn, a smart candidate blessed with charisma and a sense of humor who is taking on a seemingly quixotic political mission. No black Republican has ever defeated a black Democrat in a modern Congressional race; his opponent is a formidable incumbent whom Mr. Glenn himself regards as ''a decent man.'' As Mr. Glenn's strategist, Ron Jensen, explains, Mr. Glenn can win only by holding on to the all-white G.O.P. base (with no defections from any racists who might want to abstain altogether), peeling off some conservative white Democrats and, most crucially, winning some 15 percent of the heretofore monolithically black Democratic vote. If the potential crossover black Democrats I met are any indication, they won't leap easily. One such Glenn enthusiast, a 71-year-old county commissioner and 60's civil-rights veteran named James Mays, regards both George W. Bush and his father as among ''the most evil people in the world.'' Mr. Glenn, who was a young aide in President Bush's White House, hammers in the George W. message -- the classic Republican mantra of ''growth, lower taxes, opportunity, individual responsibility, jobs.'' In essence, he sands down any ideology beyond a faith in free enterprise. The son of educators, he presents himself as an educational reformer and as an energetic, well-connected rainmaker more likely than Mr. Bishop to attract new businesses to an area in desperate need. Like the Texas governor in his address before the N.A.A.C.P. this week, Mr. Glenn doesn't pretend that his party has a distinguished record with minorities. ''There's a perception that the Republican Party is intolerant -- against immigrants, gays, blacks,'' he says, ''and we play into that.'' To put it mildly. In primary season, Mr. Bush and John McCain both lacked the courage to take on South Carolina's Confederate flag. Last month Colin Powell, who is a Glenn contributor, went on Fox to say that the G.O.P. is ''certainly not seen as the black guy's party'' and to dissent strongly from its opposition to affirmative action. This week the Bush campaign made light of a Washington Post reporter who dared bring up the hard-line white supremacist past of its ally Strom Thurmond. Meanwhile, even as Mr. Bush appeared before the N.A.A.C.P., the news media feasted on a 1996 photo of a Republican governor, Christine Todd Whitman, broadly grinning while frisking a black man. Whatever Governor Whitman's intentions, the image was a bizarre echo of antebellum porn. Unlike the white compassionate conservatives in his party, Mr. Glenn can speak with some moral authority. He is a sharecropper's grandson and the great-grandson of emancipated slaves. When pressed, he can cite instances of experiencing discrimination, and he recalls being the sole black person at a White House meeting a decade ago where he had to speak up to challenge other Bush ites' derisive views of welfare recipients. In between campaign stops that ranged from a diesel-scented drag strip populated equally by blacks and whites to a watermelon festival parade in Cordele (''Watermelon Capital of the World''), I asked Mr. Glenn if the latent, tentative G.O.P. embrace of minorities is more spin than action, more election-year packaging than substance. He unsurprisingly asserted that Governor Bush is ''100 percent sincere'' and is intent on moving beyond the ''outreach programs and window dressing'' that have often constituted the G.O.P.'s attempt to woo minorities. ''I know the party isn't seen as motivated by the right reasons,'' he adds. ''It's seen as the party of the rich, white country club and doesn't have a lot of credibility.'' He argues that if he can bring economic relief to those left behind in Clinton-era prosperity he can help turn the page. As the first black Republican elected to Congress from a Confederate state since 1901, he would certainly be a highly watched test case of whether there can be results to back up his party's compassionate rhetoric.
 This was not the first time that the agency had been asked to consider the issue. In 1982, it ruled essentially the same way it ruled this week, that nonunion workers could take co-workers to disciplinary meetings. But the composition of the board changed over the course of the Reagan and Bush administrations, and the board began to rule in subsequent cases that the right to a witness was limited to union workers.
 The skulls and chemicals were found inside a single-room apartment in Bushwick after the man who lived there was arrested on charges that he stood in the street and fired a .22-caliber pistol into the air after arguing with another man about 6 p.m. Thursday, the police said.
 Gov George W Bush backs Rick A Lazio's bid for United States Senate at Conservative Party fund-raiser, New York City; belittles Hillary Rodham Clinton; he and Lazio praise each other's records and credentials in their first joint appearance; Gov George E Pataki also speaks, lauding Bush; Clinton, who challenges Lazio's effort to portray self as moderate, scores him for taking Conservative support (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas flew to New York to offer his support for Representative Rick A. Lazio's bid for the United States Senate yesterday, belittling Hillary Rodham Clinton with a familiar critique before an audience of Conservative Party donors in Manhattan. ''You see, he's from here,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Lazio, a sarcastic edge to his voice. ''This is his state. He knows New York well. He also doesn't have to wear a Yankee cap to play like he's a Yankee fan.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas flew to New York to offer his support for Representative Rick A. Lazio's bid for the United States Senate yesterday, belittling Hillary Rodham Clinton with a familiar critique before an audience of Conservative Party donors in Manhattan. ''You see, he's from here,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Lazio, a sarcastic edge to his voice. ''This is his state. He knows New York well. He also doesn't have to wear a Yankee cap to play like he's a Yankee fan.'' It was the first time that Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, had campaigned alongside Mr. Lazio since Mr. Lazio was chosen to run against Mrs. Clinton. Mr. Lazio, a Suffolk County Republican, and Mr. Bush used their back-to-back appearances to praise each other's records and credentials, and Mr. Lazio used his first joint appearance with his party's presumed presidential nominee to state his support for an antimissile defense shield that Mr. Bush backs. In another speech, Gov. George E. Pataki praised Mr. Bush's conservative ideals. But both Mr. Lazio and Mr. Bush were relatively restrained in their comments about Mrs. Clinton and the Senate race in New York, in what appeared to be an attempt not to draw too much attention to their joint appearance before a Conservative Party fund-raiser. The event posed a complication to Mr. Lazio's candidacy because Mrs. Clinton has recently sought to tie Mr. Lazio to Mr. Bush and repeatedly challenged Mr. Lazio's attempt to portray himself as a moderate Republican. Indeed, even before Mr. Lazio followed Mr. Bush into the ballroom at the Sheraton New York Hotel in Midtown, Mrs. Clinton, at an early-morning news conference in Long Island,  was assailing Mr. Lazio for taking Conservative Party support and appearing at its fund-raising luncheon. Referring to its Web site, the first lady ran through the party's positions several issues, including school vouchers and abortion rights. The joint appearance with Mr. Bush and Mr. Lazio came during one of Mr. Bush's rare trips to New York. Although Mr. Bush said yesterday that he believes he can win New York State against Vice President Al Gore this November, most Republicans and Democrats in the state consider that unlikely, given the Democratic registration edge in New York. For the same reason, Mr. Lazio probably does not stand to gain much politically by campaigning with Mr. Bush -- whom he addressed as Buddy in his speech -- in New York. Mr. Bush's remarks about Mrs. Clinton's residency are the latest indication of the extent to which the first lady's opponents believe a carpetbagger attack is effective against her. The host of the luncheon, Michael Long, the chairman of the state Conservative Party, drew laughs and cheers when he said, ''I admit sometimes when I hear people arguing about the horrible foreign menace that has suddenly appeared in New York, I don't know if they're talking about the West Nile virus or Hillary Clinton.'' ''We live in a dangerous world, ladies and gentlemen,'' Mr. Lazio said. ''We have enemies. And the technology for mass destruction is spreading. My friends, I'm proud to announce today that I will be working with Governor Bush to make sure that we implement an effective missile defense system for America.'' And Mr. Bush devoted only a small part of his speech to Mr. Lazio and his race with Mrs. Clinton. ''The thing I like about Rick is that he is a decisive person,'' Mr. Bush said. ''When he made up his mind to run, he entered the race. He didn't need a listening tour.''
 Count on it: The Religious Right will be back. In about two weeks, the Republican National Convention will anoint George W. Bush's choice of a running mate, and depending on that choice, conservative religious leaders will be featured in the news, either voicing praise and support or expressing disappointment and opposition. Count on it: The Religious Right will be back. In about two weeks, the Republican National Convention will anoint George W. Bush's choice of a running mate, and depending on that choice, conservative religious leaders will be featured in the news, either voicing praise and support or expressing disappointment and opposition.
 Gov George W Bush appears at a Presbyterian meeting hall in Elizabeth, NJ, where he is challenged on his support to death penalty by Rev Joseph H Garlic; photo (M) One of Gov. George W. Bush's campaign events unexpectedly turned into a debate over the death penalty yesterday when a black minister raised questions about the governor's compassion and told him that a recent execution in Texas was ''not a moral decision.'' The surprise exchange, in what is usually a highly scripted campaign, took place at a Presbyterian meeting hall in Elizabeth, N.J., where Mr. Bush had come to highlight his belief in using religious institutions to provide social services. One of Gov. George W. Bush's campaign events unexpectedly turned into a debate over the death penalty yesterday when a black minister raised questions about the governor's compassion and told him that a recent execution in Texas was ''not a moral decision.'' The surprise exchange, in what is usually a highly scripted campaign, took place at a Presbyterian meeting hall in Elizabeth, N.J., where Mr. Bush had come to highlight his belief in using religious institutions to provide social services. The presumed Republican presidential nominee sat with a mostly black and Hispanic panel of church leaders, community organizers and local officials who had been assembled by his campaign to discuss how churches provide services. But halfway through the event, the Rev. Joseph H. Garlic, seated immediately to Mr. Bush's right, changed the subject. Mr. Graham, who had been convicted for the 1981 murder of a man outside a Houston supermarket, was executed in Texas last month, with Mr. Bush proclaiming that ''justice is being done.'' Pointing to the questions that swirled around the case, including the competency of Mr. Graham's lawyer and the fact that only one witness testified against him, Mr. Garlic said the case had given Mr. Bush ''an opportunity to show some compassion and love in a way that had not been shown before.'' ''You and I must differ on the death penalty,'' a surprised Mr. Bush replied, speaking softly. ''I support it because I think it saves lives when it's administered fairly and justly and surely.'' Mr. Bush said of his refusal to intervene in the execution, ''It's not an easy decision to make, as I'm sure you can understand.'' He added, ''But it isn't a political decision for me, Reverend.'' He said he would continue to ''uphold the law'' and ''if it costs me votes, so be it.'' ''We just disagree on that case,'' Mr. Bush said, and the group returned to talking about services for children and to a proposal by him for a $400 million program to help lower-income parents pay for after-school activities. Mr. Bush has made a concerted effort throughout his campaign to prove he is a ''different kind of Republican'' by appearing in minority neighborhoods. He began his week at the N.A.A.C.P. convention. And he told the small crowd of invited guests today that he hoped his appearance before the civil rights organization would cause black voters to think, ''Hey, there might be a little different cut to this man.'' And by the end of the event, he had the crowd laughing, when he raised the question of whether he would remember his visit. ''I think it's safe to say I might,'' Mr. Bush said with a smile. Then the governor turned to Mr. Garlic, former director of the Elizabethport Presbyterian Center, where Mr. Bush spoke, and shook his hand. Though Mr. Garlic said afterward that he ''was absolutely not'' satisfied by Mr. Bush's response, he said Mr. Bush ''handled himself very well in the total situation.'' Several others in the audience said the governor had left them more comfortable with the idea of a Bush presidency and even willing to consider voting for him. Later in the day, Mr. Bush traveled to more traditional Republican turf -- a reception of New York's Conservative Party in a Manhattan hotel ballroom. But the Gary Graham issue followed him, as two protesters rose in the back of the room and began chanting. They were quickly evicted.
