 Gov George W Bush distances himself from views of foreign policy adviser Richard Perle, who counseled Israeli officials to accept only a comprehensive peace agreement and to resist any efforts by Clinton administration to use Camp David summit meeting in presidential campaign; Bush says Perle spoke only for himself, and not Bush campaign (M) In the days leading to the Camp David peace talks, a foreign policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush counseled Israeli officials to accept only a comprehensive peace agreement and to resist any efforts by the Clinton administration to use the summit meeting in the presidential campaign. The comments by the adviser, Richard Perle, caused Mr. Bush to distance himself today from those views. Mr. Bush said Mr. Perle had been ''speaking for himself'' and not the Bush campaign when he talked with Yossi Alper, an aide to Prime Minister Ehud Barak, and another Israeli official, Yoram Ben-Zeev. In the days leading to the Camp David peace talks, a foreign policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush counseled Israeli officials to accept only a comprehensive peace agreement and to resist any efforts by the Clinton administration to use the summit meeting in the presidential campaign. The comments by the adviser, Richard Perle, caused Mr. Bush to distance himself today from those views. Mr. Bush said Mr. Perle had been ''speaking for himself'' and not the Bush campaign when he talked with Yossi Alper, an aide to Prime Minister Ehud Barak, and another Israeli official, Yoram Ben-Zeev. ''I wish the administration all the best when it comes to bringing peace to the Middle East,'' Mr. Bush said, appearing outside the governor's mansion after an hour-long meeting with former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger. Mr. Bush said that he opposed any efforts to politicize the peace talks and that ''my campaign will not do so.'' Mr. Bush said that President Clinton ''deserves credit'' for his efforts to try to achieve a lasting peace settlement between the Palestinians and Israelis. Mr. Perle is one of a small circle of former state and defense department officials from previous Republican administrations who advise the governor on foreign policy, though they are not paid staff members of the Bush campaign. ''Are Governor Bush and his advisers interested in peace or politics for Israel?'' asked Representative Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut, the ranking Democrat on the House International Relations Committee. ''We should all be hoping that Camp David is successful, not figuring out how to score political points.'' He said that a Bush aide had called him about the article in The Post this morning and that he recounted what he had said and had not said. He denied the contention in the article that he had told the Israelis not to let Vice President Al Gore participate in the meeting.
 Bill Bradley says for first time that he will endorse Vice Pres Al Gore and calls on his supporters to unite behind Gore's candidacy (M) Former Senator Bill Bradley made it official today: he will use the ''e'' word when he appears with Vice President Al Gore on Thursday in their first joint appearance since Mr. Bradley quit the presidential race in March. In a preview of the remarks he plans to give in Wisconsin, Mr. Bradley posted a message on his Web site today saying for the first time that he would endorse Mr. Gore. And he called on his supporters to unite behind the vice president's candidacy for the good of the Democratic Party and the principles he campaigned on in the primaries, including universal health care, gun control and campaign finance reform. Former Senator Bill Bradley made it official today: he will use the ''e'' word when he appears with Vice President Al Gore on Thursday in their first joint appearance since Mr. Bradley quit the presidential race in March. In a preview of the remarks he plans to give in Wisconsin, Mr. Bradley posted a message on his Web site today saying for the first time that he would endorse Mr. Gore. And he called on his supporters to unite behind the vice president's candidacy for the good of the Democratic Party and the principles he campaigned on in the primaries, including universal health care, gun control and campaign finance reform. ''This morning, I will introduce Vice President Gore at a rally in Green Bay, Wis., and endorse his candidacy for the presidency,'' Mr. Bradley wrote in the message, dated July 13. ''The Democratic Party is a place of many voices, but we all share the same values,'' he said. ''It's why we're Democrats. I firmly believe that as the nominee of the Democratic Party, Al Gore is the best choice for president, and I hope and expect that he will be elected in November.'' Mr. Bradley's words and body language will be closely scrutinized by Democrats and political analysts on Thursday because of the bitter nature of his primary contests with Mr. Gore. When he quit the race after failing to win a single state, Mr. Bradley was sharply critical of the vice president's slashing campaign style, asserting that Mr. Gore had repeatedly distorted Mr. Bradley's ideas and record. And though he said at that time that he would support the vice president's candidacy, Mr. Bradley pointedly refused to use the word ''endorse.'' Mr. Bradley's advisers have said that he would be far more enthusiastic about Mr. Gore in their joint appearance on Thursday. But there is little evidence of that in his Web site message. Instead, Mr. Bradley talks broadly and idealistically about the differences between the parties, while barely mentioning the vice president, other than to endorse him. Mr. Bradley ended the message with a remark that some Bradley fans have interpreted as suggesting that he will seek to play a prominent role in the party if Mr. Gore loses in November.
 When the polls closed in a runoff election in 1997, Mr. Brown had vindicated the men who had gambled on him, defeating the Republican Rob Mosbacher, a businessman and son of a former commerce secretary in the Bush White House, by 6 percentage points. Though Anglos made up slightly more than half the turnout, Mr. Brown had won with 97 percent of the black vote, 66 percent of the Hispanic and 23 percent of the Anglo, according to an exit poll by Robert M. Stein of Rice University.
 Richard Perle, a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, was assistant secretary for international security policy at the Defense Department from 1981 to 1987. He is an adviser to Gov. George W. Bush.
 Excerpts from Vice Pres Al Gore's speech to NAACP (M)
 Schools and libraries on American Samoa become less remote from the rest of the world thanks to E-rate, government program that provides computers and Internet access to all public and private schools and libraries; E-rate is now a success, but it was nearly defeated by Republican lawmakers, who called it the 'Gore tax' because Vice Pres Al Gore championed program, which imposes a fee on long-distance telephone companies; photos (M) The E-rate was nearly defeated by Republican lawmakers, who called it the ''Gore tax'' because Vice President Al Gore had championed the program, which imposed a fee on long-distance telephone companies. The issue had threatened to dog Mr. Gore in the presidential campaign, but the political firestorm has largely been extinguished. Now Mr. Gore touts the success of the E-rate as he campaigns, and Texas, the state of his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, has put together a $1.5 billion Telecommunications Infrastructure Fund to spread Internet access to schools and libraries.
 Vice Pres Al Gore makes spirited speech at convention of NAACP in Baltimore, reminding black voters of his long commitment to their cause; Gore's message, threaded thickly with policy positions, is in deliberate counterpoint to Gov George W Bush's recent speech to group, which drew criticism that he offered only breezy generalities; photo (M) From his  opening salutation  ''I am a member of the N.A.A.C.P.; it's good to be home'' -- to his closing motivational cry -- ''I'm not asking you to read my lips; I'm asking you to read my heart!'' -- a spirited Al Gore summoned black voters today to support his presidential candidacy, reminding them of his long commitment to their cause and deriding Gov. George W. Bush as offering only words, not action. From his  opening salutation  ''I am a member of the N.A.A.C.P.; it's good to be home'' -- to his closing motivational cry -- ''I'm not asking you to read my lips; I'm asking you to read my heart!'' -- a spirited Al Gore summoned black voters today to support his presidential candidacy, reminding them of his long commitment to their cause and deriding Gov. George W. Bush as offering only words, not action. Mr. Gore's message, threaded thickly with his policy positions, was in deliberate counterpoint to Mr. Bush's speech to the same group on Monday, when the Texas governor was criticized by many in the organization who said he offered only breezy generalities. Mr. Bush was the first Republican presidential candidate to court the N.A.A.C.P. since his father spoke to the group in 1988; still, the governor received a tepid response compared with the rousing and repeated standing ovations that Mr. Gore drew today. He reiterated his opposition to raising the retirement age for Social Security benefits and to Mr. Bush's proposal to divert some Social Security investment into the stock market. Mr. Gore spoke of his support for a patients' bill of rights, gun control and a full count of people in the census as opposed to sampling. Invoking the heroes of black history, from Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman to Thurgood Marshall and Rosa Parks, Mr. Gore promised to ban racial profiling so that motorists would not be pulled over simply for ''driving while black.'' He castigated Mr. Bush for invoking the notion of ''states' rights'' to avoid taking a position on whether South Carolina should remove the Confederate battle flag from its Statehouse. Mr. Gore's appearance comes amid some concern among his staff members that blacks have been left dispirited by the campaign. Black voters account for about 15 percent of the electorate, and they usually support Democrats overwhelmingly. A New York Times/CBS News Poll in May showed Mr. Gore with 69 percent of the black vote and about 17 percent for Mr. Bush. But President Clinton, by contrast, has more than a 90 percent approval rating among black voters. Analysts said Mr. Gore could probably claim that level of support by Election Day, but questioned the commitment of black voters. David Bositis, chief pollster for the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, said: ''He'll get 90 to 95 percent of the black vote. The larger question for Gore really is black turnout, as opposed to his share of the black vote.'' Mr. Bositis said that Mr. Gore would inherit the good relations with blacks that the president had built up, stemming from the record economic expansion, low unemployment among blacks, numerous appointments of blacks to administration positions and falling crime rates. Also, Mr. Bositis said, Mr. Bush's message of being a ''different kind of Republican'' was aimed less at winning over black voters than at white swing voters. Still, he added, overall turnout in November is likely to be low, precisely because the economy is doing so well, and Mr. Gore's challenge is to activate his base, which he has had some difficulty doing. While polls show Mr. Bush winning the support of 90 percent of Republicans, Mr. Gore has the support of only about 70 percent of Democrats. This was evident in the introduction of Mr. Gore by William Lucy, an N.A.A.C.P. board member, who said, ''Al Gore, unlike a lot of other people, has not just discovered the N.A.A.C.P.'' Mr. Lucy also noted Mr. Gore's lineage as the son of Senator Albert Gore, who supported most civil rights legislation (though he did not back the Civil Rights Act of 1964). ''He has drawn from that deep well of public consciousness given to him by his father,'' Mr. Lucy said. Mr. Gore easily assumed command of the audience. In imploring his listeners to work hard to help the Democrats recapture the House, Mr. Gore said: ''I want you to consider how much we can get done by taking back the Congress, how much justice will be redeemed when John Conyers is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, how much economic progress will be made when Charlie Rangel is chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.'' Amid gales of laughter, he prompted delegates to their feet with a cadenced ridicule of Mr. Bush's talk of compassionate conservatism -- ''Talk doesn't cost much,'' Mr. Gore said -- compared to his own record of accomplishment. ''I know that you heard some nice-sounding words on Monday afternoon,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But I remembered what scripture teaches in the Book of James, Chapter 2, Verse 18: 'Yay, a man may say thou hast faith, and I have works. Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.''' And he accused Mr. Bush of repeated failures to respond to minority voters, at one point offering a dramatized rendition of an imagined chilly, monosyllabic Bush response -- ''no'' -- to the family of James Byrd, a black man dragged to his death in Texas in June 1998, when the family asked the governor to support legislation against hate crimes. N.A.A.C.P. officials seemed thrilled with Mr. Gore's performance. Julian Bond, the organization's chairman, said, ''The vice president had substance and Governor Bush had a drive-by photo opportunity.'' Kweisi Mfume, the president of the organization, said he appreciated the fact that Mr. Bush spoke to the group, but acknowledged Mr. Gore's edge. ''Al Gore is pretty much a family member,'' Mr. Mfume said. He told reporters he could forgive Mr. Gore's support for the death penalty -- a subject Mr. Gore did not raise -- because his stand was principled and not political. Joe Watson, 55, a meat cutter from Monterey, Calif., said: ''I believe Gore is more for the people. I like what he said about affirmative action, jobs and investing back in the communities.'' Edith McDougald, 57, a schoolteacher from Glen Burnie, Md., said she would not hold Mr. Gore's support for the death penalty against him, because it was the only area where she disagreed with him. ''Bush's reaction to the executions will be in the negative for him,'' she said, referring to the recent execution of a black man in Texas. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT  Correction:  July 15, 2000, Saturday  An article on Thursday about a speech by Vice President Al Gore at the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. in which he reiterated his policy proposals misstated his position on statistical sampling to adjust the census count. He favors sampling; he does not oppose it. An article on Thursday about a speech by Vice President Al Gore at the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. in which he reiterated his policy proposals misstated his position on statistical sampling to adjust the census count. He favors sampling; he does not oppose it.
 With a host of politicians, including Vice President Al Gore, demanding an investigation of ''price gouging,'' the Federal Trade Commission has started an inquiry into possible industry collusion.
 Officials say DNA test has failed to exonerate Texas death row inmate Ricky Nolen McGinn, whose case took on political significance last month when Gov George W Bush interrupted his presidential campaign to grant a stay of execution (M) A DNA test has failed to exonerate a Texas death row inmate whose case took on political significance last month when Gov. George W. Bush interrupted his presidential campaign to grant the man a stay of execution, say officials knowledgeable about  the results. The case of Ricky Nolen McGinn, 43, who was convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter, attracted national attention when his lawyers urged that new DNA tests be conducted to address doubts about his conviction. Mr. Bush, who has presided over 137 executions since taking office in 1995, granted Mr. McGinn a reprieve -- the first time the governor had done so -- to allow the DNA tests to take place. A DNA test has failed to exonerate a Texas death row inmate whose case took on political significance last month when Gov. George W. Bush interrupted his presidential campaign to grant the man a stay of execution, say officials knowledgeable about  the results. The case of Ricky Nolen McGinn, 43, who was convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter, attracted national attention when his lawyers urged that new DNA tests be conducted to address doubts about his conviction. Mr. Bush, who has presided over 137 executions since taking office in 1995, granted Mr. McGinn a reprieve -- the first time the governor had done so -- to allow the DNA tests to take place. Now, one of a series of DNA tests being conducted in response to Mr. Bush's reprieve has confirmed a match with Mr. McGinn, a law enforcement official and a high-ranking Texas Republican said. The match was also confirmed by a federal law enforcement official. The test findings could provide some political ammunition for Mr. Bush, who has come under scrutiny and criticism for the capital punishment system in Texas. Michael Jones, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the governor's office had not yet been notified of any DNA results and noted that the additional testing could take several more weeks. At a news conference outside the governor's mansion, Mr. Bush said: ''All the evidence is under a gag order. All parties are not supposed to talk about it, and I'm going to honor that gag order.'' Later, he said of the case, ''at some point in time we'll find out the truth.'' Mr. McGinn had been scheduled to die by lethal injection on June 1, and the state Board of Pardons and Paroles had voted against recommending a reprieve for DNA testing. But Mr. Bush, who under state law can override the board in such a case and grant a 30-day stay, decided to do that. In doing so, he said Mr. McGinn could ''have his full day in court.'' ''To me, Governor Bush's reprieve acknowledged problems in the system,'' said Ms. Levin, who as the head of Texas Defender Service regularly handles death row appeals.
 DNA Test Fails to Exonerate Prisoner Given Stay by Bush  A DNA test has failed to exonerate a Texas inmate whose case took on political significance when Gov. George W. Bush granted him a stay of execution, officials knowledgeable about the results say. DNA Test Fails to Exonerate Prisoner Given Stay by Bush  A DNA test has failed to exonerate a Texas inmate whose case took on political significance when Gov. George W. Bush granted him a stay of execution, officials knowledgeable about the results say.
 By his senior year, Mr. Murphy had dropped out of Georgetown for full-time politics. His first big client, in 1984, was Representative William Carney of Long Island, the incumbent who won. Mr. Murphy worked his way to the outskirts of the presidential campaign of Bob Dole in 1988 and to the primaries of George Bush in 1992. By 1996, he was in the center of the action as the chief strategist for Lamar Alexander's presidential run. His other clients have included Govs. Jeb Bush of Florida and John Engler of Michigan. He met Mr. Lazio through Cliff Pintak, a partner in his political consulting firm.
 While making these fixes, the bill's supporters must also focus on building political momentum in the House, where opponents will try to create mischief. One person who could help move things forward is Jeb Bush, Florida's governor. He has promised $200 million, Florida's share of the project's first-year costs. But he has not shown the enthusiasm of his predecessor, Lawton Chiles, who courageously blocked efforts by the agricultural interests to exercise line-by-line veto power over the project through their friends in the state legislature. A more vigorous public commitment on his part would be welcome and might have real influence in the House. At risk is an irreplaceable natural asset that happens to be dying.
 BUSH LIKES THE ATTENTION -- Gov. George W. Bush said today that he did not mind Vice President Al Gore's focus on him and calls for the governor to step into the debate in Congress. ''I've been somewhat surprised by the reaction to this campaign by my opponent and the president,'' Mr. Bush told state party leaders at a Republican National Committee meeting in Austin, Tex. ''They seem to be talking about me a lot. They're talking about me and I'm talking about me, and that's the way I like it. I must have the president worried because he spends time talking about our campaign. That's a good sign.'' He also scoffed at Mr. Gore's criticism of Congress as a ''do nothing for people'' Legislature. ''He himself is the president of the Senate,'' Mr. Bush said, adding that Mr. Gore would give the country ''four more years of a president at war with Congress.'' BUSH LIKES THE ATTENTION -- Gov. George W. Bush said today that he did not mind Vice President Al Gore's focus on him and calls for the governor to step into the debate in Congress. ''I've been somewhat surprised by the reaction to this campaign by my opponent and the president,'' Mr. Bush told state party leaders at a Republican National Committee meeting in Austin, Tex. ''They seem to be talking about me a lot. They're talking about me and I'm talking about me, and that's the way I like it. I must have the president worried because he spends time talking about our campaign. That's a good sign.'' He also scoffed at Mr. Gore's criticism of Congress as a ''do nothing for people'' Legislature. ''He himself is the president of the Senate,'' Mr. Bush said, adding that Mr. Gore would give the country ''four more years of a president at war with Congress.'' NADER WORRIES GORE CAMP -- Vice President Al Gore's new campaign chairman, William M. Daley, says Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, poses a threat to Mr. Gore's campaign, and allies inside and outside the campaign have made informal overtures to some key Nader supporters. ''There's been some discussions,'' Mr. Daley was quoted as saying on Tuesday by The Associated Press, ''kind of just, 'What is this? Why are you over there?' Nothing official where we've approached the candidate.'' Mr. Nader says at least three of his ''celebrity supporters'' have been contacted, one by the vice president himself, but he refuses to name them. Mr. Nader is drawing less than 10 percent in most polls and is given no real chance of winning. But he could hurt Mr. Gore because much of the support he has appears to come at Mr. Gore's expense, especially in swing states. GORE READY TO MEET BRADLEY -- Vice President Al Gore yesterday gave a preview of his scheduled meeting on Thursday with Bill Bradley, the former New Jersey senator and now-dispatched primary opponent. ''I'm looking forward to being with Bill Bradley,'' Mr. Gore said at a fund-raising reception in Livingston, N.J. ''We're going to have a great day together. I had a wonderful conversation with him a few days ago. I called, and we had a great talk, and from what he told me about his speech tomorrow, I think it's going to be a very hard-hitting speech.'' Mr. Gore was in New Jersey yesterday raising about $850,000 for the Democratic National Committee. He began at the home of Charles Kushner, a real estate developer, in Livingston, where about 70 people paid $5,000 each. He then went to Englewood, where he had dinner at the home of Orin Kramer, a lawyer and former Carter administration official, and his wife, Hilary Ballon, a professor of art history at Columbia University. About 40 people paid $12,500 each for the dinner, and the event raised nearly $600,000.
 DNA Fails to Exonerate Inmate Given Stay by Bush  A DNA test has failed to exonerate a Texas death row inmate, Ricky Nolen McGinn, whose case took on political significance last month when Gov. George W. Bush interrupted his presidential campaign to grant him a stay of execution, according to officials knowledgeable about the results. Gore Courts Black Voters  Al Gore summoned black voters to support his presidential candidacy, citing his long commitment to their cause and deriding Gov. George W. Bush as offering only words. A foreign policy adviser to Governor Bush, in the days leading up to the Camp David peace talks, counseled Israeli officials to accept only a comprehensive peace agreement and to resist any efforts by the Clinton administration to use the summit in the presidential campaign. Former Senator Bill Bradley indicated that he would endorse Vice President Gore when he appears with him today in their first joint appearance since Mr. Bradley quit the race in March.
 Democratic National Committee's new television commercial shows Vice Pres Al Gore saying that he supports constitutional amendment to protect rights of crime victims; photo (M) The Democratic National Committee's new television commercial being broadcast in 17 battleground states shows Vice President Al Gore saying that he supports an amendment to the Constitution to protect the rights of crime victims. The Democratic National Committee's new television commercial being broadcast in 17 battleground states shows Vice President Al Gore saying that he supports an amendment to the Constitution to protect the rights of crime victims. ON THE SCREEN -- Pictures of Mr. Gore addressing a town meeting and talking to police officers. Near the end, there is a picture of people who  appear to be unhappy crime victims with a police officer. THE SCRIPT -- Mr. Gore: ''Accused criminals have all kinds of rights. But the victims of crimes do not have rights that are always protected and guaranteed. That's why I'm for a constitutional amendment to protect victims' rights. So that for example, if somebody has been a crime victim and the person who committed that crime is about to be released, they ought to be notified. If there's a trial, they ought to have a right to speak to the jury. The people who are hurt by crime need to be heard.'' ACCURACY -- Mr. Gore does support a constitutional amendment, as does Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee. Thirty-two states have laws providing victims varying rights to be heard, though usually at the time of sentencing and not when a jury is considering guilt or innocence. President Clinton called in general terms for a constitutional amendment to protect victims' rights in 1996, but his administration opposed some versions of such an amendment in Congress. One version came to the Senate floor in April, but it was withdrawn after it became clear that objections to putting such a narrow amendment in the Constitution would keep it from being passed. SCORECARD -- The advertisement portrays Mr. Gore as a forceful defender of crime victims and as an enthusiast for the recent tendency to propose constitutional amendments to solve a variety of problems. While a detailed explanation of an amendment is not possible in a 30-second spot, one is not supplied on Mr. Gore's Web site, either. His office said there was no text of a proposed amendment.
 Besides Mr. Springer, Mr. Cicchino is survived by his parents, Peter A. and Mary Jane Cicchino of Kearny; three sisters, Sally Rooney, Jane Goretski and Jill Cicchino, also of Kearny; and a brother, William, of Cranford, N.J.
