 Mr. Lepuschitz has touched a raw nerve. Standardized tests -- increasingly linked to grade promotion, graduation, even teachers' salaries and the tenure of principals -- are the single biggest thing to have hit American education since Sputnik. Responding to the understandable demands for more ''accountability,'' almost every school in the land is morphing into a test-taking factory. Both Al Gore and George W. Bush have touted proposals linking federal dollars to scores on standardized tests.
 He is survived by four sisters, Farideh Sadjadi of Baltimore, Fereshteh Jahanbani of New York, Forouzandeh Moghimi of Tehran, Iran, and Behjat Ghanbari of Bushehr, Iran; and a brother, Mohsen Esfandiary of Washington. Correction:  July 12, 2000, Wednesday  An obituary yesterday about the futurist who took the name FM-2030 rendered incorrectly the names and residences of his surviving sisters in some copies. They are Farideh Sadjadi of Baltimore, Fereshteh Jahanbani of New York, Forouzandeh Moghimi of Tehran, Iran, and Behjat Ghanbari of Bushehr, Iran. An obituary yesterday about the futurist who took the name FM-2030 rendered incorrectly the names and residences of his surviving sisters in some copies. They are Farideh Sadjadi of Baltimore, Fereshteh Jahanbani of New York, Forouzandeh Moghimi of Tehran, Iran, and Behjat Ghanbari of Bushehr, Iran.
 Yet, there is no disputing the notion that Toronto got the best of a trade that brought them Wells, Homer Bush and Graeme Lloyd. The deal was really about Wells and Clemens, and Wells could be gloating because he is 15-2 this year and was selected by Joe Torre, his former manager, to start the All-Star Game on Tuesday night. The National League starter will be Randy Johnson, who is 14-2 with a 1.80 earned run average and 198 strikeouts in 144 2/3 innings. Yet, there is no disputing the notion that Toronto got the best of a trade that brought them Wells, Homer Bush and Graeme Lloyd. The deal was really about Wells and Clemens, and Wells could be gloating because he is 15-2 this year and was selected by Joe Torre, his former manager, to start the All-Star Game on Tuesday night. The National League starter will be Randy Johnson, who is 14-2 with a 1.80 earned run average and 198 strikeouts in 144 2/3 innings.
 Vice Pres Al Gore takes new tack in presidential campaign, beginning series of broadsides against Republican-controlled Congress and seeking to align rival Gov George W Bush with antipopulist stands he says are result of control of Congress by special interests; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore took a new tack in his presidential campaign today, beginning a series of broadsides against the Republican-controlled Congress and seeking to align Gov. George W. Bush, his Republican rival, with antipopulist stands that he says are a result of the control of Congress by special interests. Mr. Gore repeatedly branded Congress with a mouthful phrase -- the ''do-nothing-for-the-people Republican Congress'' -- in an effort to sharpen the differences between him and Mr. Bush. Vice President Al Gore took a new tack in his presidential campaign today, beginning a series of broadsides against the Republican-controlled Congress and seeking to align Gov. George W. Bush, his Republican rival, with antipopulist stands that he says are a result of the control of Congress by special interests. Mr. Gore repeatedly branded Congress with a mouthful phrase -- the ''do-nothing-for-the-people Republican Congress'' -- in an effort to sharpen the differences between him and Mr. Bush. ''It is time for the Congress to listen to the people and not the powerful,'' Mr. Gore said, speaking in an incongruously soft voice to about 300 people in the ornate auditorium of Central Connecticut State University. ''It's time for them to do something instead of doing nothing. I've heard from people all over this country who can't wait for them to work up the gumption to come out from under the thumb of the special interests.'' Mr. Gore said that Congress, in which he served for 16 years, was controlled by big oil, big drug companies, big insurance companies and health maintenance organizations and that Mr. Bush, who has so far largely sidestepped association with Congressional Republicans, was doing the bidding of these industries. ''Governor Bush, who is now head of the Republican Party, says nothing about this,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and his silence aids and abets the do-nothing Republican-led Congress and the same special interests who are contributing so much to his own campaign: the H.M.O.'s, the insurance companies, the pharmaceutical companies, the oil companies and the big polluters.'' In essence, Mr. Gore was trying to lump Congress with institutions that, polling shows, people love to hate. The venue he chose to open up this  scorching of the Republican leadership was a blue-collar region of Connecticut that is represented in Congress by a Republican, Nancy L. Johnson. Connecticut, which voted for President Clinton and is home to two Democratic senators, is considered a toss-up state, a bad sign for Mr. Gore, whose strongest region should be the Northeast, the most liberal and reliably Democratic part of the country. A recent poll by the Hartford Courant and the University of Connecticut showed the two candidates in a statistical dead heat, with Mr. Gore winning 45 percent of the vote and Mr. Bush, who has family roots here, with 43 percent. G. Donald Ferree Jr., director of the poll, said in an interview that Mr. Gore appeared to be falling back on the strategy of attacking big institutions because he was having a hard time overcoming the perception that Mr. Bush was more likable and was stronger on personal matters like leadership and credibility. ''Going after Bush personally is not working and may not seem fair,'' Mr. Ferree said. ''The less Gore focuses on personality, the better for him. It's better for Gore not to treat him as a person but to treat him as a front for the Republicans. The Congress is impersonal.'' Mr. Gore has been trying to frame the race as a dramatic ideological choice, between his own moderate, centrist views and those of a candidate who would be following the dictates of the right wing, especially with nominations of Supreme Court justices who would oppose abortion. The Gore camp has long believed that the vice president would win the election because the positions he held were more carefully crafted to public opinion than those of Governor Bush. Mr. Gore has spent much of the spring fine-tuning his positions and is now on a mission to make the public aware of his differences with Mr. Bush. Working to Mr. Gore's advantage, his supporters contend, is that his positions meld with those of most Democratic officeholders. While Republicans are splintered along numerous fault lines, the Democrats are speaking with more or less one voice, the exception being trade. Today, that message was delivered by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut Democrat who has been mentioned as a possible vice presidential running mate and who introduced Mr. Gore here. ''I am here to fight to protect Connecticut's voters from deceptive politics,'' Senator Lieberman told the audience. ''Don't let yourself be cheated by Republican offers that sound good but don't deliver. Don't let yourself be cheated by statements that seem centrist but in the end end up on the fringes, that talk the compassionate talk but, believe me, I've looked at the details, simply do not walk the compassionate walk. Al Gore is the real thing.'' He added: ''In Stevie Wonder's words, Al Gore is singing in the key of life.'' Before his speech today, Mr. Gore took part in an online discussion with readers of The Washington Post. ''I support it for particularly heinous crimes because I believe there are some offenses for which it is just,'' Mr. Gore responded. ''I know that many feel it does not really have a deterrent effect, but I think it probably does.''
 BUDGET PROBLEMS IN TEXAS  One thing George W. Bush has known in his more than five years as governor of Texas is prosperity. But now the State of Texas is facing a budget shortfall of as much as $750 million, fueled by deficits in Medicaid and other state programs and rising costs for prison inmates, according to The Houston Chronicle. Members of the Legislative Budget Board, which oversees the budget, are scheduled to meet privately with state budget officials today to plan an emergency appropriations bill for January. Rob Junell, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, said the state's economy would provide enough new revenues to cover the shortfall. BUDGET PROBLEMS IN TEXAS  One thing George W. Bush has known in his more than five years as governor of Texas is prosperity. But now the State of Texas is facing a budget shortfall of as much as $750 million, fueled by deficits in Medicaid and other state programs and rising costs for prison inmates, according to The Houston Chronicle. Members of the Legislative Budget Board, which oversees the budget, are scheduled to meet privately with state budget officials today to plan an emergency appropriations bill for January. Rob Junell, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, said the state's economy would provide enough new revenues to cover the shortfall. AN UNLIKELY RUNNING MATE  Gov. Gray Davis of California came just inches yesterday from ruling himself out of the running to be Al Gore's ticket mate. Mr. Davis has frequently been mentioned as a possible choice, someone whose considerable popularity in the Golden State could help Mr. Gore win its biggest-of-all trove of electoral votes. But the job has not been offered to him, he said in an interview, and therefore he would not address a theoretical question about whether he would accept it. ''However,'' he went on, ''what I will say is that I told the people of California when they elected me in 1998 that I would serve a full four-year term, and that is what I intend to do.''
 Because the low-power radio plan is already law, Congress is expected to move quickly to head it off before the commission grants any licenses. White House officials have said they support the creation of low-power radio stations, as has Vice President Al Gore. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has not taken a public position on the issue, said Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for his presidential campaign.
 The timing of the photo's release -- three weeks before the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, just across the Delaware River from Camden -- could hardly be worse for the governor. Some of her supporters still hold out hopes that Gov. George W. Bush might choose her as a running mate, but Mrs. Whitman's close advisers say she is trying to position herself for a cabinet position or ambassadorship.
 Thomas L. Friedman suggests that Al Gore pick Bill Clinton as his running mate (''A Modest Proposal,'' column, July 7). The same reasoning suggests that George W. Bush should pick his father, the former president. The selection of George H. W. Bush would save the duplication of Secret Service teams. Also, his background has been checked, and he has the added advantage of compensating for his son's weak grasp of foreign policy. Thomas L. Friedman suggests that Al Gore pick Bill Clinton as his running mate (''A Modest Proposal,'' column, July 7). The same reasoning suggests that George W. Bush should pick his father, the former president. The selection of George H. W. Bush would save the duplication of Secret Service teams. Also, his background has been checked, and he has the added advantage of compensating for his son's weak grasp of foreign policy.
 Article in series, Al Gore's Journey, tracing political career of Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore; focuses on his tenure in Army, where he was given special treatment as son of Sen Albert Gore, opponent of war in Vietnam, even though he sought none; he found exhilaration working as Army journalist in Vietnam in war he and millions of other Americans hated; army friend says Vietnam seemed to draw him out emotionally, providing no shortage of what Gore himself calls vividness that makes him feel more alive; photos (L) In some ways, Army Private Al Gore was never and could never have been just one of the guys, another grunt. Recruiters were afraid to even sign him up without calling in a supervisor, once they heard his name and caught on that he was the son of that antiwar Senator Albert Gore. In some ways, Army Private Al Gore was never and could never have been just one of the guys, another grunt. Recruiters were afraid to even sign him up without calling in a supervisor, once they heard his name and caught on that he was the son of that antiwar Senator Albert Gore. ''Those with lesser rank bumped him up to me because they were scared of making a mistake,'' said Dess Stokes, the staff sergeant on duty at the Newark Armed Forces Entrance and Examination Station, where Mr. Gore went to enlist, hoping to avoid notice, in August 1969. ''We all knew who he was because of his daddy opposing the war.'' No less than the Army's highest-ranking officer, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, singled him out during a visit to Fort Rucker, Ala., where Mr. Gore was stationed for more than a year. The Army chief of staff stopped in the middle of a ceremony to pull the young man aside for a private chat -- and kept Mr. Gore's superior officers waiting, and watching, while he asked one of the lowest-ranking men on the base for his thoughts on why so many young people opposed the war. Yet there is no evidence that Mr. Gore sought special treatment, or that the extra notice he got anyway provided any real protection. On the contrary, as an Army journalist, Mr. Gore probably assumed more risk than he had to, choppering around South Vietnam interviewing soldiers who had just seen action. ''Anybody who knew Al Gore in Vietnam knows he could have sat on his butt and he didn't,'' said Michael Roche, Mr. Gore's editor on The Castle Courier, the newspaper of the Army's Engineering Command in Long Binh, near Saigon. Among 30 or 40 part-time correspondents and 3 or 4 reporters, Mr. Roche said, ''I didn't have one who traveled as much as he did.'' And if Mr. Gore has a dirty secret from Vietnam, it is not that he spent his tour hiding in headquarters, but that he found much of the experience exhilarating and loved feeling ''more alive,'' to use his words, in the middle of the war that he and millions of other Americans hated. Mr. Gore is drawn to vividness, and though he is generally regarded as cautious, he has also, throughout his life, been a little bit attracted to risk and speed, practicing water-skiing stunts as a kid in Tennessee, riding his motorcycle too fast around Harvard -- or taking off in a helicopter near the DMZ with his legs dangling out the side. When asked about an Army friend's comment that he had a lot of fun in Vietnam, Mr. Gore said: ''You aren't supposed to say that, I guess. There was always the awareness of why you were there and what was going on. But in the sense of the camaraderie and the vividness again? In many ways, you're more alive.'' Those who knew Mr. Gore as a child remember his home life as rigorous, achievement-oriented and more focused on doing than feeling. His mother, Pauline LaFon Gore, recalled that the night Albert Gore lost his Senate seat in 1970 was one of the only times she ever saw her son cry. Recently, he was telling the story of his mother's being stranded in downtown Washington immediately after the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was shot. But when his interviewer remarked that the looting and smashing of windows must have been scary for her, he offhandedly said no, he didn't believe he'd ever seen his mother show fear. One Army friend said Vietnam seemed to draw Mr. Gore out emotionally -- providing no shortage of what he himself called the vividness that made him feel more alive. Mr. Gore has occasionally added a splash of color to the tableau when describing his military service. Years ago, he told reporters he was shot at in Vietnam when he was not -- an exaggeration that may have been less an attempt to mislead than to make his experience more vivid. When asked about those statements, Mr. Gore said only this, ''I wasn't shot at, but I was in areas where there was firing.'' He mentioned a trip with Mike O'Hara, now a sportswriter for The Detroit News, to Khe Sanh, near the DMZ, where Army engineers were re-opening an abandoned airstrip. ''They sent in the infantry to secure it and there were helicopter gunships firing,'' Mr. Gore added. ''My buddy kidded me for digging a foxhole, but there was firing in the hills surrounding there. It wasn't aimed at me, but I wasn't sure of that.'' Mr. O'Hara, Mr. Gore's closest friend in Vietnam, has said he recalls gunfire, too -- all outgoing. When he first ran for president, in 1988, Mr. Gore's campaign was criticized for using photos of him in his uniform, carrying a standard-issue M-16. Was he trying to create the impression that he saw combat? Al Gore's military record is in no particular need of improvement. He was one of only about a dozen of the 1,115 Harvard graduates in the Class of '69 who went to Vietnam. And even before enlisting, he passed up a chance to serve in the National Guard -- the military option chosen by his presidential opponent, George W. Bush. A cousin of Mr. Gore said she and her then-husband had secured the promise of a place for him in the Alabama Guard. ''I had friends who had gone to Vietnam, and one who had come back a paraplegic, and I was beside myself wanting to keep Al out of there,'' said the cousin, Gayle Byrne, of Birmingham, who grew up near Carthage, Tenn., where the Gores spent summers on their farm. So Ms. Byrne's former husband, a member of the Guard, asked a well-placed contact to hold a spot for Mr. Gore. The decision was complicated by his father's coming Senate race, which everyone knew would be tough, in large part because of Senator Gore's stand against the war. Though Albert Gore voted to authorize American involvement in August 1964, by the end of that year he was pushing for a negotiated settlement with the Communists. Though Mr. Gore said his assignment as an Army journalist came as a complete surprise, Mr. Tyson recalled that ''the reason people enlisted was to have a greater ability to pick'' their job, an assessment Army historians say is accurate. A family friend recalled that Mr. Gore surveyed the options and hoped to serve as an Army journalist. Highly credentialed enlisted men generally got their choice of assignments, and with his Harvard degree, Army officials said, Mr. Gore never ran any real risk of being assigned to the infantry. ''She and Al were like Lou Grant and Mary Tyler Moore,'' cracked Maurice Hendrick, who worked there with Mr. Gore and later became mayor of Rutherford, N.C. ''She'd been there 1,000 years and was very firm and no-nonsense,'' while Mr. Gore, in the ingenue role, worked hard and aimed to please. The real goal was to obscure the news. ''If there was a helicopter crash, you couldn't put that on the front page,'' said Gus Stanisic, who served with Mr. Gore and edited the paper. ''You couldn't dwell on fatalities.'' The half-dozen soldiers who lived and worked together on The Flier were against the war, same as Mr. Gore. They saw protest movies -- among them ''M*A*S*H*'' and ''The Strawberry Statement'' -- right on the base, and got away when they could. That May, Albert Arnold Gore Jr. and Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson were married in Washington's National Cathedral, Al in his dress blues, Tipper in a formal, high-necked gown. Then he brought his new bride back to Alabama, where home was a 10-foot wide ''Expando model'' trailer. There was a sweetness to this anxious time, though. The night before a friend, Bob Delabar, shipped out for Vietnam, Mr. Gore spent hours crawling around on a highway median looking for a four-leaf clover -- a talisman Mr. Delabar said he carried to Vietnam and back, until it finally disintegrated in his wallet. Mr. Gore was waiting to go to Vietnam, too. All his friends remember that he wanted to go, and the usual course of a two-year hitch in the Army included a year there. The Gore family could never prove their suspicions, denied by various Nixon administration officials, that Mr. Gore's orders were deliberately held up. At the time, his Army buddies said, they were convinced President Nixon would not allow him to go to Vietnam -- not while there was even a slight chance it might do Senator Gore some political good should something bad happen to his son. But the fact that Mr. Gore was eventually sent to Vietnam with only seven months left to serve in his hitch was highly unusual. In the end, Mr. Gore shipped out the month after the election. And the nastiest fighting Mr. Gore saw in 1970 was back in Tennessee. Senator Gore's antiwar position was a loser there, and his son took a couple of weekend passes and a week's leave to try to help save his father's career. The son stood behind the father at rallies, sometimes in uniform, to remind folks that the Gores opposed the war but were still good Americans doing their duty. They also appeared together in two commercials, one in which he and his father were on horseback and another in which the senator told him, ''Son, always love your country.'' Mr. Brock, who went on to serve as chairman of the Republican Party, then as Trade Representative and Secretary of Labor in the Reagan administration, would later express regrets for his campaign. His slogan,  ''Bill Brock believes in the things we believe in,'' was a bald appeal to disaffected supporters of George Wallace, and his campaign made Senator Gore out to be a turncoat son of the South. ''A person who preceded me speaking in East Tennessee one night called him a traitor to his country,'' said Frank Hunger, who was married to Mr. Gore's sister, Nancy. ''At a football game that fall when his name was announced he was practically booed out of the stadium, but he held his head high. He took it.'' On election night, Albert Gore gave a concession speech conceding nothing. ''The truth shall rise again!'' he told supporters, in what has been interpreted as a reference to the promise of his son's future. Those who knew the senator, though, feel he was too lost in his own pain that night to have been thinking any such thing. Though Mr. Gore no doubt learned a great deal from his father, who died in 1998, that one campaign shaped Mr. Gore's own public life to a remarkable extent. Really? Even though some of the same people who defeated your father were coming after you and President Clinton? Asked again, Mr. Gore let loose, sounding much more like the son of an old Tennessee populist than he usually does: ''One thing I did learn in the aftermath of that election is that the people you're fighting for should not have their interests damaged and overturned by superior fund-raisers and political activities on the other side!'' he said, almost shouting. ''You owe it to them! The wealthy and the powerful will always have more money, but if you can even the odds? You can't let them down, because they're depending on you.'' Mr. Gore then offered another way the 1970 campaign stayed with him. His father, he said, ''was accused during that race of losing touch with his constituency, which wasn't true, but later when I was in Congress I believe I held what was the all-time record for town hall meetings. And nobody ever said that about me, not even unfairly.'' Which may also explain why Mr. Gore's long campaign days so often end in some deserted hall where he has stayed late to answer every straggler's question -- long after Mr. Bush and most other Americans have knocked off for the evening. Whether the 1970 campaign also made Mr. Gore a more cautious politician is less clear. His father got out in front of his constituents -- on race and the war and the separation between church and state -- and lost his seat. In a new forward to the book, which was reissued this spring, Mr. Gore wrote, ''For those who want to attack my view, let me the save you the trouble of reading the entire book. On pages 325 and 326, I wrote: 'It ought to be possible to establish a coordinated global program to accomplish the strategic goal of completely eliminating the internal combustion engine over, say, a 25-year period.' It is possible; it needs to be done; it will create more jobs, not destroy jobs. I'm proud that I wrote those words, and I reaffirm them today.'' Mr. Gore said his father taught him when to play it safe and when to go for it: ''My father told me, 'Son, you have to pick the walls you're going to butt your head against.' He meant some issues are so tough that if you take on the overwhelming opinion of the majority in your district you better keep track of how much damage you're doing to your ability to accomplish constructive change. Very few people will talk about that, but it's something we all have to think about. Politicians cannot apply that standard to every single issue, he said -- an acknowledgment that is obvious but also pretty nervy. As an example of an issue to which he has applied a less stringent standard over his career, Mr. Gore named gun control, saying that ''unlike today, the 1970's did not cry out for restrictions on guns.'' After his father's 1970 race, Mr. Gore felt sure he'd never have a career in politics. He talked about writing, even farming -- and told Mr. Hendrick, back at Fort Rucker, that he and Tipper wanted nothing more than to move back to Tennessee, live on a commune and raise vegetables. Right after Christmas, Specialist 4 Al Gore finally did ship out for Vietnam, and arrived at the 20th Engineer Brigade at Bien Hoa, outside Saigon, on Jan. 2, 1971. The Army was in bad shape at that point, demoralized by the scornful lack of support for a war the country was no longer even trying to win. ''Everybody knew what a moronic war it was by that time, and it was, 'Do what you have to do to get home,' '' Mr. Roche, Mr. Gore's editor in Vietnam, said. ''So getting in a chopper to go to fire support bases at that point in time was pretty risky'' for Mr. Gore, Mr. Roche said. ''But the one thing you could do'' that didn't seem like an utter waste in those days, Mr. Roche added, was try to build up fellow soldiers by reporting the individual acts of bravery that did happen amid so much despair -- and, less dramatically, the good works of the engineers, who were building roads, hospitals and water purification systems all over the country. And that is what Mr. Gore did in the war. Bien Hoa was relatively safe, though sirens occasionally warned of mortar attacks. From the quarters Mr. Gore shared with nine other guys, he could hear fighter planes taking off throughout the night. Barry Ancona, of Manhattan, who had known Mr. Gore at Fort Rucker, said he knew even before Mr. Gore arrived that he was on the ''watch list.'' ''All that meant was that he was connected to someone important. It was more like a protocol thing, but it didn't mean anything.'' An Army photographer, H. Alan Leo, said his commanding officer, Brig. Gen. Kenneth Cooper, called him in before Mr. Gore arrived. ''His exact words were, 'This is not a direct order, but I want to make sure this person does not get into a situation he cannot get out of.' '' General Cooper, now retired, has said he has no memory of either that conversation or Mr. Leo. Several other soldiers who knew both Mr. Gore and Mr. Leo in Vietnam said they liked Mr. Leo but either did not believe him or thought he must have taken a comment like ''Watch his back'' a little too literally. Mr. Leo acknowledged that he had resented Mr. Gore before he ever met him, and changed his routine only slightly. Mr. Gore says he more often traveled with other photographers, and never felt restrained. Did he feel treated differently by some of the other guys, because of his name? A few men in his company said Mr. Gore was probably best known in Vietnam for his scathing impersonations of superior officers. Mr. Gore also seems to have quoted every Tennessean in Vietnam at one time or another. And he offered highly detailed accounts of the engineers' work. Every night, he said, the Australians would sing Maori folk songs -- which inspired Mr. Gore to write an admiring story ''about the diversity and multiculturalism'' of their schools. ''I opined that we Yanks could learn a thing or two.'' The piece never ran. After five months in Vietnam, Mr. Gore applied for and received an early out to attend Vanderbilt divinity school in Nashville. The Army was granting such outs easily at that point. Vietnam certainly did not make Mr. Gore an anti-interventionist, even in the 1970's and '80's. Unlike others in his party, he supported the invasion of Grenada in 1983 and was one of only 10 Senate Democrats who supported the Gulf War in 1991, infuriating his party's leadership. Mr. Stanisic has no idea. ''In those days you just said, 'Oh, yeah, man, I dig.' '' Mr. Gore said he didn't remember using the word atone, but very much recalled his deeply unsettled feelings about the war. And about coming home. ''I'm not sure I fully understand it,'' Mr. Gore said quietly. ''But you know, it didn't end. You were leaving something that was still going on. If you're a part of something, a war, you want to win it. Not that I had a bayonet in my teeth, but part of what was screwed up about it was that we weren't trying to win.'' And if the highly competitive Mr. Gore was atoning, it was not because he went to war, but because he came home. Al Gore's Journey This is the sixth in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future installments will examine George W. Bush's relationship with his father and how both candidates entered politics.
 David Knapp letter says many people in Green Party find both Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore morally unacceptable as presidential candidates (July 6 letter and July 8 Anthony Lewis column) As a conscientious opponent of capital punishment, I cannot vote for Vice President Al Gore even though I entirely oppose Gov. George W. Bush. For a great number of us, the choice is between a third-party candidate and not voting. We believe that our duty as citizens is better discharged by sticking to our guns in the face of defeat than by sharing a victory for Mr. Gore's profoundly wrong positions.
 While Al Gore was enlisting in Army to be sent to Vietnam, George W Bush like many young conservatives had doubts about conflict but was nonetheless inclined to support it, though not necessarily to point of fighting in it; both entered military in markedly different ways; while Gore enlisted, Bush signed up to be pilot in Texas Air National Guard--coveted position that significantly reduced risk that he would be sent to Vietnam and probably not obtainable if father was less prominent; photo (M) While Al Gore was signing up to fight in (or at least write about) a war that he did not believe in, George W. Bush was somewhat less resolutely partying in Houston.  Mr. Bush, like many young conservatives, had doubts about the war but was nonetheless inclined to support it -- though not necessarily to the point of fighting in it. When Mr. Bush graduated from Yale in 1968, he was in roughly the same situation as Mr. Gore was upon graduation from Harvard a year later. Both were Southern men in Ivy League colleges, and both had fathers in Congress who might suffer politically if their sons fled to Canada or took extraordinary measures to avoid the draft. While Al Gore was signing up to fight in (or at least write about) a war that he did not believe in, George W. Bush was somewhat less resolutely partying in Houston.  Mr. Bush, like many young conservatives, had doubts about the war but was nonetheless inclined to support it -- though not necessarily to the point of fighting in it. When Mr. Bush graduated from Yale in 1968, he was in roughly the same situation as Mr. Gore was upon graduation from Harvard a year later. Both were Southern men in Ivy League colleges, and both had fathers in Congress who might suffer politically if their sons fled to Canada or took extraordinary measures to avoid the draft. Unlike Mr. Gore, who enlisted in the Army, taking a path that he knew would lead to South Vietnam, Mr. Bush signed up to be a pilot in the Texas Air National Guard. It was a coveted posting that significantly reduced any risk that he would be sent to Vietnam, and it probably would not have been obtainable if his father had been less prominent. ''Did I think about going to the Army post and saying, 'Send me to Vietnam?' '' Mr. Bush asked in an interview. ''Not really. I wanted to fly, and that was the adventure I was seeking.'' Mr. Gore was always a serious, ambitious young man struggling with deep moral questions and, in the case of Vietnam, with deeply practical calculations about how his actions would play in his father's re-election campaign. Some critics have also suggested that in later years he embellished his Vietnam role for his own political career. Mr. Bush, in contrast, was a carefree, happy-go-lucky fellow who was not disposed to agonize over anything more grand than his Saturday night plans. He was not the kind of person to choose to swelter in the Vietnamese jungle. In a sense, while Mr. Gore might have been more conscientious or responsible, Mr. Bush was far more normal. While the Bush campaign likes to suggest that service in the Guard was an entirely honorable alternative to Vietnam, in 1988 one of Mr. Bush's father's strongest backers (and future chief of staff), John H. Sununu, publicly criticized the Democratic vice presidential nominee, Lloyd Bentsen, for getting his son into the Guard. That was maladroit, since another young man in the same unit as Mr. Bentsen's son was George W. Bush. Asked if he discussed the war with his father, the younger Mr. Bush says he must have but cannot recall any details. Likewise, roommates and a girlfriend from that period say they do not recall Mr. Bush saying much about the war, and he came across as a lukewarm supporter at a time when most people were passionate one way or the other. ''My first impulse and first inclination was to support the country,'' Mr. Bush recalled in an interview. Vietnam filtered into the popular consciousness in many ways, but for Mr. Bush and many of his classmates a crucial moment came with the death of George W. Carpenter. Mr. Carpenter, an acquaintance of Mr. Bush and the boyfriend of a cousin, grew up on Long Island and had been valedictorian and class president in high school, as well as captain of the football team. It was a mine that exploded and killed him; he was 20. The death sent a shiver through the Yale campus, and, for classmates like Mr. Bush, Vietnam suddenly seemed more real and dangerous than ever. ''For guys in the Ivy League at that time, there was nobody that I recall very well standing up and saying, 'Hey, my country calls and if these guys from the inner city are going to war, then, by God, so will I,' '' said John T. Sartore, a friend of Mr. Bush at Yale. ''Most people were wandering around figuring out how to get out of it, and there were so many ways: getting married, getting orthotics for your feet, getting braces, failing the medical, joining the Peace Corps and so on.'' Many of the routes to evade service in Vietnam were out of the question for a man like Mr. Bush, rooted in conservative Texas values. He seems never to have considered pretending to be gay, going to prison for refusing to fight, or fleeing to Canada, and he had his father's political career to worry about. ''It was a very hairy time, and I think George had a little different pressure because his father was a public figure,'' said Roland W. Betts, one of Mr. Bush's fraternity brothers at Yale. As Mr. Bush recalls it, ''There was no question in my mind that there was going to be a military service in 1969.'' For Mr. Bush, the crucial step was applying for a position in the Texas Air National Guard while back in Houston for Christmas vacation in his senior year. Nationally, 100,000 people were on waiting lists to get into the Guard, and the details of Mr. Bush's admission to the unit are subject to debate. Critics say that the Bushes pulled rank, but there is no firm proof of this. It is clear, however, that whether or not he demanded it, Mr. Bush got special treatment because he was a Congressman's son. Mr. Bush not only was admitted to a program with a long waiting list but also was promoted to second lieutenant without going to officer candidate school and jumping through the normal hoops. Likewise, he was given pilot training despite his lack of aviation experience. Mr. Bush, sensitive to suggestions that he shirked his responsibility in Vietnam, said that during his National Guard service he went to his commander, who is now dead, and asked to be admitted to the Palace Alert program, which could have sent him to Vietnam for a short stint. In any case, as all the pilots knew, Mr. Bush's plane, the F-102, was virtually obsolete, and so there was little chance that he would be accepted for a mission in Vietnam. And, indeed, he was not.
 President Clinton toned down his partisan, ''Al Gore for President'' pronouncements today at the National Governors' Association summer conference, knowing that more than half the governors in the room had a very different take on the coming election. President Clinton toned down his partisan, ''Al Gore for President'' pronouncements today at the National Governors' Association summer conference, knowing that more than half the governors in the room had a very different take on the coming election. But Mr. Clinton still made the case, without explicitly naming names, that large tax cuts like those proposed by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas would endanger the longest economic expansion in the nation's history. Among those in the audience were Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, a Republican who has been mentioned as a top vice presidential prospect for Mr. Bush. In an interview, Mr. Ridge said he appreciated the president's ''very conciliatory tone,'' but disagreed vigorously with Mr. Clinton on which economic plan of those proposed by Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore was more sound. ''As he was speaking I was thinking of George Bush's 'Prosperity With a Purpose' plan,'' Mr. Ridge said.
 The companies have also asked their outside supporters to write letters to the Transportation Department, though executives are barred from asking the politicians to lobby Clinton administration officials more directly. Hundreds of mayors, governors and members of Congress have weighed in, breaking down along predictable geographic lines. Richard M. Daley, the mayor of Chicago and the brother of Vice President Al Gore's campaign chairman, backs American. Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, supports Delta. For either city, a victory would mean new jobs, more trade with China and a bigger tax base. The Teamsters have also written letters on behalf of U.P.S. and with Mr. Gore looking to shore up the support of labor leaders angered by his position on other trade issues, the union could be an important voice. Even American and Delta acknowledge that U.P.S. has built the strongest base.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush addresses NAACP annual convention in Baltimore; admits that Party of Lincoln has been derelict in its treatment of blacks in latest bid to show he is different kind of Republican; pledges strong civil rights enforcement will be cornerstone of his administration; is given polite reception; is also jeered by opponents of death penalty protesting execution of Gary Graham by State of Texas (M) Gov. George W. Bush told the nation's largest civil rights organization today that ''the party of Lincoln has not always carried the mantle of Lincoln,'' and he pledged that ''strong civil rights enforcement will be a cornerstone of my administration.'' Gov. George W. Bush told the nation's largest civil rights organization today that ''the party of Lincoln has not always carried the mantle of Lincoln,'' and he pledged that ''strong civil rights enforcement will be a cornerstone of my administration.'' ''One hundred and forty years later, that is still true,'' Mr. Bush added. ''For our nation there is no denying the truth that slavery is a blight on our history. And that racism, despite all the progress, still exists today.'' Mr. Bush, to a large extent, simply retailored his stump speech for the thousands of delegates to the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and he won a polite reception. He did not cover several topics of interest to the delegates, including the death penalty, Supreme Court nominees and affirmative action. Just as Mr. Bush was about to be introduced, four demonstrators rose in the Baltimore Convention Center and began protesting the execution last month of Gary Graham. ''Remember Gary Graham,'' the protesters shouted. ''An innocent man was murdered by Governor Bush.'' Mr. Graham, the 135th inmate to be executed in Texas since Mr. Bush became governor five and a half years ago, went to his death proclaiming his innocence. The N.A.A.C.P. has called his execution a ''gross travesty of justice'' and wants a national moratorium on executions. When he began speaking, Mr. Bush quickly drew laughter by remembering how Jackie Robinson, upset by something John F. Kennedy once did, called the president a fine man but said he reserved the right to change his opinion. ''For those of you who support me,'' Mr. Bush said, ''I see a couple here, maybe more than a couple: I hope you won't change your opinion. And for those of you who don't, I hope that at least you take Jackie's opinion as your own and give me a chance to tell you what is in my heart.'' Black Americans represent one of the Democratic Party's strongest constituencies, and those Republicans who have appeared before the N.A.A.C.P. have not had an easy time. Mr. Bush's father, who was then the vice president, faced a chorus of boos and hisses in 1983 when he tried to portray the Reagan administration as sensitive to blacks. A year later both Mr. Bush's father and President Reagan cited scheduling conflicts in declining invitations to the convention and sent Elizabeth Dole, then the secretary of transportation. She was received politely but not enthusiastically. Mr. Bush's father did speak to the group as a presidential candidate in 1988. Governor Bush's reception today was polite, but he did not appear to have changed many minds. After his speech, a few listeners spoke of his courage in addressing a skeptical crowd. But many more listeners complained about the lack of specifics in the speech. Gary Bledsoe, the president of the Texas branch of the civil rights organization, said Mr. Bush, ''reduced some barriers today, but I don't think he won any support.'' Mr. Bush spoke of expanding opportunity and said, ''this begins by enforcing the civil rights laws.'' ''Discrimination is still a reality even when it takes different forms,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Instead of Jim Crow, there's racial redlining and profiling. Instead of 'separate but equal,'  there's separate and forgotten. Strong civil rights enforcement will be a cornerstone of my administration.'' He did not elaborate. Mr. Bush put his usual emphasis on education and ending what he called ''the soft bigotry of low expectations'' for minority children. He promoted his plan to give parents in low-income areas vouchers that they could use for private schools if their children attend poor schools that failed to improve. He has campaigned often in black and Hispanic neighborhoods, to underscore his theme that he is a ''compassionate conservative.'' And his campaign media strategist was on hand today filming the governor's speech, though Mr. Bush's aides said they had no plans, for now, to use the speech in commercials. Mr. Bush still has significant differences with the N.A.A.C.P., and not just over the death penalty. The group has been leading a boycott of South Carolina over the Confederate battle flag. During the Republican primary in South Carolina, Mr. Bush declined to take a stand on whether the flag should fly over the Capitol. As a tax-exempt group, the N.A.A.C.P. cannot endorse a presidential candidate. But the evening before Mr. Bush's appearance, the group's leaders urged members to mount an ambitious voter registration drive. Julian Bond, the group's chairman, argued that one more conservative vote on the Supreme Court could result in a setback for civil rights causes. Vice President Al Gore and Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, are scheduled to speak to the group.
 ''One giant chunk of time devoted to counting votes may be gripping if you are a floor clerk in the House or Senate,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the presumptive Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''But for 249 million other Americans, it's not as captivating.'' Convention officials have told the networks the votes will occur earlier in each evening's program. It is also a gathering, some professional convention watchers said, that will further advance the evolution of the event into a marketing vehicle. Steve Scully, political editor of C-Span, which will provide pool television coverage of the proceedings, said the conventions were traditionally platforms for governors and senators to speak on the issues that concerned them. The plan for prime time outlined by Mr. Card involved speeches by just two elected officials: Mr. Bush and Senator John McCain of Arizona. Others who were given prime time slots include Mr. Bush's wife, Laura; Gen. Colin L. Powell, former head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Mr. Bush's adviser on security and foreign policy issues, Condoleezza Rice; and former Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole. Mr. Card said that while it is not certain anyone will be designated as the keynote speaker, more people may be added to the speakers' list. The vice-presidential nominee will speak on the convention's third night. The slogan for the convention, which begins on July 31, is ''Renewing America's Purpose. Together.'' Mr. Card said there will be a specific theme on each of the evenings: education and health care on Monday, military strength on Tuesday and prosperity and protecting Social Security on Wednesday. Thursday will be devoted to Mr. Bush, who will deliver his acceptance speech.
 Text of address by Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush before annual conference of NAACP in Baltimore (M) A full transcript of Mr. Bush's remarks is available from The New York Times on the Web: www.nytimes.com/politics
 Ah, July. The children commune with Harry Potter while their parents watch the ''Big Brother'' roommates try to make an alarm clock out of a couple of potatoes. (Where's Al Gore when you need a consult?) Just outside our nation's capital, kids of all ages have been flocking to an arcade in Rockville, Md., to ride on The Shocker, an electric chair simulation that challenges patrons to hang on until smoke comes out of their skulls. (Where's George W. Bush when you need a photo op?) July is a special month in American politics, a semiofficial civic vacation from the yearlong presidential campaign. Admittedly, most Americans have already been on hiatus from this race for so long they've forgotten the names of the candidates. (Is Gary Bauer in this somewhere? What ever happened to Orrin Hatch?) But that was a springtime form of inattention. We overlooked George W. Bush and Al Gore absent-mindedly, the way we neglected to catch ''Mission Impossible 2.'' In July you can ignore politics in a decisive, activist way, the way we did ''The Patriot.'' Ah, July. The children commune with Harry Potter while their parents watch the ''Big Brother'' roommates try to make an alarm clock out of a couple of potatoes. (Where's Al Gore when you need a consult?) Just outside our nation's capital, kids of all ages have been flocking to an arcade in Rockville, Md., to ride on The Shocker, an electric chair simulation that challenges patrons to hang on until smoke comes out of their skulls. (Where's George W. Bush when you need a photo op?) July is a special month in American politics, a semiofficial civic vacation from the yearlong presidential campaign. Admittedly, most Americans have already been on hiatus from this race for so long they've forgotten the names of the candidates. (Is Gary Bauer in this somewhere? What ever happened to Orrin Hatch?) But that was a springtime form of inattention. We overlooked George W. Bush and Al Gore absent-mindedly, the way we neglected to catch ''Mission Impossible 2.'' In July you can ignore politics in a decisive, activist way, the way we did ''The Patriot.'' But that's an August problem -- August looks like summer, but it's really autumn with high temperatures, full of back-to-school sales and professional football. July, on the other hand, is a month that imposes so few demands that it will be happy if it just succeeds in eliminating a few more people from the ''Survivor''  island. Three weeks from now, Sean-the-neurologist-with-nipple-ring and  Susan-the-tough-talking-truck-driver will no longer be part of the ongoing national dialogue, and July can declare victory. Unless, of course, Al Gore picks one of them as his running mate. Gore Challenges Do-Nothing-for-People Congress. Video available via satellite and webcast. Governor Bush to Unveil His Initiative to Ensure Safe Children and Strong Families in Royal Oak, Mich. Current conventional wisdom holds that Mr. Gore's choice of a vice-presidential nominee will be greatly influenced by Mr. Bush, who goes first at the Republican Convention in Philadelphia. Mr. Bush is said to be looking for someone boring, the better to avoid a moment like the one in 1988 when the words ''Dan Quayle'' created a Mardi-Gras-like sense of anticipation in the press room at the Republican Convention. If Mr. Bush selects Gov. George Pataki of New York, who was his classmate at Yale, Mr. Gore might pick Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana, a fellow alumnus of St. Albans in Washington D.C. Both slates could embark on the ceremonial post-convention bus tour wearing their school jackets, waving pom-poms out the window. However, the Republican Party ought to consider giving the nod to Mr. Giuliani, who is currently operating under a misalignment of the stars so powerful that he might serve as a kind of a magnet, drawing political misfortune away from the guy at the top. If that happened, Mr. Gore would undoubtedly want to hunt up a bigger, more powerful bad luck magnet of his own -- say, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson.
 Bush at N.A.A.C.P. Convention  Gov. George W. Bush, speaking at the N.A.A.C.P.'s annual convention, said that ''the party of Lincoln has not always carried the mantle of Lincoln'' and pledged that ''strong civil rights enforcement will be a cornerstone of my administration.'' Gore Attacks Congress  Vice President Al Gore took a new tack in his presidential campaign, beginning a series of broadsides against the Republican-controlled Congress and seeking to align Gov. George W. Bush with anti-populist stands. His attacks came in a speech at Central Connecticut State University. Bush at N.A.A.C.P. Convention  Gov. George W. Bush, speaking at the N.A.A.C.P.'s annual convention, said that ''the party of Lincoln has not always carried the mantle of Lincoln'' and pledged that ''strong civil rights enforcement will be a cornerstone of my administration.'' Gore Attacks Congress  Vice President Al Gore took a new tack in his presidential campaign, beginning a series of broadsides against the Republican-controlled Congress and seeking to align Gov. George W. Bush with anti-populist stands. His attacks came in a speech at Central Connecticut State University.
