 Word for Word column excerpts Vice Pres Gore's 1969 Harvard senior thesis, The Impact of Televion on the Conduct of the Presidency, 1947-1969; photo (M) AH, the lessons learned in youth. About love, faith, family and yes, the power of television to define the modern presidency. This last issue weighed especially heavily on at least one young person, Albert Gore Jr., as revealed in the topic he chose for his senior thesis for the history department at Harvard in 1969. Its title: ''The Impact of Television on the Conduct of the Presidency, 1947-1969.'' The 84-page paper sheds light on an aspect of political life that would preoccupy Mr. Gore in his career in public office and into the current presidential campaign. Often perceived by voters as stiff and overrehearsed, the vice president has sought advice from image-makers conventional (the media consultant Carter Eskew) and not so (the feminist author Naomi Wolf) for ways to improve his image before the cameras. AH, the lessons learned in youth. About love, faith, family and yes, the power of television to define the modern presidency. This last issue weighed especially heavily on at least one young person, Albert Gore Jr., as revealed in the topic he chose for his senior thesis for the history department at Harvard in 1969. Its title: ''The Impact of Television on the Conduct of the Presidency, 1947-1969.'' The 84-page paper sheds light on an aspect of political life that would preoccupy Mr. Gore in his career in public office and into the current presidential campaign. Often perceived by voters as stiff and overrehearsed, the vice president has sought advice from image-makers conventional (the media consultant Carter Eskew) and not so (the feminist author Naomi Wolf) for ways to improve his image before the cameras. Shades of earth-tone suits: every president since Harry Truman, Mr. Gore writes, has had to adjust his image to the demands of the television screen, even those with a special distaste for the process, like Dwight D. Eisenhower: For Mr. Gore, John F. Kennedy was the closest thing to a political TV star: Even if he couldn't fix the ears, Mr. Gore observes, President Johnson was determined to influence the filming of them. Mr. Johnson's efforts to bend television news to his will clearly fascinated Mr. Gore. The president's failure to grasp the subtleties of the task is a recurring theme of the paper, as Mr. Gore illustrates in an anecdote about Mr. Johnson's building of a television studio in the basement of the White House. Mr. Gore also analyzes the decision by Richard M. Nixon, who had taken office just two months before Mr. Gore submitted his thesis, to forgo giving a State of the Union address just after his inauguration. Which leads Mr. Gore to this observation: By 1964, Mr. Gore notes, the televised news conference had become a critical part of the modern presidency (even though some later presidents -- notably Bill Clinton -- would hold them infrequently). Mr. Johnson's solution? Intimations of John McCain, and a strategy that Mr. Gore, who actively limits his availability to the media, seems to have taken pains to avoid: In a subsequent chapter, Mr. Gore details his thoughts on why television has become so central to governing:
 ''We want to do shows with an intimate feeling,'' he went on. ''With the Garde's lighting, you don't notice the disappearance of a full proscenium.'' Mr. Sigel is eager to find new ways of producing, or presenting, new or old material for new audiences. ''We want to interest other producers in coming here. The blockbuster type show is on the way out, and more theaters'' -- he mentioned Goodspeed in East Haddam and the Bushnell in Hartford -- are planning smaller stages. ''There is a paucity of product to command a large stage,'' he added, looking to alliances with regional theaters and expressing interest in extending the life of Off Broadway plays and musicals.
 Clinton Called On to Bring Star Power to Campaign  A rising tide of Democratic leaders contend that President Clinton, who is still revered by a core of the party's constituents, should play a prominent role campaigning for Vice President Al Gore, who is trailing Gov. George W. Bush in several battleground states. Vice President Al Gore presented his own economic proposals as ''tried and true'' in a continuation of his assault on Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas.
 Mr. Sharpton was hardly alone, of course, in suggesting that the photograph was so problematic that it could cost Mrs. Whitman a spot on the Republican presidential ticket with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''They say a picture is worth a thousand words,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''It might be worth a vice-presidential nomination.'' Today, by contrast, with her party's convention coming to New Jersey's backyard in two weeks, Mrs. Whitman's horizons are generally seen as limited to a cabinet office at best, or even to an ambassadorship, if Mr. Bush wins in November. ''By and large most people are acknowledging that the vice presidency isn't ready to be served up to her,'' said Tom Wilson, a former director of the state Republican Party.
 Mahbubur Rahman is shot and killed at Ala King Fried Chicken & Pizza Hot in Bushwick section of Brooklyn by man who, police say, intended to rob restaurant; there are no suspects (S) The gunman ran out of the restaurant, Ala King Fried Chicken & Pizza Hot at 1591 Broadway in Bushwick, without any money, said Lt. Stephen Biegel, a police spokesman. Two other employees were in another part of the store at the time of the 1:30 a.m. killing, but neither saw the shooting, he said. Lieutenant Biegel said it was unclear why the gunman shot the clerk, who was identified as Mahbubur Rahman, 27, of Brooklyn. The gunman ran out of the restaurant, Ala King Fried Chicken & Pizza Hot at 1591 Broadway in Bushwick, without any money, said Lt. Stephen Biegel, a police spokesman. Two other employees were in another part of the store at the time of the 1:30 a.m. killing, but neither saw the shooting, he said. Lieutenant Biegel said it was unclear why the gunman shot the clerk, who was identified as Mahbubur Rahman, 27, of Brooklyn.
 This campaign for the Senate started almost as soon as the last one ended, in November 1998, when Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced that he would not seek re-election. Mrs. Clinton has been talking and listening her way across New York since last July. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas have been making daily policy pronouncements and attacks from the moment each emerged as his party's presumptive presidential nominee in March. The United States Senate race in New Jersey, one of that state's most combative and closely watched campaigns in decades, has thrown a few more voices into the political din, at least in the New York metropolitan region. It doesn't help that there are only so many issues to go around, and it does seem as if Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Gore, Mr. Lazio and Mr. Bush are reading off the findings of the same focus groups. Can anyone be faulted  for losing track of whether it is Mrs. Clinton or Mr. Gore who is denouncing the ''risky'' Republican Social Security or tax plan, or whether it is Mr. Bush or Mr. Lazio blaming the Clinton administration for skyrocketing fuel costs or high taxes? In the race for president, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore each decided to campaign as if Election Day were a week away as soon as the nomination was secure, and not risk yielding the stage to his opponent. But Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Giuliani made no such choice: they could not escape public attention if they tried, and they did try, concerned from the start that too much attention was not good for two candidates who were so polarizing.
 In Texas, officials did not merely delay implementation of the enhanced inspection program in 1995, they scrapped it entirely as it was set to begin. Critics called it a short-term concession to convenience that turned out to have a significant cost to the environment and to taxpayers. When Texas legislators and the governor, George W. Bush, now the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, repealed the law that included the enhanced inspections, they reneged on a contract that had already been signed with a company called Tejas Testing Technology. Tejas has since gone bankrupt, but only after suing the state and receiving a settlement of $140 million, most of which was paid from a state environmental cleanup fund.
 Mr. Peresutti, 27, is the press secretary for former President George Bush. He graduated from Georgetown University. His father is a maitre d'hotel at the Four Seasons restaurant in New York. The bridegroom's mother is a counselor with Windham International, an executive relocation firm, and a substitute teacher at St. David's School, both in New York.
 Last week, President Clinton and both major presidential candidates, George W. Bush and Al Gore, made pilgrimages to the N.A.A.C.P.'s annual meeting. Their appearances were a reminder that this country's next leap forward in race relations must build upon but also reach beyond the issues that moved America in the 1960's, when bigotry was more nakedly expressed and civil rights advocates of both races could focus their united energies on the legal barriers to political and educational equality.
 Mrs. O'Mara, 29, graduated from Northwestern University and is now a candidate for a doctorate in American history at the University of Pennsylvania. From 1994 to 1996, she was a policy analyst on the White House staff of Vice President Al Gore. Her father, who retired as the dean of Trinity Episcopal Cathedral in Little Rock, Ark., is the chaplain of Christ Episcopal Chapel in Hobe Sound. Mrs. O'Mara, 29, graduated from Northwestern University and is now a candidate for a doctorate in American history at the University of Pennsylvania. From 1994 to 1996, she was a policy analyst on the White House staff of Vice President Al Gore. Her father, who retired as the dean of Trinity Episcopal Cathedral in Little Rock, Ark., is the chaplain of Christ Episcopal Chapel in Hobe Sound.
 Increasing number of Democrats, at time when polls show Vice Pres Al Gore trailing Gov George W Bush in several battleground states, contends that Pres Clinton should play a prominent role stumping for Gore this fall--even if it reminds voters that he, and not his protege, remains party's pre-eminent performer; in closely contested states from Washington to Missouri to New Jersey, state Democratic leaders and strategists say Clinton could bring much needed excitement to a campaign that has often seemed leaden and uninspiring, even to many of its allies; photo of Clinton and Gore (M) At a time when polls show Vice President Al Gore trailing his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush, in several battleground states, an increasing number of Democrats contend that President Clinton should play a prominent role stumping for Mr. Gore this fall -- even if it reminds voters that he, and not his protege, remains the party's pre-eminent performer. At a time when polls show Vice President Al Gore trailing his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush, in several battleground states, an increasing number of Democrats contend that President Clinton should play a prominent role stumping for Mr. Gore this fall -- even if it reminds voters that he, and not his protege, remains the party's pre-eminent performer. More important, those Democratic leaders say, Mr. Clinton is still revered by important Democratic constituencies, particularly black voters. Several recent polls suggest that a substantial number of those core Democrats seem either disengaged from the contest or disenchanted with Mr. Gore. ''I think Bill Clinton could carry this state for Al Gore,'' said Jim Edmunson, the chairman of the Oregon Democratic Party, a traditionally strong Democratic state where a recent poll shows Mr. Gore trailing Mr. Bush of Texas. ''My counsel would be to use the president wherever and as often as they can.'' Mr. Clinton's role in the postconvention campaign is the subject of discussions between White House officials and aides to Mr. Gore, including William M. Daley, the campaign chairman. Both sides say Mr. Clinton has made it clear that he will bow to Mr. Gore's judgment on how he should be involved in the race, a decision the vice president is not expected to make until after the convention. But the pressure to use Mr. Clinton has placed the Gore campaign in a bind. The vice president's advisers acknowledge that Mr. Clinton's artful touch with a crowd could energize Democratic voters for Mr. Gore. But they worry that the president will outshine Mr. Gore on the trail, making the nominee seem more like the campaign's understudy than its star. For that very reason, the Democrats have scheduled Mr. Clinton to address the Democratic National Convention on its first evening next month, thereby leaving the spotlight to Mr. Gore for the next three nights. Most Democrats view the convention as the moment when Mr. Gore must step decisively out of Mr. Clinton's shadow and stake his claim as the party's undisputed chief. ''One of Gore's real deficits, in terms of public image, is the leadership question,'' said a Democratic strategist who informally advises the Gore campaign. ''Curing that is more important than using Clinton's magic with the base. The question is, would Clinton's efforts in the fall undermine Gore's leadership image? It's a delicate question that can't be answered yet.'' But the Gore campaign is likely to resist having the two men campaign side by side. Some of Mr. Gore's advisers would prefer that Mr. Clinton play a relatively minimal part in the postconvention campaign, similar to President Reagan's role in George Bush's 1988 campaign. Mr. Clinton, however, has made clear that he would like to do more. While the Gore campaign clearly wants to keep its options open for the president, Democratic leaders in many of those battleground states have not been shy about voicing their opinions to the Gore campaign and to Mr. Clinton himself: they would like to see the president campaigning early and often on their home turf. ''There's no one like the president who can communicate to voters,'' said Paul Berendt, chairman of the Washington State Democratic Party. ''I think he's the secret weapon of the Gore effort.'' ''He might be the person it takes to activate people,'' Mr. Giblin said. ''They seem to respond better to Bill Clinton than to Al Gore.'' Mr. Giblin's remarks underscore a concern usually expressed privately by Democrats: that Mr. Gore is not connecting emotionally with Democrats as well as Mr. Bush is with Republicans. Several recent polls seem to confirm that worry. A Gallup survey in late June showed 75 percent of Democrats supporting Mr. Gore, compared with 91 percent of Republicans saying they would vote for Mr. Bush. And a poll released on Thursday by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press shows that Republican support for Mr. Bush is more intense than Democratic support for Mr. Gore. Democrats discount such early polls, arguing that their core voters historically become interested in campaigns later than Republicans. Once those Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents become focused on the contest, they will quickly unite behind the vice president, Mr. Gore's allies assert. But many of those same Democrats also say Mr. Gore has suffered from the widespread perception, fair or not, that he is not particularly warm, engaging or likable. ''After Bill Clinton, I think anyone would seem to face a letdown in terms of enthusiasm,'' said Representative Charles B. Rangel, a Democrat from New York. ''Clinton has been electric among the minority community. Gore, unless he is turned on, can be stiff and awkward.'' Though warm-and-fuzzy biographical commercials for Mr. Gore and a feel-good Democratic convention could help him in the personality contest, many Democrats say they are also counting on Mr. Clinton to transfer some of his popularity to Mr. Gore. ''He can use his charm to get people to listen,'' said Roy Temple, executive director of the Democratic Party in Missouri, where a recent poll shows Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore. And when he gets them to listen, he can say, ''Who do you want to lead the country?'' ''Al Gore doesn't have to have Bill Clinton campaigning to win,'' he added. ''But if you've got a resource like that, you use it to the fullest extent possible.'' Asked if they were worried that Mr. Clinton would overshadow Mr. Gore on the stump, most of the Democratic leaders said no. Voters, they argued, would learn to accept the vice president for who he was once they focused on the campaign. ''I don't think Clinton helps among the traditional liberals,'' said Amy Isaacs, national director of Americans for Democratic Action, a liberal group that has endorsed Mr. Gore. And some political analysts contend that Mr. Clinton could provide a constant reminder of impeachment, Monica S. Lewinsky and campaign finance abuses that could drive conservative Democrats and independent voters into the arms of Mr. Bush. ''My belief is, they've always wanted to punish Bill Clinton somehow, and they are going to do that by punishing Al Gore,'' said Ed Sarpolus, a Michigan-based pollster whose most recent survey shows Mr. Bush with a 12-point lead in Michigan. ''Until Gore separates himself, he'll be in trouble.'' Democratic leaders say they are less worried about those issues than about Mr. Clinton's irrepressible fondness for the campaign, which, they say, could make him difficult to control. Once unleashed, will he follow the Gore script? Will he be willing to sing in the chorus and not interrupt the vice president's solos? ''He is a racehorse and when the elections roll around, he's eager to get out on the track,'' said David Axelrod, a Democratic strategist who talks to both the White House and the Gore campaign. ''But it will be Gore's call. I think Clinton wants to do what is best.''
 With the nomination of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas a foregone conclusion and the four-day Republican agenda a predictable exercise in free media exposure and party boosterism, one of the few honest novelties to be discovered by the conventioneers will be this city and the true extent of its proclaimed metamorphosis.
 Other fans include Barbara Bush, who does the puzzles with her grandchildren, and Tom Peters, the management guru.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, continuing his assault on Gov George W Bush's record in Texas, presents his own economic proposals as 'tried and true,' while contending that Bush had made 'a mess' in Texas (M) Continuing his assault on Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, Vice President Al Gore presented his own economic proposals today as ''tried and true,'' while Governor Bush, he said, had made a ''mess'' in Texas. Mr. Gore was addressing his ideological soul mates here at a convention of the Democratic Leadership Council, the centrist organization that he helped found 15 years ago. Continuing his assault on Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, Vice President Al Gore presented his own economic proposals today as ''tried and true,'' while Governor Bush, he said, had made a ''mess'' in Texas. Mr. Gore was addressing his ideological soul mates here at a convention of the Democratic Leadership Council, the centrist organization that he helped found 15 years ago. Recalling that he had helped write the news release announcing the formation of the group, Mr. Gore described its mission as similar to that of his presidential campaign today: to help the nation to escape the clutches of special interests, which, he said, had dragged it into recession and deficits when the Republicans were in charge. ''That's the true legacy of the Bush-Quayle years,'' Mr. Gore said, in his episodic effort to link Mr. Bush, his likely Republican rival, with Mr. Bush's father's presidency, which was rejected by the voters in 1992. ''I'm not going to see us dragged back to the tired old thinking that nearly destroyed the American dream,'' Mr. Gore said, saying that his proposed tax cuts for specific purposes like health care and education were preferable to across-the-board income-tax cuts. Mr. Gore has proposed $500 billion in tax cuts over 10 years. Mr. Bush has proposed $1.3 trillion in income-tax cuts over 10 years, which, Mr. Gore said, would bring the current prosperity to ''a screeching halt.'' If tax cuts run slightly counter to the Democratic Leadership Council orthodoxy, Mr. Gore assured his audience that he would impose fiscal discipline. ''I have been very clear, since the day I began this campaign, about what I am proposing,'' Mr. Gore said. ''An economic policy that's tried and tested and built on our values. Fiscal discipline as the foundation.'' In a sarcastic appraisal of the budget situation in Texas, Mr. Gore said the state faced a budget shortfall of $610 million, one that Democrats linked to Mr. Bush's $1.7 billion tax cut, but one that Republicans said would be more than covered by new surplus tax revenues, as long as the economic boom continued. ''You might think that a governor whose state ranks dead last in the entire nation for families with health coverage, who then gets a surplus courtesy of the national economic boom, might turn his attention to moving from No. 50 to, say, 45, or maybe even better -- but nooo,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Instead of taking up legislation to help families that desperately need health care, many of them going across the border to Mexico to try to find health care,'' he said. ''Instead of proposing legislation to help them, Governor Bush made a big tax break for the oil industry the very first bill that he signed that year. Now I don't really know how many oil executives in Texas lack health insurance, but I can tell you this -- a lot of children in Texas do.'' He went on: ''This week, as Governor Bush was traveling from photo op to photo op, trying to put the compassion into his conservatism, we learned that he failed to use tens of millions of dollars budgeted to feed poor and hungry children during the summer months.'' The vice president then said, ''When he was asked why Texas was suddenly facing a shortfall, Governor Bush told The Dallas Morning News, 'I hope I'm not here to have to deal with it.' '' After the gasps died down, Mr. Gore added: ''With all due respect to Governor Bush, America can't afford to deal with it either.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said Mr. Gore was trying to have it both ways: first by criticizing Mr. Bush some months ago for not having to submit an actual budget the way other governors do, and now blaming this nonexistent budget for the shortfall. Mr. Bartlett also said that Mr. Bush had initiated an aggressive program to serve children, increasing the number being served to 260,000, from 175,000. The Bush campaign also deployed Representative John Kasich, the Ohio Republican who is chairman of the Budget Committee and has been mentioned as a possible vice presidential running mate for Mr. Bush, on the governor's behalf. He said in a telephone interview that Mr. Gore's speech was ''absurd,'' in part because the Clinton-Gore administration had submitted 13 supplemental budgets over the last seven years, spending plans that were submitted when the nation was ''several hundred million dollars in the hole.''
 Despite the lines, most visitors to the park do take the Wgasa Bush Line Railway, which loops five miles around grazing groups of giraffe, gazelles, rhinos, elephants and other  wildlife from Asia and Africa.
 BLACK BELT. Written and illustrated by Matt Faulkner. Knopf. $16.95. (Ages 5 to 8) An exciting karate fantasy about a child named Bushi, one of the little boys in school, bullied by the big kids. In a dream about a black belt master, Bushi learns it is ''always best to get out of the way of a charging bull.''
 In May, Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, suggested a break from decades of strategic theology when he said he would consider deep unilateral cuts in American warheads while building robust defenses to be shared with European allies and, perhaps, one day with Russia or China. In suggesting that, Mr. Bush repudiated a governing assumption of American arms control that the ability of each side to annihilate each other created a safer world by making the temptation to use nuclear weapons unthinkable. ''Whether you agree with missile defenses or not, what Bush did was quite important,'' said Robert A. Manning, the director of Asia Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, who said he has informally advised the Bush campaign. ''He was overturning a paradigm of the cold war, and saying Russia is not a problem, why target them?'' BUT critics argue that any missile defenses will upset deterrence's delicate balance. Moscow fears that even a small system would be a step  toward a larger one that Russia could not afford to match. So it is threatening to freeze arms cuts if Washington bolts the treaty, as Mr. Bush has suggested he might do.
 Florida Gov Jeb Bush letter disagrees with July 13 editorial that suggested his efforts to help preserve the Florida Everglades have been less than vigorous (M)
 But Kenny G (his last name is Gorelick) had other resources. ''He did show a knack for connecting to the basest impulses of the large crowd,'' Mr. Metheny wrote, ''by deploying his most effective licks (holding long notes and playing fast runs -- never mind that there were lots of harmonic clams in them) at the key moments. . . . The other main thing I noticed was that he also, as he does to this day, plays horribly out of tune -- consistently sharp.'' But it was what followed that got people excited. The subject was Kenny G's 1999 recording of the song ''What a Wonderful World,'' in which the voice of Louis Armstrong is embedded within the new recording by Kenny G's quartet. ''With this single move,'' Mr. Metheny wrote, ''Kenny G became one of the few people on earth I can say that I really can't use at all -- as a man, for his incredible arrogance to even consider such a thing, and as a musician, for presuming to share the stage with the single most important figure in our music.'' And then he adds a hint of personal retribution: ''Everything I said here is exactly the same as what I would say to Gorelick if I ever saw him in person. And if I ever DO see him anywhere, at any function -- he WILL get a piece of my mind.'' Taking a cue from Mr. Metheny's challenge (''I am also amazed that there HASN'T already been an outcry against this among music critics -- where ARE they on this?????!?!?!?!''), I bought ''Classics in the Key of G'' to hear the offending song and listened to a Kenny G album for the first time in my life. Like Mr. Metheny, I never felt one way or the other about Mr. Gorelick; his music is ambient dandelion-fluff that I knew plenty about from being put on hold by telephone receptionists. He sells millions, yet doesn't measure up to Coltrane? I'd sooner get riled about why I can't shoot my tax returns at the moon and get them back an hour later, fully executed. In selecting ''What a Wonderful World,'' Mr. Gorelick made a good choice for his own purposes. I'm afraid that it works. The last 20 years of intelligent writing about Armstrong has established that he was capable of both the freshest, freest pieces of improvisation as well as cheery schlock; and to understand him is to understand that American pop culture is nothing without both impulses. I think I'd be more upset if Kenny G sampled a really lively, rhythmic Armstrong performance. But he wouldn't. It wouldn't work. Pop may be opportunistic, but above all it's practical.
 ''I'm not asking you to read my lips,'' Vice President Al Gore beseeched the civil-rights conventioneers. ''I'm asking you to read my heart!'' The line brought down the house on Wednesday at the convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Baltimore, where Gov. George W. Bush spoke two days earlier. The audience had given Mr. Bush a polite hearing. ''For those of you who support me,'' he said, ''I see a couple here, maybe more than a couple: I hope you won't change your opinion.'' ''I'm not asking you to read my lips,'' Vice President Al Gore beseeched the civil-rights conventioneers. ''I'm asking you to read my heart!'' The line brought down the house on Wednesday at the convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Baltimore, where Gov. George W. Bush spoke two days earlier. The audience had given Mr. Bush a polite hearing. ''For those of you who support me,'' he said, ''I see a couple here, maybe more than a couple: I hope you won't change your opinion.'' The audience reserved their enthusiasm for Mr. Gore, which must have been something of a tonic to the presumptive Democratic nominee. Running neck and neck with or even slightly behind Mr. Bush in recent polls, the vice president needs a strong showing from black voters, who normally support Democrats in overwhelming numbers. Mr. Gore's staff is troubled by surveys showing that support to be less intense than in past campaigns. The vice president got another potential lift last week when his bitter primary rival, former Senator Bill Bradley, emerged to give reporters this message: ''I want to make it clear that I endorse Al Gore for president of the United States.'' Things, meanwhile, have been going fairly smoothly this summer for Mr. Bush. So smoothly, in fact, that the Republican National Committee felt confident enough to put its television advertising campaign on his behalf on hiatus, even as the Democratic National Committee began running a new spot, on victims' rights, for Mr. Gore. Four more days of good news for Mr. Bush are on the horizon: the Republican National Convention begins in two weeks in Philadelphia, though how much the city shares in the potential public relations bonanza remains to be seen. Last week, television viewers across the nation watched the upsetting spectacle of the Philadelphia police beating a man accused of stealing a car and shooting an officer.
