 Pres Clinton strongly criticizes Republicans for blocking his African-American and Hispanic judicial nominees, and he urges delegates to annual convention of NAACP to elect Vice Pres Al Gore to ensure that courts remain diverse; Clinton receives a hero's welcome at convention (M) President Clinton strongly criticized Republicans today for blocking his African-American and Hispanic judicial nominees, and he urged delegates to the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. to elect Vice President Al Gore to ensure that the courts remained diverse. President Clinton strongly criticized Republicans today for blocking his African-American and Hispanic judicial nominees, and he urged delegates to the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. to elect Vice President Al Gore to ensure that the courts remained diverse. Mr. Clinton also said the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, had remained silent when Republicans in that state blocked a Hispanic nominee, Enrique Moreno, to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. He praised Mr. Bush for not avoiding the N.A.A.C.P convention, as the Republican presidential nominee in 1996, Bob Dole, had done. But Mr. Clinton said he thought Mr. Gore had delivered the better speech of the two presidential contenders and would make the better president. Members of the audience clapped politely when Mr. Bush spoke on Monday. They jumped to their feet after Mr. Gore's address on Wednesday. But they saved a hero's welcome for Mr. Clinton today. ''We've had a lot of vice presidents, a lot of vice presidents made great presidents -- Thomas Jefferson, Teddy Roosevelt, Harry Truman, Lyndon Johnson,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''But we've never had a vice president that did so much good as vice president as Al Gore -- never, not ever in the history of the country.'' As Mr. Gore had done in his speech on Wednesday, Mr. Clinton quoted from the Bible in his remarks. Citing Ecclesiastes 11:25 -- ''In the day of prosperity, there is forgetfulness of affliction'' -- the president said this period of economic growth is the ideal time to focus on the less fortunate. He reminded the audience of his first visit to an N.A.A.C.P. convention, in 1992, when he was governor of Arkansas and Mr. Gore was a senator from Tennessee.
 Gov George Bush says his campaign has begun serious vetting of financial and medical records of top candidates to be his running mate, and he says he does not intend to run the finalists though a public interview process; lists Vice Pres Al Gore among the number of recent vice presidents who have served their presidents well; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that his campaign had begun ''serious vetting'' of the financial and medical records of the top candidates to be his running mate, and he said he did not intend to run the finalists through a public interview process. ''There's something I can do to bring some order and privacy to the process,'' Mr. Bush told reporters on his campaign plane. ''It doesn't suit my style to say, 'Hey, so and so's coming in,' and have the person have to walk through a bunch of reporters to have the discussion.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that his campaign had begun ''serious vetting'' of the financial and medical records of the top candidates to be his running mate, and he said he did not intend to run the finalists through a public interview process. ''There's something I can do to bring some order and privacy to the process,'' Mr. Bush told reporters on his campaign plane. ''It doesn't suit my style to say, 'Hey, so and so's coming in,' and have the person have to walk through a bunch of reporters to have the discussion.'' Mr. Bush said only his wife and Richard B. Cheney, the former Congressman at the head of his search process, knew his thinking on the issue. He said he had learned the dangers of being too public from watching his father select Dan Quayle. He said that since ''everybody knew'' who was on George Bush's short list, it was easy for Mr. Quayle's selection to leak out. With the Republican National Convention little more than two weeks away, speculation has been mounting and Mr. Bush received a barrage of questions at a news conference here on whether he would select Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, who was at his side. ''I'm not telling you,'' he replied. Many Republicans believe Mr. Ridge's choice is unlikely because his support for abortion rights would create a storm among conservatives. Mr. Bush had some rare praise for his opponent, Vice President Al Gore, naming him, along with Walter F. Mondale, Mr. Quayle, and his own father as recent vice presidents who had all served their presidents well. The Texas governor also said that Mr. Gore was a forceful debater. But Mr. Bush was soon back to jabbing at Mr. Gore over his campaign style and fighting with him over the state of the Texas budget. Mr. Bush also unveiled a proposal for a $75 million five-year program of grants to community groups to use veterans as mentors and role models in programs for children.
 MANHATTAN: CORRECTIONS UNION BACKS BUSH  The Correction Officers' Benevolent Association of New York has become one of the first unions to endorse Gov. George W. Bush's run for the presidency. Norman Seabrook, president of the 11,000-member union that represents workers at New York City jails, said the union's board voted this week to support the presumptive Republican candidate ''because he is a Republican that has shown his willingness to sit down with anyone and talk about the issues that concern the nation.''  Steven Greenhouse (NYT)
 Vice President Al Gore, the presumed Democratic presidential nominee, tried to capitalize on the issue by painting his likely opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as a lackey for the oil industry, which has profited from high gasoline prices. Mr. Bush, in turn, has accused Mr. Gore and the Clinton administration of failing to devise a coherent domestic energy policy and relying too much on foreign oil. Last month, Mr. Gore laid out a plan to reduce dependence on foreign oil.
 G.O.P. TO HONOR HOFFA -- Republicans plan to hold a reception honoring the Teamsters' president, James P. Hoffa, on July 31, the first night of their party's convention in Philadelphia. The announcement yesterday by Jim Nicholson, chairman of the Republican National Committee, underlined the Republicans' desire to win the Teamsters' support, or at least persuade the 1.4-million-member union not to endorse Vice President Al Gore, who has worked hard behind the scenes to win the union's backing. Thus far, Mr. Hoffa has bucked the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and not endorsed Mr. Gore because the vice president supported the China trade bill. G.O.P. TO HONOR HOFFA -- Republicans plan to hold a reception honoring the Teamsters' president, James P. Hoffa, on July 31, the first night of their party's convention in Philadelphia. The announcement yesterday by Jim Nicholson, chairman of the Republican National Committee, underlined the Republicans' desire to win the Teamsters' support, or at least persuade the 1.4-million-member union not to endorse Vice President Al Gore, who has worked hard behind the scenes to win the union's backing. Thus far, Mr. Hoffa has bucked the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and not endorsed Mr. Gore because the vice president supported the China trade bill.
 Vice Pres Al Gore blames Gov George W Bush for $610 million budget deficit facing Texas, saying Bush puts politically popular tax cuts ahead of paying for Medicaid and other state services; Bush says earlier state surpluses made tax cuts the right thing to do; lawmakers in Texas also disagree on where responsibility for shortfall lies, and there are predictions of future belt-tightening (M) How much of the blame belongs to Gov. George W. Bush? Needless to say, Mr. Bush and his presidential rival, Vice President Al Gore, offered very different answers today as they campaigned across the country. How much of the blame belongs to Gov. George W. Bush? Needless to say, Mr. Bush and his presidential rival, Vice President Al Gore, offered very different answers today as they campaigned across the country. In Wisconsin, where he appeared with former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Mr. Gore blamed the Texas governor for putting ''politically popular'' tax cuts ahead of paying for Medicaid and other state services. ''Now,'' Mr. Gore said, ''Governor Bush wants to do for American what he's done for Texas: go to Washington and spend our surplus and then more for budget-busting tax cuts and hope that somehow it will all add up.'' In Pennsylvania, with Gov. Tom Ridge at his side, Mr. Bush shot back, pointing out that earlier state budget surpluses had made tax cuts the right thing to do. ''If Al Gore suggests a state with a surplus shouldn't cut taxes,'' he asked, ''then how can the American people count on Al Gore to cut taxes when our nation has a surplus?'' There also was no agreement in Texas as to where any blame should lie. Several Democratic lawmakers traced the shortfall to the $1.6 billion in tax cuts pushed by Mr. Bush and his allies. But the governor's supporters countered that such assertions were cheap politics, noting that  many Democrats had voted for the budget package. The basic explanation for the shortfall can be found in Texas' two-year budget cycle. Lawmakers drafted the current budget, which runs through Aug. 31, 2001, during last year's legislative session. The $99 billion budget, which is divided about evenly between federal matching funds and state general revenues, included a $3,000 pay raise for teachers and $1.7 billion in tax cuts -- the latter pushed aggressively by Mr. Bush. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, noted that shortfalls also occurred in midstream during other budgets: $182 million in 1997 and $104 million in 1999. In Pennsylvania, Mr. Bush said President Clinton was planning today to sign a $15 billion supplemental appropriation for extra expenses in the current federal budget year. ''But today my opponent attacked me because we're going to do the same thing in Texas,'' he said. He added: ''That's why Vice President Al Gore has got no credibility on an issue like this. On one hand he wants to launch an attack. On the other hand President Clinton is doing the same thing.'' Several Democratic Texas lawmakers were critical of Mr. Bush and the emphasis he has placed on tax cuts. Representative Garnet F. Coleman flew to Wisconsin to appear with Mr. Gore and brief reporters about the budget shortfall. He said the size of this year's shortfall was particularly worrisome. Some Democrats say they worry that the deficit may reach $750 million. Mr. Coleman was particularly critical of the Medicaid overruns, saying that Mr. Bush and lawmakers had known that fewer federal dollars would be available for the program. He said lawmakers intentionally underfinanced Medicaid to free up money for tax cuts. ''It's kind of unfair to Monday morning quarterback, to say what you did didn't work,'' he said. ''We had an opportunity to vote yay or nay, and most of us voted yay. We're in the same boat as Governor Bush on this issue.''
 In a brief comment while campaigning in Pittsburgh, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who is to be formally nominated at the Philadelphia convention, said, ''Obviously we've got to take these incidents very seriously.'' But he reserved further comment, as did Republican convention officials who had eagerly selected this overwhelmingly Democratic city after seeing firsthand the evidence of its downtown renewal.
 Bill Bradley emerges from months of political seclusion to appear with Vice Pres Al Gore in Green Bay, Wis, and to endorse his erstwhile primary foe; Bradley expresses confidence in Gore's ability to keep nation steady in era of rapid change; Gore effusively praises Bradley for his high ideals; Gore's main task of day is to present Bradley as an ally in attempt to win over independent voters that Bradley appealed to in his own campaign; photos (M) Bill Bradley emerged from months of political seclusion today to endorse Al Gore, his erstwhile primary foe, and to help the vice president appeal to independent voters here in the Midwest. Mr. Bradley, whose bitter primary battle with Mr. Gore ended without the former New Jersey senator's winning a single state, used the words of Vince Lombardi, the former coach of the Green Bay Packers, to say he would work for a Democratic president and a Democratic Congress. ''Winning is a team sport,'' he said. Bill Bradley emerged from months of political seclusion today to endorse Al Gore, his erstwhile primary foe, and to help the vice president appeal to independent voters here in the Midwest. Mr. Bradley, whose bitter primary battle with Mr. Gore ended without the former New Jersey senator's winning a single state, used the words of Vince Lombardi, the former coach of the Green Bay Packers, to say he would work for a Democratic president and a Democratic Congress. ''Winning is a team sport,'' he said. ''Today I want to make it clear that I endorse Al Gore for president of the United States,'' Mr. Bradley told a crowd at an old-fashioned amusement park on the shore of Lake Michigan. He cited the vice president's leadership and his understanding of technology, saying that that understanding would allow Mr. Gore to keep the nation steady in an era of rapid change. Mr. Gore effusively praised Mr. Bradley for his ''high ideals,'' adding, ''There is no more passionate voice for justice and equality in all of America.'' As the two Democrats were making up on the stage, Mr. Gore's campaign was engaged in the kind of political pounding of Gov. George W. Bush's policies that Mr. Gore had used so effectively against Mr. Bradley in the primaries. The Gore campaign seized on news of a $750 million state budget shortfall in Texas as evidence that Mr. Bush's proposal for a $1.3 trillion tax cut for the United States over 10 years would derail the nation's roaring economy. ''Governor Bush wants to do for America what he's done for Texas -- go to Washington and spend our surplus and then more for budget-busting tax cuts, and hope then that somehow it will all add up,'' Mr. Gore asserted. ''The last thing this country needs is an era of Bush economics that brings us back to deficits, high interest rates and high unemployment.'' Mr. Bush responded with a sharp attack on Mr. Gore, contending that the vice president did not understand the budget process in Texas and that his state's budget shortfall would be covered by surplus tax revenue. ''If Al Gore suggests a state with a surplus shouldn't cut taxes, then how can the American people count on Al Gore to cut taxes when our nation has a surplus?'' Mr. Bush said. But the main task of the day, at least for Mr. Gore, was to present Mr. Bradley as an ally and to win over the independent voters that the former senator appealed to in his own campaign. Today's appearance was the first time Mr. Bradley and Mr. Gore had met since debating in Los Angeles on March 1. Mr. Bradley, who last fall surprised the Gore campaign by gaining strong support in New Hampshire and other critical states, was ultimately trounced by Mr. Gore in every state in which they competed. Mr. Bradley dropped out of the race on March 9, retaining his handful of delegates and not issuing an explicit endorsement of Mr. Gore. But the Gore campaign has had trouble attracting the kind of voters to whom Mr. Bradley appealed, particularly white men and independents. And as the mid-August Democratic convention approaches, officials said, the Gore camp has been ever more eager to knit up the raveled Bradley relationship and aggressively court the swing voters who are up for grabs in the Midwest battleground states. ''I really appreciated Senator Bradley's support,'' Mr. Gore told supporters at the airport here after the event. ''This is one of the most important days in the election.'' The Gore campaign chose this quaint set-piece of Americana as the site of the long-awaited reunion for its picturesqueness and the chance to reach out to swing voters. The crowd, which local police officials estimated at about 3,500, was bolstered by Gore supporters from organized labor, including the National Education Association and the International Association of Fire Fighters. They have been among the vice president's most ardent supporters, and their presence reflected the Gore campaign's concern, given the intensity that characterized their primary battle with Mr. Bradley, that the event could have gone awry. As it happened, the event appeared to go smoothly, even if there was little warmth between the candidates and their staffs. None of the Bradley aides is joining the Gore campaign, and the two candidates did not make themselves available to reporters for questioning after their speeches. Democratic officials said Mr. Bradley could not be available because he had to catch a plane tonight to Italy, but there also was some grumbling among Bradley backers that Mr. Gore had held the event in Wisconsin instead of a state like New Jersey or New York, where Mr. Bradley is better known and more popular. The two met privately at the airport here for 40 minutes, with no aides present, before they appeared together and clasped hands for the cameras. Gore aides said that Mr. Bradley would have a prime-time speaking slot on the second night of the four-day nominating convention and that they expect Mr. Bradley to campaign on behalf of Mr. Gore, but nothing has been scheduled. In his speech, Mr. Bradley alluded to the ''big'' issues he had raised in the primaries -- racial strife, poverty, globalization -- and said that, under Mr. Gore's leadership, ''We will come closer to solving the problems I mentioned earlier than under the leadership of Gov. George W. Bush -- and it's not even a close call.'' Mr. Bradley also said he was endorsing Mr. Gore because the vice president understood technology. ''Vice President Gore has a deep understanding of those technological forces changing America,'' Mr. Bradley said. ''I know he will strive to keep America ahead of those forces so that they maximize our future for the greatest number of Americans.'' Whether Mr. Bradley was quite ready to step out today seemed arguable. Famously contemplative and reluctant to follow the traditional norms of politics, he acknowledged somewhat wistfully in his speech that his loss to Mr. Gore had been a deep disappointment, one that he was chalking up to experience. In addition to their full-scale effort to present the Bradley endorsement in the best possible light, the Gore team went to great lengths today to focus reporters' attention on the Texas budget, delivering reams of documents and flying a policy aide from Washington and a state legislator from Texas to Green Bay to brief reporters on it. Mr. Gore said that his own proposals for balancing the budget and paying down the debt would maintain the current economic boom. He added: ''Governor Bush has a different priority -- massive tax breaks for those who don't need them. Let's give Governor Bush credit -- he practices what he preaches, in that his top priority for Texas's budget surpluses was a big tax cut.'' At a news conference in Pittsburgh, Mr. Bush responded to the criticism by saying that President Clinton was planning to sign a $15 billion supplemental appropriation for extra expenses in the current fiscal year. ''That's why Vice President Al Gore has got no credibility on an issue like this,'' Mr. Bush said. ''On one hand he wants to launch an attack. On the other hand President Clinton is doing the same thing.'' Asked later why Mr. Bush had made such a point of aggressively rebutting Mr. Gore, Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the governor, pointed to the man who lost so badly to Mr. Gore in the primaries. ''Bush is not Bradley,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''Bush will counterpunch.'' BILL BRADLEY  Endorsing Vice President Al Gore yesterday in Green Bay, Wis.: Throughout my campaign I talked about the enormous opportunity we had to do big things, again. An enormous opportunity made possible by the economic growth we've had for the last decade and by the Democratic leadership of Bill Clinton, Al Gore and the Democratic Congressional candidates who helped make it possible. . . . Indeed, Democratic voters spoke and selected Vice President Gore as our party's nominee. I'm here in Green Bay today because I believe what Vince Lombardi once said is true: Winning is a team sport. And today, I want to make it clear that I endorse Al Gore for president of the United States. I believe that under his leadership we will come closer to solving the problems I mentioned earlier than under the leadership of George W. Bush, and it's not even close.''
 Some Congressional Democrats complained that the Republicans were making the municipal law an issue to regain the party's appeal to Catholics who might have been upset by the visit of Gov. George W. Bush to Bob Jones University, as well as the House leadership's initial objection to the appointment of the first Catholic to be chaplain of the House.
 Bradley Endorses Gore  Bill Bradley emerged from months of political seclusion to endorse Vice President Al Gore, his former primary foe, and to help Mr. Gore appeal to independent voters in the presidential race. Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, who had long been seen in his family as the one with the greatest political promise, has been crowded off the national stage by his older brother. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Gore exchanged sharp comments over a $610 million shortfall in the Texas state budget.
 Editorial says Bill Bradley's endorsement is greatly needed by Vice Pres Al Gore, whose campaign for president has been strangely lethargic since Bradley's departure from the race The formal endorsement of Vice President Al Gore by former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey yesterday was predictable, but Mr. Gore had reason to savor it. Although the vice president defeated Mr. Bradley in every state primary early this year, his campaign since then has been strangely lethargic. The polls show Mr. Gore with only 70 percent support among Democrats, while Gov. George W. Bush has 90 percent support among Republicans. Though Mr. Bradley did poorly in the primary season, he might give Mr. Gore a lift among young people and independents. Mr. Bradley's endorsement also marks a shift toward the convention season and the vice-presidential selections. As political theater, his performance at a boisterous rally in Wisconsin was far different from the awkward endorsement of Mr. Bush in May by Senator John McCain, who jokingly compared the exercise to taking medicine. In both cases, how Mr. McCain and Mr. Bradley handle themselves for the rest of the year will be watched by party professionals as a sign of whether either will be able to pick up the pieces and run again if their nominees are defeated in November. The formal endorsement of Vice President Al Gore by former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey yesterday was predictable, but Mr. Gore had reason to savor it. Although the vice president defeated Mr. Bradley in every state primary early this year, his campaign since then has been strangely lethargic. The polls show Mr. Gore with only 70 percent support among Democrats, while Gov. George W. Bush has 90 percent support among Republicans. Though Mr. Bradley did poorly in the primary season, he might give Mr. Gore a lift among young people and independents. Mr. Bradley's endorsement also marks a shift toward the convention season and the vice-presidential selections. As political theater, his performance at a boisterous rally in Wisconsin was far different from the awkward endorsement of Mr. Bush in May by Senator John McCain, who jokingly compared the exercise to taking medicine. In both cases, how Mr. McCain and Mr. Bradley handle themselves for the rest of the year will be watched by party professionals as a sign of whether either will be able to pick up the pieces and run again if their nominees are defeated in November. The Bush campaign was quick to try to recycle the former New Jersey senator's earlier criticism of Mr. Gore, particularly the charges that Mr. Gore was not telling the truth about his record. But there is a long history of challengers having to eat their words at convention time with little ill effect. It was Mr. Bush's father, after all, who had to live down his description of Ronald Reagan's tax-cut plans as ''voodoo economics.'' Both Mr. Bradley and Senator  McCain have ruled themselves out for the vice-presidential nominations of their parties, and there does not seem to be a rush to make them change their minds. Only two weeks before the opening of the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, speculation is rampant over Mr. Bush's choices. The governor said yesterday he had a short list. The guessing has centered on three governors -- Frank Keating of Oklahoma, George Pataki of New York and Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania -- as well as Elizabeth Dole and Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska. Mr. Pataki and Mr. Ridge are pro-choice Catholics who might stir up an unwelcome furor among anti-abortion forces at the convention. On the Democratic side, Mr. Gore is said to be looking closely at Senators Evan Bayh of Indiana and Bob Graham of Florida, as well as Gov. James Hunt of North Carolina. But because of the vice president's weak standing among the Democratic faithful, he is said to be considering the House minority leader, Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri. Some party insiders say Mr. Gephardt, more than anyone else, would put Missouri in the Democratic column and expand Mr. Gore's support generally within the Democratic base, especially in the industrial Midwest. But such thinking also highlights one of Mr. Gore's problems. At this point, he should be thinking of strategies for reaching beyond Democrats to independents and Republicans and not have to worry about support among Democrats.
 Gov Jeb Bush, resisting entreaties from Republican Party, rarely ventures beyond Florida to take part in party functions and shuns opportunities to speak out about his brother, Gov George W Bush; Jeb Bush, in first extensive interview he has given about his brother's campaign, says driving force behind his low visibility, besides his priority of tending to Florida business, is the Bush name; sees himself in tangled and often hurtful predicament of constantly being compared with his father the former president and his brother the would-be president; photos (M) As Gov. George W. Bush considers potential running mates, here is an appealing choice: He is a popular young governor from the fourth largest state, one where Democrats hope to compete ferociously. He is something of a policy wonk, a nice balance to Mr. Bush's celebrated aversion to minutiae. He is beloved among many Latino voters, a crucial voting bloc. He is Roman Catholic, a big plus since Mr. Bush faced accusations in the primaries that he was anti-Catholic. And he has star appeal as a scion of one of the most famous political families. The trouble is, his name is Bush. Because of an odd twist of fate, or, more precisely, electoral fortune, Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, who had long been seen in the family as the one with the greatest political promise, has been crowded off the national stage by his older brother. As Gov. George W. Bush considers potential running mates, here is an appealing choice: He is a popular young governor from the fourth largest state, one where Democrats hope to compete ferociously. He is something of a policy wonk, a nice balance to Mr. Bush's celebrated aversion to minutiae. He is beloved among many Latino voters, a crucial voting bloc. He is Roman Catholic, a big plus since Mr. Bush faced accusations in the primaries that he was anti-Catholic. And he has star appeal as a scion of one of the most famous political families. The trouble is, his name is Bush. Because of an odd twist of fate, or, more precisely, electoral fortune, Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, who had long been seen in the family as the one with the greatest political promise, has been crowded off the national stage by his older brother. Rather than capitalizing on his brother's fame, Jeb Bush has receded far more than is typical for a new governor of a big state. Resisting entreaties from other governors and Republican officials, Mr. Bush rarely ventures beyond Florida to take part in party functions. He shuns opportunities to speak out about his brother's campaign, except when asked about its prospects in Florida. And he will not have a high-profile speaking slot at the party's national convention late this month. ''I've really been almost reclusive,'' Mr. Bush said in the first extensive interview he has given about his brother's campaign and how he fits in -- or does not. Explaining his deliberate efforts at low visibility, he cited the Bush name. ''Maybe I'm overly sensitive to it about the legacy and all that.'' Indeed, a driving force behind Mr. Bush's faint profile, besides his priority of tending to Florida business, is what he said is the tangled and often hurtful predicament of constantly being compared with his father the former president and his brother the would-be president. Another inescapable reality for Jeb Bush is that as much as he and his brother love each another, friends say their relationship has never been like that of another famous set of political siblings, John and Robert Kennedy. Robert Kennedy was President Kennedy's closest adviser in the White House and would take on his enemies. By contrast, Jeb Bush, who is 47, said he chats with his 54-year-old brother only about once a week. He is not steeped in the presidential campaign, or at least is not eager to show that he is. Nor does George W. Bush seem inclined to turn to his brother. Asked recently if he would appoint Jeb Bush to a cabinet position, as President Kennedy did with his brother, George Bush offered a resounding, ''Uhhhhhh, no!'' Sitting by his computer (e-mail messages popped up continuously) in his small anteroom next to his larger ceremonial office in the Capitol here, Jeb Bush talked about how he resents the contrasts with his brother and father. Jeb Bush is often portrayed in the press as more cerebral than his brother, while George W. Bush is depicted as more of a natural politician. They are both frequently described as more agile campaigners than their father. Mr. Bush said he was particularly pained when his brother is called a lightweight. ''I don't understand why people would say it,'' he said. ''Perhaps because he's a guy's guy. He's easygoing. He has interests outside of politics and all this wonky stuff. People that really bother me are intellectuals that think they've got it all figured out, that he doesn't have the gravitas to serve. The only comfort I get is they get it wrong all the time. There's actually a political advantage to being underestimated in George's case.'' But Mr. Bush would much rather talk about Florida than about his brother. He is so averse to the limelight that he said he consented to this interview not because he finally relented after requests stretching back to last year, but because he was told that the reporter planned to write an article anyway. It was never supposed to be this complicated. When his brother George was still settling on a career in his late 30's, Jeb Bush was well on his way to building one in politics. He was a real estate developer in Miami and for two years served as the Florida secretary of commerce. After he declared his candidacy for governor in 1994, Mr. Bush was jolted when his brother unexpectedly jumped into the race for governor of Texas. Jeb Bush, unable to hide his consternation, groused that it would trivialize his campaign by turning it into a ''cute People magazine story.'' No one, not even their mother, thought George Bush had a chance to topple Ann Richards, the fiery incumbent in Texas, and his triumph stunned the political establishment. But Jeb Bush was the loser: Gov. Lawton Chiles beat him by less than two percentage points. Four years after that initial run as a self-described ''head-banging conservative,'' Mr. Bush softened his oratory and easily beat Buddy MacKay. Had he not lost the first time, Jeb Bush might well be the Republican presidential hopeful, or, at least, a hot prospect for the second slot. Instead, if his brother is elected, Mr. Bush will find himself precluded from fulfilling any aspirations for the White House for four, or perhaps even eight years. In fact, win or lose, the public may have had too much of the Bush family to endure a second son running for the White House. Jeb Bush puts it this way: ''George is the right person at the right time.'' But he said his brother's success was more than ''plankton responding to heat and light.'' He said his brother benefited from his ''good naturedness'' and aggressive campaigning after the primaries. Mr. Bush rejects the what-ifs. He gushes so repeatedly about how he is ''blessed'' to be governor that he is either quite happy or overcompensating for the political dead-end inadvertently created for him. Unlike his wisecracking, often charming brother, Jeb Bush is earnest, quiet and often sticks to himself at gatherings with other governors. ''Shy would be an appropriate way to describe Jeb personally,'' said Gov. Bill Graves of Kansas. Mr. Bush's tenure has been enthusiastically received by Republicans and even many Democrats. His first year went particularly well, and he got on swimmingly with the Republican-controlled Legislature. He presided over a major overhaul of the public education system and the two largest tax cuts in state history. By last November, things turned rocky after Mr. Bush sought to head off a controversial ballot measure with his own proposal, the One Florida initiative, to end racial preferences in university admissions and some public contracts. The reaction was swift and largely negative. In January, two black lawmakers staged a sit-in in Mr. Bush's offices, drawing a clutch of cameras. That prompted the governor, in rather graphic language, to bark to an aide to have the reporters removed. The situation worsened two weeks later in Miami at a forum on Mr. Bush's proposal. The governor sat in the front row for hours as speaker after speaker savaged him. ''The low point probably was the hearing in Miami -- 2,000 people shouting ugly things about me,'' Mr. Bush recalled. ''What I concluded was that the things that were being said were not particularly rational. It was raw emotion.'' If Mr. Bush is haunted by that period, he did not betray that. In fact, he took a reporter on a tour of where the sit-in occurred. ''I regret losing my temper,'' he said. But he stands by the One Florida initiative because, he said, it has already resulted in more minorities attending public universities in Florida. The firestorm seems to have subsided. While Democrats vow to invoke the initiative to mobilize black voters in November to back Vice President Al Gore, polls show that the governor remains quite popular. A survey of likely Florida voters conducted June 23-26 by Mason-Dixon Polling and Research found the governor's approval rating at 63 percent, the highest of any Florida governor since Bob Graham in 1986. Jeb Bush is so focused on Florida that the one hint of his brother's campaign is displayed on the bottom shelf of one cabinet: a commemorative Texas license plate that proclaims, ''G.W. Bush, President.'' Mr. Bush does offer his brother counsel now and then. Most recently, he said, he urged him ''to address  elder issues, and he'll do more of that.'' He added, ''They easily fall prey to scare tactics and I'm convinced that Gore, when confronted with the realities of where he is, will resort to fear.'' Like any successful siblings, there is a competitive edge between the two. Yet if Jeb Bush harbors any jealousy, he does his best to suppress it. Playfully, he lets it be known that his more famous brother is not above appropriating his ideas. In the 1994 campaign, one of Jeb Bush's favorite lines was that he was running not because he was George and Barbara's son, but because of his own children's futures. ''He stole it lock, stock and barrel,'' Jeb Bush said. More recently, he said, George Bush picked up his idea of offering school vouchers, or state scholarships, to students in schools where many are not performing well. And when the two appeared at a news conference in Plant City, Fla., in March, George Bush said he might consider reducing the gas tax. Then Jeb Bush piped in with an eloquent explanation of why he did not think that was wise because it would take away much needed money for highways. George Bush later relented. In return, Jeb Bush said he has learned from his brother, to the point that he has emulated him. ''I've tried to steal the very formula that made him successful,'' he said. ''To have a clear agenda. To let the world know what it is. And then do what you said you were going to do. It's so easy to do the opposite.'' While Jeb Bush is shunning the national stage, George P. Bush, the eldest son of the governor and his Mexican-born wife, Columba, is filling the void in his own way. At 24, he has the poise and good looks that have made him something of a sensation on the campaign trail. Told that his visitor had not seen George P.'s television commercials for his uncle in which he appeals to Latinos and Generation Xers, Jeb Bush grabbed a videotape and seemed on the verge of tears as he proudly showed off his son. Mr. Bush was not even disapproving of his son posing on a bed for photographers at People magazine, where he made the list of 100 most eligible bachelors (he ranked fourth). ''I asked him that last night, actually, why he went with the bed scene instead of the stand-up shot,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He's pretty handsome vertically. He said that's the way they wanted it.'' Jeb Bush is well aware that there could be ''missed opportunities.'' But he seems resigned to leaving the big stage to his brother and son. Asked why he is retreating to the sidelines at the convention, Jeb Bush said, ''I'll yield my time to George P.''
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column suggests that Bill Bradley went into four-month self-imposed exile before endorsing Vice Pres Al Gore for president because lying low is a way to avoid the kind of mistakes that can scuttle a vice presidential nomination; notes how Energy Sec Bill Richardson, Sen Bob Graham and Gov Christine Todd Whitman have diminished their chances for a spot on the Democratic and Republican tickets Al Gore received an endorsement yesterday from one Bill Bradley, a former basketball player. Mr. Bradley is said to have served in the United States Senate, but he seems to have spent most of this millennium in seclusion, and much about him is unknown, including the identity of his favorite book. In a brief joint appearance with Mr. Gore in Wisconsin, Mr. Bradley revealed that he had once spent 15 months running for the presidential nomination himself, in this very country. He then treated the crowd to a brief recapitulation of his old stump speech, followed by the tribute to Mr. Gore, whom he praised as a member of the Democratic Party. Al Gore received an endorsement yesterday from one Bill Bradley, a former basketball player. Mr. Bradley is said to have served in the United States Senate, but he seems to have spent most of this millennium in seclusion, and much about him is unknown, including the identity of his favorite book. In a brief joint appearance with Mr. Gore in Wisconsin, Mr. Bradley revealed that he had once spent 15 months running for the presidential nomination himself, in this very country. He then treated the crowd to a brief recapitulation of his old stump speech, followed by the tribute to Mr. Gore, whom he praised as a member of the Democratic Party. Mr. Bradley provided a real test for Mr. Gore's reputation as a man who can pander to anything, even an inanimate object. But the vice president delivered the goods, describing Mr. Bradley as ''an important part of America's future'' and, far more imaginatively, a ''friend.'' Remember when Bill Richardson was a favorite for the number two slot? Back in February the secretary of energy was so omnipresent in Mr. Gore's entourage you expected him to start handing out the box lunches. But that was before gasoline passed $2 a gallon and our national defense secrets turned up hidden behind an office copying machine. Now the poor man is such political dog meat, he'll be lucky if the Democrats let him watch the convention on television. And it was just a couple of months ago that Senator Bob Graham of Florida was a hot ticket, shepherding Mr. Gore around the state, introducing him at rallies while the vice president stared at Mr. Graham with rapt, Tipper-level attention. The senator had so much influence he helped prod Mr. Gore into his save-Elian-Gonzalez moment, an unprecedented triple-pander-with-splat that politicians will be gasping about for generations. Mr. Graham, apparently searching for a really dramatic coup to put himself back in contention, recently opened his diaries to Time magazine. It turns out that the senator writes down every single thing he does, 24-7, and has an entry to prove that on the evening in 1994 when his daughter gave birth to a son, he spent the moments between 1:30-1:45 p.m. rewinding a video of ''Ace Ventura, Pet Detective.'' He must have presumed that Mr. Gore would be particularly attracted to a potential vice president who has every move recorded in 4,000 notebooks, color-coded by season.
 President Clinton has not taken a formal position on the legislation, although the Justice Department objects to the horse-racing exemption. Vice President Al Gore opposes the bill, citing the horse-racing exemption and what he considers the unwarranted federal intrusion on freedom of commerce on the Internet. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has no position on the bill, an aide said, although many of his colleagues have opposed it not only because of diminished lottery sales but also because they say it is as an infringement of states' rights.
 The governor, who has been trying to put the issue behind her,  attended several ceremonies today, including a fund-raiser tonight with Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate.
 The conservative side gets some attention today as he makes his first joint appearance with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. They will appear together at a fund-raising luncheon in Manhattan for the state Conservative Party. While Mr. Bush describes himself as a ''compassionate conservative,'' Mr. Lazio, running in a state where Democrats hold a 3-to-2 advantage in voter registration and moderate Republicans have been most successful, hardly ever uses the word ''conservative'' on the stump. He has disputed claims by the campaign office of his opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton, that he is far to the right of most New York Republicans. The luncheon, with tickets going for $500 apiece, is expected to net at least $100,000, which would go toward the $750,000 the party is seeking to raise for the November elections. Mr. Long said the money would be spent on direct mail and television advertising advocating Conservative Party positions and, closer to November, urging people to vote the Conservative Party line, which will include Mr. Lazio and Mr. Bush.
 Leonard Schwartz letter points out that missile defense test failures are caused by hardware and technology problems, not by any failure of political leadership as charged by Republican presidential candidate Georg W Bush (S) In your July 9 front-page article discussing the missile defense test failure, Gov. George W. Bush said, ''Given the right leadership, America can develop an effective missile defense system.'' In your July 9 front-page article discussing the missile defense test failure, Gov. George W. Bush said, ''Given the right leadership, America can develop an effective missile defense system.'' Was the test failure due to a failure of leadership by President Clinton? Were previous test failures a result of poor leadership by Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush? Does Governor Bush suggest that as president, he can take control of the missile defense program and make it work? The failures have been of hardware and technology. I doubt if  Governor Bush can solve the problem with leadership.
 Article by Margaret Mittelbach and Michael Crewdson on searching for elusive Karner blue butterfly, which was identified by Vladimir Nabokov as separate subspecies in 1950 and named by him; novelist's site, Albany Pine Bush Preserve in New York, described; photo; map (M) While Nabokov was writing in the 1940's, he also studied the anatomy of butterflies at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard. Among the butterflies he examined were some old specimens collected in the 19th century from Karner, N.Y., a bygone village in an area known as the Albany Pine Bush. Although he identified the Karner blue as a distinct subspecies in 1943 and named it Lycaeides melissa samuelis, it wasn't until the late spring of 1950 that Nabokov -- whose prose abounds in butterfly imagery -- took up his net and went looking for Karner blues in the wild. Before leaving he wrote to a friend, the literary critic Edmund Wilson, that he planned to drive to ''a place called Karner, where in some pine barrens, on lupines, a little blue butterfly I have described and named ought to be out.'' While Nabokov was writing in the 1940's, he also studied the anatomy of butterflies at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard. Among the butterflies he examined were some old specimens collected in the 19th century from Karner, N.Y., a bygone village in an area known as the Albany Pine Bush. Although he identified the Karner blue as a distinct subspecies in 1943 and named it Lycaeides melissa samuelis, it wasn't until the late spring of 1950 that Nabokov -- whose prose abounds in butterfly imagery -- took up his net and went looking for Karner blues in the wild. Before leaving he wrote to a friend, the literary critic Edmund Wilson, that he planned to drive to ''a place called Karner, where in some pine barrens, on lupines, a little blue butterfly I have described and named ought to be out.'' On June 2, 1950, while driving from Boston to Ithaca, he visited the Pine Bush for the first time. Fifty years later -- to the day -- we followed in his footsteps. When Nabokov visited the Pine Bush in 1950, he didn't have much trouble finding Karner blues. The day after his visit, he wrote Wilson again saying that he had driven ''to a certain place between Albany and Schenectady where, on a pine-scrub waste, near absolutely marvelous patches of lupines in bloom, I took a few specimens of my samuelis.'' At that time, his samuelis was the most abundant insect in the Pine Bush. A single swipe of the butterfly net was said to have been enough to capture a dozen. These days Karner blues are so scarce that netting one is a federal offense for which one can be fined up to $25,000. Since Nabokov first identified the Karner blue as a unique creature, the butterfly's Pine Bush habitat has been reduced to one-tenth its original size. In 1975, when the Karner blue became the first insect on the New York State endangered-species list, it also became the poster bug for the Pine Bush. Advocacy groups fought development with protests and legal maneuvers, and as a result, more than 2,500 acres of the Pine Bush have been turned into a preserve. To help track down some of these rare beings, we enlisted Don Rittner, a longtime advocate for the Karner blue and the founder of the Pine Bush Historic Preservation Project, which was organized in 1972 to protect the region's flora and fauna. When we made our rendezvous with Mr. Rittner -- in a diner parking lot off Route 155, just 15 minutes from downtown Albany -- he was wearing a straw hat to protect against the strong sun, and he seemed highly optimistic about our chances of seeing Karner blues. ''Let's go look for the insect that stopped millions of dollars of development,'' he said cheerfully. Following Mr. Rittner down a narrow trail, we entered the world of the Pine Bush. Instead of dirt beneath our feet there was sand, and struggling to grow up from this barren substratum was the Pine Bush's version of a forest. Miniature scrub oaks grew no higher than eight feet. Pitch pines with blackened trunks sprouted long needles that looked like cactus spines. From the top we could still hear the cars on the highway. But we were surrounded by a panoramic view of Pine Bush as far as we could see. And from there it was easier to appreciate this weird ecosystem's subtle charm -- varying shades of green layered upon green over waving dunes. ''We're in the most pristine part of the Pine Bush, and we're still standing in the city of Albany,'' Mr. Rittner said. ''I don't know any other city in the country that has its original wilderness still in its borders.'' In fact, the Pine Bush is a biological island surrounded by urban sprawl. Once covering 40 square miles between Albany and Schenectady, it has been steadily built over as these cities have spread out. ''The Pine Bush is like butter to developers,'' Mr. Rittner said. ''It's so easy to build on. They just come in and push the sand around.'' And despite being the home of 300 vertebrate species, 1,500 plants and thousands of invertebrates, the Pine Bush is not an obviously lovable habitat. According to Mr. Rittner, it's been called every name in the book: bleak, blasted, desolate and a wasteland. Butterflies apparently like the heat, though. From the moment we left the highway and entered the Pine Bush, we were besieged with them: American coppers, tiger swallowtails, spring azures, monarchs and skippers. Even before Nabokov named the Karner blue, entomologists were flitting around the Pine Bush with butterfly nets and collecting jars. So many species were discovered in the 19th century near the vanished village of Karner that scientists nicknamed the area Butterfly Station. ''There are 70 species of butterflies out here, which is more than in all of Great Britain,'' Mr. Rittner said. The missing ingredient in our search through the Pine Bush was lupine, the lavender wildflower around which the entire life cycle of the Karner blue revolves. Karner blue butterflies will lay their eggs only on lupine stalks, and their caterpillars eat only lupine leaves. Fifty years ago, when Nabokov first saw the Pine Bush, it was blanketed in lupine. Periodic wildfires set by lightning cleared away tall vegetation, making way for lupine plants, which require direct sunlight. Since then, a combination of development and fire suppression squeezed out this flower. ''No fire, no lupine, no Karner blue,'' Mr. Rittner said. ''It's that simple.'' After witnessing the egg laying, we crossed the highway to another section of the Pine Bush, this one not as pristine but overgrown with invasive shade trees. As we walked along the sandy paths, Mr. Rittner told us that in the 1970's he and his friends had written Nabokov a letter, hoping to get his support for preserving the Pine Bush from development. Although Nabokov did not join the fight to save the butterfly, he wrote back  that he remembered the Pine Bush as a ''sandy and flowery little paradise.'' IN ALBANY: The Albany Pine Bush Preserve Commission will lead a Karner Blue Butterfly Walk tomorrow from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the start of a three-week period when it may be visible. The meeting place is on the western edge of Albany on the east side of Route 155 (just north of the New York State Thruway and about a quarter mile south of Old State Road) at the Karner blue butterfly sign, which is next to the State Employees Federal Credit Union. Wear comfortable walking shoes and light clothing. Bring water, a hat, sun block and tick repellent. No butterfly nets please. Information: (518) 785-1800.
 Vice President Al Gore is strongly considering plans to announce his running mate the day after the Republican National Convention ends early next month, as a way of siphoning media attention from the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush, Democratic officials said today. Vice President Al Gore is strongly considering plans to announce his running mate the day after the Republican National Convention ends early next month, as a way of siphoning media attention from the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush, Democratic officials said today. Concerned that the Republicans could use that bounce to expand the marginal lead they already hold in many national polls, the Democrats are assessing whether to try to reduce Mr. Bush's post-convention coverage with the announcement of their vice-presidential pick. ''As a tactical option, it's attractive and under serious consideration,'' one top adviser to Mr. Gore said of the plan, which was first reported this morning in USA Today. But the adviser said that Mr. Gore had not agreed yet, for several reasons. Mr. Gore may want to allow some time to pass after the Republican convention ends to gauge the public's response to the Republican ticket. And he may also need extra time to determine whether he wants to counter the Republican choice in terms of gender or geography. Another variable would be the timing of Mr. Bush's announcement of his running mate. If it is well before the Republican convention, Mr. Gore  will be more likely to make his announcement shortly after the end of that convention, the adviser said. Regardless of when Mr. Bush announces his pick, Mr. Gore is likely to announce his choice of running mate well before the Democratic National Convention begins on Aug. 14. Democratic officials said today that they have tentatively scheduled President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton to address the convention on its first night, a Monday, allowing Mr. Gore to command the spotlight for most of the next three nights. There had been some discussion of having Mrs. Clinton, who is running for the Senate from New York, speak on Tuesday, when the Democrats plan to focus on women candidates. But Mr. Gore's advisers wanted both Clintons to speak on the first evening, to ensure that the vice president would dominate subsequent media coverage. Former Senator Bill Bradley, who formally endorsed Mr. Gore today, is scheduled to be among the featured speakers Tuesday, Democratic officials said. On Wednesday, the convention will begin focusing more on Mr. Gore's biography, with testimonials and, possibly, video clips. Mr. Gore will accept the nomination on Thursday.
