 The Rev. Al Sharpton, whose protest against the state police closed down the Atlantic City Expressway last summer, said he and the Black Ministers Council of New Jersey planned to hold protests around the state and at the Republican National Convention late this month. Those demonstrations could be politically embarrassing to Mrs. Whitman, whose supporters have been suggesting her as a possible vice-presidential nominee or, if George W. Bush wins the White House, a cabinet member or ambassador.
 In politics, Mr. McDonnell -- ever the mediator -- had friends in both major parties. He served as a campaign chairman for Andrew Stein, a Democrat, when he ran for Manhattan borough president in 1977. But he also advised two Republican presidents, Ronald Reagan and George Bush, on labor issues when they were running for office.
 ALLUSIONS TO CAMPAIGNS PAST  The year 1948 has suddenly loomed large in the presidential race. It began when the Bush campaign turned to Senator Strom Thurmond, a South Carolina Republican, to blunt Al Gore's efforts to look Trumanesque as he attacks Congress as a ''do-nothing-for-people'' legislature. The long-serving Mr. Thurmond noted in a statement issued by the Bush campaign that he had actually campaigned for president against Harry S. Truman. ''Mr. Gore, I knew Harry Truman. I ran against Harry Truman. And Mr. Gore, you are no Harry Truman,'' Mr. Thurmond said, paraphrasing a line that Lloyd Bentsen, the Democratic vice-presidential candidate, used against his opponent, Dan Quayle, in 1988. Democrats quickly noted that Mr. Thurmond ran against Truman in 1948 as a segregationist Dixiecrat. And they pointed out that the statement was released on the same day that Mr. Bush was appearing before the N.A.A.C.P. and speaking of bettering relations between Republicans and black voters. ''Political doublespeak, thy name is George W. Bush,'' said Jenny Backus, the press secretary for the Democratic National Committee. THE RIDGE FACTOR FOR BUSH  A new poll in Pennsylvania shows that Gov. George W. Bush would benefit significantly in that important state if he added Gov. Tom Ridge to his ticket. The Keystone Poll, conducted by the Center for Politics and Public Affairs at Millersville University, shows a statistical dead heat in a head-to-head contest, with Mr. Bush at 44 percent and Mr. Gore at 40 percent. The survey of 634 registered voters has a sampling error of plus or minus four points. If Mr. Ridge is added to the Republican ticket, Mr. Bush's lead would extend to 51 percent to 39 percent, beyond the margin of error.
 Gore on Patients' Rights  Vice President Al Gore, speaking at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, prodded Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to get behind the patients' bill of rights before Congress. Bush Promotes Adoption  Gov. George W. Bush, speaking in Michigan, said that ''foster care ought to be a bridge to adoption'' and called for measures to promote adoption. Gore on Patients' Rights  Vice President Al Gore, speaking at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, prodded Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to get behind the patients' bill of rights before Congress. Bush Promotes Adoption  Gov. George W. Bush, speaking in Michigan, said that ''foster care ought to be a bridge to adoption'' and called for measures to promote adoption.
 The Democratic committee is also getting a substantial assist from Mr. Clinton, who has headlined 14 events for House candidates, raising $8.3 million. Vice President Al Gore has appeared at three major House fund-raising dinners in recent months, bringing in $3.8 million. Mr. Kennedy, chairman of the Democratic House committee, said that money is flowing to House candidates in part because many donors do not believe Democrats will gain seats in the Senate and are uncertain about Mr. Gore's ability to defeat Gov. George W. Bush for the presidency.
 Hillary Rodham Clinton, standing in for Pres Clinton, tells NAACP's annual convention that blacks should not be beguiled by the assurances of Gov George W Bush that he abhors discrimination (M) Hillary Rodham Clinton, blending roles as a Senate candidate and first lady, told delegates to the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. here today that they should not be beguiled by the assurances of Gov. George W. Bush that he abhors discrimination and is committed to enforcing civil rights laws. Standing in for President Clinton, who had been scheduled to appear today but was instead presiding over the Mideast summit meeting at Camp David, Mrs. Clinton did not mention Governor Bush by name. But she made it clear that her biting criticisms were directed at the expected Republican presidential nominee, who appeared at the convention on Monday. Hillary Rodham Clinton, blending roles as a Senate candidate and first lady, told delegates to the annual convention of the N.A.A.C.P. here today that they should not be beguiled by the assurances of Gov. George W. Bush that he abhors discrimination and is committed to enforcing civil rights laws. Standing in for President Clinton, who had been scheduled to appear today but was instead presiding over the Mideast summit meeting at Camp David, Mrs. Clinton did not mention Governor Bush by name. But she made it clear that her biting criticisms were directed at the expected Republican presidential nominee, who appeared at the convention on Monday. Mrs. Clinton said it was gratifying that the annual meeting of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was attracting the kind of political guests who had shunned the group in the past, an allusion to Mr. Bush's appearance after Bob Dole, the Republican nominee in 1996, declined to attend the group's convention. Even though someone may speak to you, Mrs. Clinton said it is wise to ''watch what they do and not what they say.'' ''I'm all for compassion,'' she said, lightly mocking Mr. Bush's assertions that he understands the pain of discrimination. ''I think it's wonderful when people feel 'real bad' when there's discrimination. It's fine when people say they are 'truly compassionate' about hate crimes.'' Her appearance was sandwiched between Governor Bush's speech yesterday and a planned appearance by Vice President Al Gore, the expected Democratic presidential nominee, on Wednesday morning. Mr. Bush received a surprisingly warm welcome, noting wryly that previous Republican presidential nominees had not always been eager to appear before the N.A.A.C.P. Julian Bond, the chairman of the N.A.A.C.P., told reporters that the delegates were delighted that Mr. Bush had appeared, but they were disappointed that he had not addressed specific concerns like affirmative action or the death penalty. He said both Mrs. Clinton and Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, who also spoke to the convention today, offered genuine substance in their talks, in contrast to Mr. Bush, who he said ''viewed his appearance as a photo opportunity.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore prods Gov George W Bush to get behind a bipartisan patients' bill of rights now before Congress; criticizes insurance companies that offer bonuses to doctors each time they decline to refer patients to a specialist; photo of Gore at University of Arkansas for Medical Science in Little Rock (M) Vice President Al Gore prodded his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, today to get behind a bipartisan patients' bill of rights now before Congress. ''It's time for Governor Bush to show us whose side he is on,'' said the vice president, speaking at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, where his campaign aides had set up several boxes of the game Operation that they labeled ''Bush's Health Plan.'' Vice President Al Gore prodded his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, today to get behind a bipartisan patients' bill of rights now before Congress. ''It's time for Governor Bush to show us whose side he is on,'' said the vice president, speaking at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, where his campaign aides had set up several boxes of the game Operation that they labeled ''Bush's Health Plan.'' Mr. Gore was introduced by a surgeon who told of a patient who had lost her breast unnecessarily because her insurance company had refused to pay for an M.R.I. test that would have shown that her cancer was localized and could have been treated with a lumpectomy and radiation instead of a mastectomy. ''That's an old trick,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Stick a feather in your hat and call it macaroni.'' The current system, Mr. Gore said, not only hurts patients but puts doctors in the position of being forced to ''play games'' with the truth in dealing with insurance companies in order to be true to the Hippocratic oath. In a statement, the Bush campaign answered that Mr. Gore was ''continuing his ''I'm not a leader tour' '' and ''attempting to shift blame for the lack'' of patient protections. Gov. Bush has signed a patient protection bill into law in Texas after initially fighting another version of the bill. On NBC's ''Today'' show in New York, where the vice president began the day, Mr. Gore corrected Katie Couric when she said he had been ''assailing'' Mr. Bush on the issue. ''I'm not assailing him personally, Katie.'' Then he went on to say Mr. Bush, as the de facto head of the party, was, along with Republican Congressional leaders, beholden to drug companies who opposed meaningful patient protections or prescription drug benefits. After the show, Mr. Gore worked the crowd outside Rockefeller Center, where he competed for attention with the ''Today'' weatherman, Al Roker, who complained that he was losing his audience. While Mr. Gore shook hands and made funny faces at a couple of babies, he heard more complaints over the loudspeaker. Inside the studio, another guest, the television judge Judy Sheindlin, was irate that the green room had been ''taken over'' by Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore later got down on one knee to serve Her Honor a muffin.
 Nightly tracking polls of voters in Iowa and New Hampshire, for example, showed that Vice President Al Gore's Jan. 5 debate attack on Bill Bradley over health care and his Jan. 8 blast over a Bradley vote on flood relief had a distinct effect on Democratic voters, and halted the momentum the former New Jersey senator had built. Nightly tracking polls of voters in Iowa and New Hampshire, for example, showed that Vice President Al Gore's Jan. 5 debate attack on Bill Bradley over health care and his Jan. 8 blast over a Bradley vote on flood relief had a distinct effect on Democratic voters, and halted the momentum the former New Jersey senator had built. Endorsements cut both ways, Dr. Jamieson said. For example, the endorsement of Gov. George W. Bush by the National Right to Life Committee won him votes from abortion opponents in his race against Senator John McCain,  but cost him votes among Republican supporters of abortion rights. That endorsement, she said, ''may have misled people into thinking McCain was more pro-choice than he actually was.'' The key to deriving impact from endorsements, she said, was usually to advertise them. In Iowa, for example, only 19 percent of Democrats were aware of the endorsement of Mr. Bradley by Senator Paul Wellstone of neighboring Minnesota, who campaigned frequently with him. But 75 percent knew that Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa had endorsed Mr. Gore. The Harkin support was shown often in Gore advertisements. The Wellstone endorsement was not shown at all. Instead,  Mr. Bradley's campaign used an advertisement showing that he was being backed by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York. Another important finding was that knowing the source of a political advertisement can be critical to its effectiveness. Dr. Jamieson found that a Bush radio advertisement accusing Mr. McCain of opposing spending for cancer research was widely known across the country and had a big impact on female voters, although it was broadcast only in New York. Those who knew that the Bush campaign had sponsored it were 11 percentage points less likely to believe it than those who did not, Dr. Jamieson said. Had it been sponsored by a group calling itself Citizens for Breast Cancer Research, for instance, it might have been even more effective, she said.
 From Bushwick to Harlem, many teachers were standing in front of nearly empty classes. The Board of Education has budgeted $150 million on instruction alone, for small classes of 12 to 15 students, yet many schools had just six to eight students in a class, and some had as few as three.
 She is expected to play a visible role at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, including welcoming delegates at a Camden event. Her supporters give her long-shot prospects as a running mate with George W. Bush and better odds for a cabinet or ambassadorial appointment in a Bush administration.
 An obituary yesterday about the futurist who took the name FM-2030 rendered incorrectly the names and residences of his surviving sisters in some copies. They are Farideh Sadjadi of Baltimore, Fereshteh Jahanbani of New York, Forouzandeh Moghimi of Tehran, Iran, and Behjat Ghanbari of Bushehr, Iran. An obituary yesterday about the futurist who took the name FM-2030 rendered incorrectly the names and residences of his surviving sisters in some copies. They are Farideh Sadjadi of Baltimore, Fereshteh Jahanbani of New York, Forouzandeh Moghimi of Tehran, Iran, and Behjat Ghanbari of Bushehr, Iran.
 8 a.m. Gores arrive at LAX. Janet Reno greets them. To: Terry McAuliffe  From: Al Gore  Re: The Gore Convention Day Three: The theme is ''Rediscovering the Human Side of Al Gore,'' including a yet-to-be-selected Gore family tragedy. Day Four: The theme is ''Rediscovering the Lighter Side of Al Gore,'' including hilarious and beloved comedy routines where I balance a broom on my nose, do the booty-call line dance and hypnotize chickens.
 Gov George W Bush calls for measures to promote adoption, including grants to states and an increase in the adoption tax credit; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush declared today that ''foster care ought to be a bridge to adoption'' and called for measures to promote adoption, including grants to states and an increase in the adoption tax credit. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, announced the proposals as he returned to his ''compassionate conservative'' themes and planned several weeks of appearances devoted to social welfare measures for low-income and struggling Americans. Gov. George W. Bush declared today that ''foster care ought to be a bridge to adoption'' and called for measures to promote adoption, including grants to states and an increase in the adoption tax credit. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, announced the proposals as he returned to his ''compassionate conservative'' themes and planned several weeks of appearances devoted to social welfare measures for low-income and struggling Americans. And Mr. Bush called for spending $300 million more over the same period to be used for vouchers to assist teenagers who are leaving the foster care system. The vouchers, of up to $5,000 per person, could be used for college tuition or vocational training. Mr. Bush pointed to his own state as a leader in improving foster care and the adoption system. The number of children who can be permanently adopted rose to 2,123 in 1999 from 1,033 in 1996 because of procedures developed to keep children from languishing in foster care, an aide to Mr. Bush said. The Gore campaign immediately attacked Mr. Bush's credibility by pointing to such findings as a 1999 report that ranked Texas 49th among the 50 states in the number of children living in poverty. ''The facts speak for themselves, said Kym Spell, a Gore aide. ''Bush's record in Texas is short on compassion and long on broken promises.'' For most of the 45-minute panel session, Mr. Bush simply questioned the panelists or listened as they told inspirational tales of overcoming difficult family situations. Television cameras filmed the kinds of scenes that have become a Bush campaign staple: the candidate surrounded by minority children. ''I appreciate the spirit of love that exists inside these walls,'' Mr. Bush said, as he sat under a blue banner proclaiming ''Strong Families, Safe Children.'' Former Lt. Gov. Connie Binsfeld of Michigan told Mr. Bush that states needed more flexibility in using federal funds. ''I could talk for two days, governor,'' she said, ''because -- '' But Mr. Bush interrupted her, saying, ''I don't know if I could listen for two.'' At another point Mr. Bush hugged one of the two foster sons that Sierra Craig was adopting as he talked about the adoption tax credit. He tried to draw out her 11-year-old son, Eric. ''What grade are you in?'' he asked. ''Sixth,'' the boy whispered. Mr. Bush said: ''That's good. I was in sixth grade once, too.''
