 Gov George W Bush's failed 1978 race for Congress in Texas has left deep imprint on him that is evident as he campaigns for president; Bush ran energetic, but flawed, campaign in race that may have been unwinnable, allowing opponent to portray him as overeducated phony in way that some Bush supporters now portray Vice Pres Al Gore; has been engaged in politics since his teens and has considered various runs for office since his 20's; photos (L) George W. Bush was seething with frustration. Here he was, feeling as Texan as the chaw he liked to tuck under his lower lip, and he had to smile gamely while the audience snickered at him as an alien in cowboy boots. It was 1978, and the 31-year-old Mr. Bush was trying to get a start in politics by running for Congress here in West Texas. A candidate forum was under way, and his rival was needling Mr. Bush with an oft-repeated joke in which he was the punchline, a yarn that reinforced a perception of him as a spoiled rich kid from back East. George W. Bush was seething with frustration. Here he was, feeling as Texan as the chaw he liked to tuck under his lower lip, and he had to smile gamely while the audience snickered at him as an alien in cowboy boots. It was 1978, and the 31-year-old Mr. Bush was trying to get a start in politics by running for Congress here in West Texas. A candidate forum was under way, and his rival was needling Mr. Bush with an oft-repeated joke in which he was the punchline, a yarn that reinforced a perception of him as a spoiled rich kid from back East. ''It was a Mercedes,'' drawled Mr. Hance, raising his eyebrows, and the audience tittered knowingly at the hint that Mr. Bush was the kind of man more comfortable in a Mercedes than a pick-up. ''The guy rolled down the window and wanted to know how to get to a certain ranch.'' The audience roared with laughter, and just to be sure that the voters got the connection with the Connecticut-born Mr. Bush, Mr. Hance said he had noticed something else about the Mercedes: ''It had Connecticut license plates.'' Mr. Bush lost that race for Congress. Yet the story of his entry into politics, and particularly of that campaign, suggests that it left a deep imprint on him, one evident today as he campaigns for the White House. Back then, Mr. Bush ran an energetic but deeply flawed campaign. He chose a race that may have been unwinnable, and then let himself be portrayed to many voters as an over-educated phony out of touch with ordinary voters -- ironically, a bit the way some Bush supporters now look at Vice President Al Gore. When Mr. Bush first entered the Congressional race, he was still single and struggling to start an oil company. He was not obvious Congressional material: he lived in a bachelor's flat, his bedframe tied together with one of his neckties, and he dressed exclusively in ratty denim or in clothes that did not match. Mr. Bush campaigned feverishly from morning to night in his white Oldsmobile Cutlass, usually running late, his volunteers sitting beside him and struggling to domesticate him. Older people were sometimes put off by what they saw as Mr. Bush's cockiness, but the young volunteers were dazzled by his enthusiasm. ''No matter how late the activities of the previous evening, he was always up early the next morning and working in a way I'd rarely seen in Lubbock,'' said J. Michael Weiss, whom Mr. Bush met while shaking hands at a shopping mall and turned into a volunteer county chairman. George W. Bush is often seen today as a very late entrant into politics; he is running for president after holding elective office for just five years. Yet in another sense, he has been engaged in politics one way or another since his teens and has considered various runs for office since his 20's. Mr. Bush was first exposed to politics at the age of 17, when his father ran for the Senate, and later he worked full-time on Senate campaigns in Florida for Edward J. Gurney and in Alabama for Winton M. Blount, nicknamed Red. The lure of these campaigns was not policy but the adventure of a statewide campaign; a friend recalls Mr. Bush saying that he spent his time in Alabama drinking and dating. Diane Paul, a girlfriend of Mr. Bush when he was in his mid-twenties, said that Mr. Bush was fascinated even then by politics and searching for a way to run for office. In 1971, when he was 25, Mr. Bush found a spot. A seat in the Texas State Senate was coming open in Houston the next year, and he chewed over with friends the idea of running for it. So Mr. Bush went off to Harvard Business School and then started business in 1975 as an oilman in Midland, the West Texas city where he had spent his childhood. Just two years later, a terrific opportunity seemed to tumble into his lap. George Mahon, the local Democratic congressman, announced his retirement after 43 years in the House. It was a useful marriage. For a candidate like Mr. Bush who some saw as a rootless and immature carpet-bagger, it was helpful politically to settle down and start a family, particularly with a local girl who was an authentic West Texan. But the young couple seemed absolutely in love as they roared around the district on the campaign trail, and there was almost no muttering about the sheer political convenience of it all. What drew Mr. Bush into politics? In an interview, he rejected the suggestion that he had followed his father into politics, saying instead that he had been angry at Carter administration policy on natural gas pricing. But in a 1995 conversation with a historian, Herbert S. Parmet, Mr. Bush emphasized the degree to which his own family legacy pushed him into the political world. ''There is a passing on of tradition, passing on legacy, passing on responsibility,'' Mr. Bush said then, according to Professor Parmet's transcript of the conversation. ''So I don't think it's a conscious effort. I don't think it's any of this thing where, you know, 'by God, young man, if you play your cards right you, too, may end up in politics.' It's more of an inherent trait.'' Mr. Bush may not have had a decent suit when he announced his candidacy, but he had other assets -- among them a first-rate name. George Bush had been a prominent name in Texas ever since his father had begun his political career in 1964 with a campaign for the Senate and then, after losing, served two terms as a congressman from Houston. The elder Bush ran for the Senate unsuccessfully again in 1970, but by then his star was rising in the Republican Party: he was mentioned three times as a possible vice president -- twice for President Richard M. Nixon, once for President Gerald R. Ford --  and became famous by holding a series of posts like ambassador to the United Nations, chairman of the Republican National Committee and director of central intelligence. The younger Mr. Bush's key supporters in the 1978 campaign were his buddies in Midland, people like Donald L. Evans, who is now the chairman of his presidential campaign. In addition, friends of the father helped out the son or contributed money. It would have been difficult to imagine an unknown 31-year-old who had barely held a job running for Congress -- had it not been for Mr. Bush's name and his family connections. But it soon became apparent that there was also a downside to this pedigree. The other candidate in the Republican primary runoff, Jim Reese, the courtly and conservative mayor of Odessa, initiated attacks on Mr. Bush using themes that still reverberate today. Indeed, some of the epithets later attributed to Ann Richards when she competed -- and lost -- against Mr. Bush in the 1994 contest for governor, like Junior or Shrub, were first used by Mr. Reese in 1978. Sensitive to the perception that he was simply playing on his name and background -- a sensitivity that continues to this day -- Mr. Bush asked his father not to campaign for him and played down the connection. ''We don't need Dad in this race,'' Mr. Bush told The Midland Reporter-Telegram. ''We don't need anyone in this race but the people of this district.'' Yet the Congressional primary runoff became a proxy battle between two national Republican giants, for Ronald Reagan and the elder George Bush were dueling in preparation for the 1980 Republican presidential nomination, and Mr. Reagan did not want a Bush family victory in Texas. Mr. Reagan contributed $3,000 from his own political action committee to Mr. Reese's campaign and taped a television commercial for him. This infuriated the Bush family. ''I'm not interested in getting into an argument with Reagan,'' the elder Mr. Bush told The Washington Post at that time. ''But I am surprised about what he is doing here, in my state.'' ''They are making a real effort to defeat George,'' Mr. Bush added indignantly. ''We were going broke farming, and we were fighting anything that was keeping us down,'' recalled J. C. Lewis, an Oklahoma farmer and retired Air Force pilot who flew down to Texas to campaign against Mr. Bush in small towns like Wolfforth. The most common interpretation of the 1978 campaign is that Mr. Bush was a wonderful campaigner and natural-born politician. But this seems to be a gloss burnished by time and the selective memories of Mr. Bush and his friends. Here in West Texas people say that Mr. Bush was personable and a quick study but still made a series of mistakes, largely through inexperience. For example, there was the day, early in the campaign, at a candidate forum on a farm near the town of Dimmitt. ''Today is the first time I've been on a real farm,'' Mr. Bush said, beaming at the crowd. Then there was the TV commercial Mr. Bush dreamed up to demonstrate how energetic he was: it showed him jogging on a track. In those days, joggers were about as common in West Texas as Martians. ''In his campaign in '78, I didn't get the feeling that he had the knack for it,'' Mr. Angelo said of Mr. Bush. Since then, Mr. Angelo has revised his opinion and now believes Mr. Bush has tremendous political instincts. In the end, Mr. Bush beat Mr. Reese handily in the Republican primary, taking 56 percent of the vote. ''George has been underestimated every time,'' Mr. Reese reflected the other day, as he sat on a couch in his home in Odessa. ''I did it initially. Ann Richards did it in the governor's race. And Al Gore may be doing that now.'' While Mr. Bush now is sometimes mocked for an ignorance of policy details, back then people thought he had the opposite problem: a tendency to drop references in his speeches that baffled audiences, like a discussion of anti-inflationary economic policy. Another problem was that while Mr. Bush never really had a clear campaign strategy, Mr. Hance did: he focused his campaign on emphasizing local ties and on casting Mr. Bush as a carpet-bagger from the East. One of Mr. Hance's most effective radio spots was this one, read by an announcer: ''In 1961, when Kent Hance graduated from Dimmitt High School in the 19th congressional district, his opponent George W. Bush was attending Andover Academy in Massachusetts. In 1965, when Kent Hance graduated from Texas Tech, his opponent was at Yale University. And while Kent Hance graduated from University of Texas Law School, his opponent'' -- the announcer's voice plunged -- ''get this, folks, was attending Harvard. We don't need someone from the Northeast telling us what our problems are.'' Otice A. Green, a long-time political consultant who has worked on campaigns since 1956 -- including Mr. Hance's in 1978 -- said that Mr. Bush made a ''good entry'' into politics and was an impressive candidate. But, he added: ''Kent Hance was one of the best I ever saw.'' It would have helped Mr. Bush if Republicans had united around him and vouched for him as a genuine West Texan. In retrospect, several Republicans think Mr. Bush should have tried much harder to get Mr. Reese's strong backing for the general election. Mr. Bush spent a third more than Mr. Hance in the general election campaign, but the extra spending played into the Democrats' hands. Mr. Hance denounced Mr. Bush for getting 64 percent of his campaign contributions from outside the district. Mr. Bush complained that Mr. Hance's numbers were wrong. Over all, he said, only 48 percent of the money came from contributors outside the district. ''We've been attacked for where I was born, for who my family is, and where my money has come from,'' The Midland Reporter-Telegram quoted Mr. Bush as saying. ''I don't think that's fair.'' Mr. Bush and Mr. Hance did not have any particular ideological or policy disagreement. Indeed, The Reporter-Telegram wrote that at one appearance the two men were asked what difference there was between them. ''Well,'' Mr. Bush said finally, ''I've got more hair.'' ''Hance would have made a good Republican,'' Mr. Bush told the audience. ''And Bush would have made a good conservative Democrat,'' Mr. Hance affirmed. Mr. Bush's father was appalled that his membership in the Trilateral Commission was hurting his son's candidacy. So he wrote to Mr. McCathern, the farm organizer, and suggested a meeting to clear the air. They had a ''very, very affable meeting'' in Houston, Mr. McCathern said, and Mr. Bush resigned from the Trilateral Commission a few days before the election. But if the elder Bush kept his cool over the issue, the son occasionally lost his. Mel Turner, a local radio personality and a Republican, said he was leaning toward Mr. Bush but was troubled by the matter of the Trilateral Commission. At a candidate forum at the Branding Iron restaurant in Odessa, Mr. Turner stood up and asked Mr. Bush about the Trilateral Commission and whether his father was working for one-world government. ''Junior Bush comes up, refused to shake my hand, looked me square in the eye and said, 'you . . . ' '' using a crude epithet, Mr. Turner recalled. ''Then Kent Hance came up and said, 'Mel, I'll see you up at the Tech game.''' Late in the campaign, disaster struck the Bush forces. A university student was organizing a ''Bush bash'' to recruit young people from Texas Tech, and placed an advertisement in the student newspaper promising free beer. In fact, the event was tame and ended early, but the Democrats had their ammunition. Five days before the election, a law partner of Mr. Hance wrote a public letter denouncing the Bush campaign for using alcohol to lure young people. The letter went to 4,000 members of the Church of Christ in Lubbock, and copies were put under windshield wipers of cars of people attending church services. ''Kent's opponent, young Mr. Bush, apparently is using tactics to secure votes which do not indicate the same high character,'' the letter declared. ''Mr. Bush has used some of his vast sums of money in an attempt, evidently, to persuade young college students to vote for and support him by offering free alcohol to them.'' Mr. Bush called a news conference in which he fumed: ''His campaign has been funny. First he attacked my family, then my background, and now my morals.'' Supporters of Mr. Bush found out that Mr. Hance owned a building that was leased to Fat Dawgs, a bar in Lubbock. Some of Mr. Bush's friends urged him to accuse Mr. Hance of hypocrisy, but he refused; voters would reward a candidate who took the high road, he told supporters. A few days later, Mr. Bush was defeated, 53 percent to 47 percent. Of course, if Mr. Bush had won, it might not have been the best thing for his career. He would have become part of the Washington establishment, and would not have cultivated the beyond-the-beltway aura that has been his strength since he re-entered politics by running for governor in 1994. As for Mr. Hance, he ran for the United States Senate in 1984 but lost and ended up a  lawyer in Austin -- and a supporter of the Bushes. Mr. Hance recalled that while in Congress, he met another young Southern Democrat, a Tennessean named Al Gore, and grew friendly with him. After seeing both men in action, he concluded that Mr. Bush is a far more effective campaigner. ''I'm convinced that Bush is going to be beat him and beat him soundly,'' Mr. Hance said. ''I served with Gore and I know him, and I like him. But I'd hate to ride from Lubbock to Los Angeles with him. If you rode from Lubbock to Los Angeles with Bush, it'd be loads of fun. And Gore'd be saying things like, 'I see some mountains.' '' So what did Mr. Bush learn from his first political contest? How did it change him? ''It was an interesting lesson,'' Mr. Bush said in an interview. ''Sometimes there are races you just can't win.'' Another lesson, some of Mr. Bush's friends say, is the need to respond forcefully to accusations like those about the ''Bush bash.'' The high road may be honorable, he discovered, but it does not necessarily lead to elective office. More broadly, that first campaign taught Mr. Bush, as his old pal Mr. O'Neill puts it, ''don't let your opponent define you.'' Mr. Hance believes he taught Mr. Bush two lessons. First, he said, he showed Mr. Bush the need to cultivate the religious right, those church-goers who he had largely ignored during the campaign and who in the end voted against him on the alcohol issue. And second, he thinks, he helped teach Mr. Bush the need to be more folksy. Governor Bush's Journey This is the eighth in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will look at George W. Bush's mid-life redemption.
 DEMOCRATS DRILL FOR OIL -- No sooner had Dick Cheney been selected as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate than the Democratic National Committee put up a Web site, www.bush-cheney.net, as a parody of the team. With a graphic of an oil well gushing dollars, the Web site says the two men are ''covered with money from Big Oil'' and features statements that Mr. Cheney's Congressional voting record is more conservative than that of Jesse Helms. A committee spokesman said the site went up minutes after Mr. Cheney's selection was announced and, so far, it has received more than 15,000 hits. The Bush campaign, which has acquired a large number of domain names to prevent parody sites, had apparently never purchased the Bush-Cheney combination. ''We like to think of our site as like 'Dragnet','' said the committee spokesman, ''It's just the facts, ma'am.'' DEMOCRATS DRILL FOR OIL -- No sooner had Dick Cheney been selected as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate than the Democratic National Committee put up a Web site, www.bush-cheney.net, as a parody of the team. With a graphic of an oil well gushing dollars, the Web site says the two men are ''covered with money from Big Oil'' and features statements that Mr. Cheney's Congressional voting record is more conservative than that of Jesse Helms. A committee spokesman said the site went up minutes after Mr. Cheney's selection was announced and, so far, it has received more than 15,000 hits. The Bush campaign, which has acquired a large number of domain names to prevent parody sites, had apparently never purchased the Bush-Cheney combination. ''We like to think of our site as like 'Dragnet','' said the committee spokesman, ''It's just the facts, ma'am.'' KEYES BACKS BUSH TICKET -- He did not win a single presidential primary or caucus, but Alan Keyes, the hard-right radio talk show host, stayed on the campaign trail long after it was certain that Gov. George W. Bush was going to be the Republican nominee. Winning or losing was not as important to him, he insisted, as spreading his message that the nation must rededicate itself to moral principles and especially to outlawing abortion. But late Tuesday in Boston, Mr. Keyes, the only black candidate in the 2000 presidential field, pulled out of the race. Asked if he still considered himself a candidate with just a week to go before Mr. Bush is formally nominated in Philadelphia, he replied: ''I am not.'' He said he would back the Bush-Cheney ticket, noting that Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, were strong opponents of abortion. GORE AHEAD IN NEW JERSEY -- In New Jersey, which both parties view as a crucial electoral battleground, Vice President Al Gore continues to hold a slight lead over Gov. George W. Bush, according to the latest Quinnipiac  University poll. The survey of 910 registered voters taken July 19-24, with a margin of sampling error of three percentage points, shows Mr. Gore with a lead of 46 percent to 41 percent in a one-on-one race. When small-party candidates are included, Mr. Gore's lead is 42-38 over Mr. Bush, with 7 percent for Ralph Nader and 2 percent for Patrick J. Buchanan. The survey was taken before Mr. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney, who opposes abortion, as his running mate, but the poll suggested that choosing a vice presidential candidate who favored abortion rights would have done little to help Mr. Bush in New Jersey: 15 percent said they would have been more likely to vote Republican, 15 percent less likely, and 66 percent said it would have made no difference.
 James A. Baker III was secretary of state under President George Bush.
 Peter J Bauer letter disputes July 26 news analysis of Gov George W Bush choice of Richard B Cheney as running mate You say Dick Cheney, George W. Bush's choice for his running mate,  brings ''few obvious political advantages to the ticket.'' I disagree. Mr. Cheney brings the most important of all political advantages to the Republican ticket: credibility. You say Dick Cheney, George W. Bush's choice for his running mate,  brings ''few obvious political advantages to the ticket.'' I disagree. Mr. Cheney brings the most important of all political advantages to the Republican ticket: credibility. Rather than some governor with no international experience being paired with, for example, another governor with no international experience, Mr. Bush has chosen an experienced, knowledgeable running mate. The selection of Mr. Cheney as the vice-presidential candidate has taken me off the fence. Knowing that Mr. Bush has the good sense to surround himself with capable, experienced people rather than a partner who can bring in a state or several will likely have as big an effect on others, too.
 Bush and Cheney Hit the Campaign Trail  Gov. George W. Bush and his new running mate, Dick Cheney, visited the vice-presidential contender's home state, Wyoming, defending Mr. Cheney's conservative voting record and vowing that the ticket would ''renew America's purpose.'' Gore Seeks Jackson's Aid  Vice President Al Gore, campaigning in Chicago, urged members of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's organization, the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, to support him and work to defeat the ''old guard'' represented by the Republican ticket. Mr. Jackson was once a bitter rival of Mr. Gore's, but is now a close ally.
 He published many more books, including ''Women in Russia'' (1977); ''Black Box''(1985), a study of the Soviet shooting down of Korean Air Lines Flight 007 concluding that the United States may have engineered the plane's deviation into Soviet strategic airspace; and ''The Gorbachev Era''(1986), written with Condoleezza Rice, Gov. George W. Bush's foreign policy adviser.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column cites Century Foundation analysis of Gov George W Bush's proposal to let workers invest part of their Social Security taxes in personal retirement accounts that found plan would worsen system's long-term deficit and/or lead to big cuts in Social Security benefits In their brief joint appearance on Tuesday, George W. Bush and Dick Cheney both mentioned Social Security first when they referred to some of the big issues facing the country. Both said that strengthening the Social Security system was a priority. And yet a rigorous analysis by the nonpartisan Century Foundation of Mr. Bush's proposal to allow workers to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes in personal retirement accounts has determined that the plan would either worsen the system's long-term deficit or lead to substantial cuts in Social Security benefits, or both. In their brief joint appearance on Tuesday, George W. Bush and Dick Cheney both mentioned Social Security first when they referred to some of the big issues facing the country. Both said that strengthening the Social Security system was a priority. And yet a rigorous analysis by the nonpartisan Century Foundation of Mr. Bush's proposal to allow workers to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes in personal retirement accounts has determined that the plan would either worsen the system's long-term deficit or lead to substantial cuts in Social Security benefits, or both. The analysis of Mr. Bush's plan was conducted by Henry J. Aaron, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution; Alan Blinder, an economics professor at Princeton University and a former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board; Alicia Munnell of Boston College; and Peter Orszag, president of Sebago Associates, an economics and public policy consulting firm. The authors went on: ''Governor Bush has promised not to raise payroll taxes or invest the trust fund in stocks. He also has proposed tax cuts that would consume virtually the entire projected non-Social Security surplus, leaving no room for transfers to Social Security without causing a non-Social Security deficit. Governor Bush's plan would therefore have to rely on cutting Social Security benefits.'' The authors based their analysis on a diversion of two percentage points of the current Social Security payroll tax into individual retirement accounts. And they assumed an inflation-adjusted rate of return on the accounts of 5.9 percent annually, which matched the assumption of Martin Feldstein, an advocate of retirement accounts and a top adviser to Governor Bush. ''The conclusion,'' the authors wrote, ''is that Governor Bush's proposal could cut Social Security benefits by more than 50 percent for young workers, and the proceeds from the individual accounts would (on average) make up only a portion of that cut while exposing individuals to significant risk.'' The study said: ''These estimates are based on assumptions we believe understate the likely reductions in Social Security benefits. Even with these favorable assumptions, the results are dramatic: Governor Bush's plan requires substantial reductions in Social Security benefits and increased exposure to market risks for future retirees. Indeed, the implied reductions in Social Security benefits for future retirees are so substantial, they raise questions about the viability of protecting benefits for current retirees, older workers, disabled workers, and survivors while diverting payroll taxes into individual accounts.'' Governor Bush and Mr. Cheney will be rigorously cross-examined on this matter between now and November.
 Photo of Gov George W Bush and wife, Laura, making first campaign appearance with running mate, Dick Cheney, in Cheney's home state, Wyoming
 Vice Pres Al Gore, warning against apathy within Democratic ranks, urges members of Rev Jesse Jackson's Rainbow/PUSH Coalition to set aside doubts about him and work to defeat Republican 'old guard' ticket of Gov George W Bush and Dick Cheney; Chicago speech caps several days of campaigning in which he sought to reach out to party's core liberal wing; his aides say they are counting on Jackson to energize black voters by raising questions about Bush; photo (M) Warning against apathy within the Democratic ranks, Vice President Al Gore today urged members of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's organization, the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, to set aside doubts about him and work to defeat the Republican ''old guard'' embodied in the ticket of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. Speaking before a mostly black audience of more than 100 people in a hotel ballroom here, Mr. Gore said  the dismaying imperfections of politicians had turned off many people. Warning against apathy within the Democratic ranks, Vice President Al Gore today urged members of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's organization, the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, to set aside doubts about him and work to defeat the Republican ''old guard'' embodied in the ticket of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. Speaking before a mostly black audience of more than 100 people in a hotel ballroom here, Mr. Gore said  the dismaying imperfections of politicians had turned off many people. But he implored his listeners to avoid cynicism, cautioning that their indifference could help elect Mr. Bush and thus allow the Republicans to undermine civil rights, workers' rights, the economy, the environment and health care programs. ''There can be absolutely no doubt that voters will go to the polls choosing between two very different visions for our future,'' Mr. Gore said. ''It is the choice between the old guard that gave us deficits, division and social injustices, and a new vision for prosperity and progress, investment, inclusion and growth to lift up all of our people.'' Mr. Gore did not explain what he meant by ''imperfections.'' His speech capped several days of campaigning in which he has sought to reach out to the party's core liberal wing, which includes environmentalists, unions and black and Hispanic voters. Many polls have shown relatively little enthusiasm among those constituencies for Mr. Gore. And as if to hammer home that point, his audience today applauded only occasionally. His advisers say they are counting on Mr. Jackson -- who closed his remarks today with a chant of ''More with Gore'' -- to energize black voters by raising questions about Mr. Bush. In introducing Mr. Gore today, Mr. Jackson -- once a bitter rival who has become his close ally -- asserted that the Clinton administration's policies had improved the lives of black families. But he also warned that ''prosperity fatigue'' might be creating apathy among black voters. And then he opened a slashing attack on Mr. Cheney, a former five-term congressman from Wyoming and secretary of defense under President George Bush, the governor's father. Mr. Gore acknowledged that concern, saying, ''I do give our opponents some credit'' for their tactics. Mr. Gore also raised questions about Mr. Bush's commitment to civil rights, recalling that the governor had supported South Carolina's right to fly the Confederate battle flag over its state house. ''He took a look up there at the flag pole,'' the vice president said of Mr. Bush. ''He saw the American flag; he saw the dome. But he did not see a symbol of injustice and oppression. Something was wrong with his vision.'' In his remarks today, Mr. Gore avoided the raspy, high-energy Southern-preacher speaking style he sometimes assumes when addressing black audiences. Instead, he spoke in a calm, almost easy-going voice as he delved into his confessional themes.
 Gov George W Bush and his new running mate, Dick Cheney, make whirlwind visit to Wyoming, Cheney's home state; defend Cheney's conservative voting record; Bush strikes more partisan tones than usual; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush and his new running mate, Dick Cheney, made a whirlwind visit today to the vice-presidential contender's home state, defending Mr. Cheney's conservative voting record and vowing that the ticket would ''renew America's purpose.'' In their first campaign trip, Mr. Bush struck more partisan tones than usual, hammering away at the integrity and trustworthiness of the Clinton administration. He presented the all-Western Republican ticket as the antidote. Gov. George W. Bush and his new running mate, Dick Cheney, made a whirlwind visit today to the vice-presidential contender's home state, defending Mr. Cheney's conservative voting record and vowing that the ticket would ''renew America's purpose.'' In their first campaign trip, Mr. Bush struck more partisan tones than usual, hammering away at the integrity and trustworthiness of the Clinton administration. He presented the all-Western Republican ticket as the antidote. ''Dick and I both have roots in the West,'' Mr. Bush of Texas told a chanting crowd packed into the gymnasium of the high school Mr. Cheney, 59, attended more than 40 years ago. ''The West is a place full of straightforward people who usually say what they mean and mean what they say.'' Then Mr. Bush reached back to one of President Clinton's well-known evasions in the Monica Lewinsky scandal. ''The West is full of people who understand the meaning of what the word 'is' is,'' he said. A day after Mr. Bush announced that he had selected his father's former defense secretary as his running mate, the Texas governor was quickly hit with questions about Mr. Cheney's voting record in his six terms in the House. He and the Gore campaign engaged in a fierce cross-country competition to define what  voters thought about Mr. Cheney. ''I obviously thought about the record,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And this is a conservative man. So am I.'' The governor and his aides said the selection of Mr. Cheney showed that Mr. Bush was putting political considerations aside to make a sober-minded decision on a running mate who could serve as commander in chief. ''He brings some strength to the administration,'' Mr. Bush said in a  news conference. ''It speaks volumes that I'm willing to pick somebody who is as strong a man as he is,'' Mr. Bush said, ''that I'm comfortable with having excellence by my side.'' The Democrats also said the choice spoke volumes, about whether Mr. Bush really is a new kind of Republican or a throwback to the past. They pointed to Mr. Cheney's  conservative voting record as well as his service in the administrations of Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and George Bush. ''I'm very proud of Halliburton,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''I have nothing to apologize for.'' He described it as a company that had started small as the brainchild of one man and become ''the quintessential American success story.'' Mr. Bush said his opponents were trying to ''divert attention from the fact that the Democrats have no energy policy.'' The Bush campaign presented the trip to Natrona High School as a sentimental journey to the hometown where Mr. Cheney met his wife, Lynne. He was the class president and a captain of the football team. She was the prom queen, and as Mr. Bush added today, a ''nationally ranked champion baton twirler.'' Gov. Jim Geringer warmed up the audience and dismissed the talk of Mr. Cheney's voting record. ''I'd rather have Vice President Cheney with his heart, than President Gore with no backbone,'' he said. It was Mr. Bush, not his running mate, who seemed in a feisty mood. As he brought Mr. Cheney down the aisle of his campaign plane, reporters asked the governor what he thought of the Democrats' reaction to Mr. Cheney.
 Dick Cheney, Gov George W Bush's expected vice presidential running mate, has consistently opposed unilateral American sanctions against other nations in his years in Congress, as White House official and as Halliburton Co chief executive (M)
 In his presidential campaign, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has declared illiteracy a ''national emergency,'' a view that his opponent, Vice President Al Gore has said he shares. To tackle it under a federal-state program called Even Start, Congress and the Clinton administration have increased aid to state literacy projects by nearly 50 percent, to $150 million, in three years.
 James H Bernstein letter, commenting on July 26 article, says Gov George Bush may have ceded middle ground without fight to Democrats by choosing Richard B Cheney as running mate Re ''Bush Names Cheney, Citing 'Integrity' and 'Experience' '' (front page, July 26): I am a moderate Republican who was hoping that George W. Bush's selection of a running mate would send a message that he intended to fight vigorously for the middle ground. Unfortunately, I feel that his choice of Dick Cheney may be ceding the middle ground to the Democrats. Re ''Bush Names Cheney, Citing 'Integrity' and 'Experience' '' (front page, July 26): I am a moderate Republican who was hoping that George W. Bush's selection of a running mate would send a message that he intended to fight vigorously for the middle ground. Unfortunately, I feel that his choice of Dick Cheney may be ceding the middle ground to the Democrats.
 Prof Arnold A Offner letter, commenting on July 26 article, deplores Gov George Bush's choice of extreme social conservative, Dick Cheney, as running mate Re ''Bush Names Cheney, Citing 'Integrity' and 'Experience' '' (front page, July 26): Re ''Bush Names Cheney, Citing 'Integrity' and 'Experience' '' (front page, July 26): George W. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as his vice-presidential running mate sends a clear signal to the American people. Mr. Cheney's Congressional voting record demonstrates that he is an extreme conservative on critical issues like a woman's right to an abortion, gun control, the environment and civil rights. In sum, Mr. Bush's choice of Mr. Cheney shows that the best that Mr. Bush could find for a running mate in this remarkable age of diversity was a retread from his father's era. Clearly, Mr. Bush and the Republicans represent a chilling threat to the most basic social advances that the United States and its people have made over the last century.
 Shaun Breidbart letter questions Dick Cheney's change of voter registration in order to avoid constitutional problem as Gov George Bush's vice presidential running mate (July 25 article) You report that a few days before being chosen by George W. Bush to be his running mate, Dick Cheney flew to Wyoming to change his voter registration to avoid a constitutional problem (news article, July 25). The Constitution, you note, prohibits Electoral College members from selecting ''inhabitants'' of their state as both president and vice president. You report that a few days before being chosen by George W. Bush to be his running mate, Dick Cheney flew to Wyoming to change his voter registration to avoid a constitutional problem (news article, July 25). The Constitution, you note, prohibits Electoral College members from selecting ''inhabitants'' of their state as both president and vice president.
 Samuel M Greenhouse letter disputes July 24 article on Gov George W Bush's choice of Dick Cheney to be running mate You report that the Bush family wanted to know whether Dick Cheney could withstand a strenuous election campaign, given concerns about his health (news article, July 24). But what the American public needs to know, before voting for a Bush-Cheney ticket, is whether Mr. Cheney (if elected to the vice presidency), could withstand the rigors of the presidency in the event that a President George W. Bush died or became physically or mentally incapable of discharging his duties. You report that the Bush family wanted to know whether Dick Cheney could withstand a strenuous election campaign, given concerns about his health (news article, July 24). But what the American public needs to know, before voting for a Bush-Cheney ticket, is whether Mr. Cheney (if elected to the vice presidency), could withstand the rigors of the presidency in the event that a President George W. Bush died or became physically or mentally incapable of discharging his duties.
 Ken Whelan letter disputes assertion in David Frum's July 25 Op-Ed article that Gov George Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as running mate signals end of Reagan conservatism
 Robert W Carr letter, commenting on July 26 article on Gov George Bush's choice of the ultraconservative Dick Cheney as running mate, notes that vice president casts deciding vote when there is tie in Senate Re ''Bush Names Cheney, Citing 'Integrity' and 'Experience' '' (front page, July 26): Re ''Bush Names Cheney, Citing 'Integrity' and 'Experience' '' (front page, July 26):
 Correction of July 22 article, which misstated name of company that hired Gov George W Bush in 1971 An article on Saturday about Gov. George W. Bush's life in the five years after he left Yale misstated the name of an agricultural company that hired him in 1971. It was Stratford of Texas, not Stratford of Houston. An article on Saturday about Gov. George W. Bush's life in the five years after he left Yale misstated the name of an agricultural company that hired him in 1971. It was Stratford of Texas, not Stratford of Houston.
 Gary Bauer letter disputes David Frum's assertion in July 25 Op-Ed article that Gov George Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as running mate signals end of Reagan conservatism David Frum's view that the choice of Dick Cheney as George W. Bush's running mate signals the end of Reagan conservatism, because Mr. Cheney, while conservative, is not a real conservative, is interesting but odd. David Frum's view that the choice of Dick Cheney as George W. Bush's running mate signals the end of Reagan conservatism, because Mr. Cheney, while conservative, is not a real conservative, is interesting but odd. Mr. Cheney's long voting record in the House of Representatives was categorically and unambiguously pro-life, pro-military and strong defense, and pro-tax cuts. In fact, Mr. Cheney's voting history is the kind of pattern that historians will label as having belonged to a Reagan conservative. If anything, his voting pattern in Congress was at odds not with Reagan conservatism but with the Nixon-Ford wing of the Republican Party, from which he came. In answer to the question, ''Is Bush leaving Reaganism behind?'', the answer -- at least in the choice of Dick Cheney -- is clearly no.
 Dick Cheney, Gov George W Bush's running mate, used high-level contacts in Middle East he made as defense secretary to help transform Halliburton Co, which he has served as chief executive since 1995, into world's largest oil field services company; his corporate experience makes clear Republican ticket's roots in oil business; graphs and tables of financial data (M) And now, as he re-emerges from the business world to become the running mate of the presumed Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, Mr. Cheney's corporate experience has made clear the Republican ticket's roots in the oil industry. But by early 1995, Mr. Cheney had decided against a presidential bid, and began considering his next move. The business world, largely unknown to Mr. Cheney, became ''a more attractive option after he gave up on running for president,'' recalled Sean O'Keefe, who was secretary of the Navy in the Bush Administration and remains close to Mr. Cheney. Several friends and business associates said they did not know of any role former President George Bush played in helping Mr. Cheney obtain the post at Halliburton.
