 From 1948 to 1967, Jerusalem was a divided city -- half Jordanian, half Israeli -- with limited passage allowed through the Mandelbaum Gate, mostly for international officials and Christian clergy. Most important for the future, the Old City was sealed off to Jews and many of their religious sites were defiled. Then, in the 1967 war, Israel took all of Jerusalem and the West Bank, its triumphant army chaplain, Shlomo Goren (later to become a chief rabbi of Israel) blowing his ram's horn at the Western Wall.
 It's a term that Americans are likely to hear frequently this year, as strategists and journalists weigh in with state-by-state analyses of the treacherous electoral map that confronts Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore. It's a term that Americans are likely to hear frequently this year, as strategists and journalists weigh in with state-by-state analyses of the treacherous electoral map that confronts Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore. Swing states in the presidential race like New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, Missouri and Washington are all rated as tossups or moving only marginally toward Mr. Bush, who is strongest in the South and Rocky Mountain states, or toward Mr. Gore, whose support is heaviest on the East and West coasts. Factor in the participation of third-party contenders like Patrick J. Buchanan and Ralph Nader, and it's hard to conclude anything except: it's too close to call. The tightness of the race has, if anything, intensified the guessing game of who the candidates will choose as their running mates. With the Republican convention set to begin in Philadelphia in eight days, most of the attention is on Mr. Bush's choice, which the governor said he will make imminently. A leading contender is Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary in the Bush administration. Other names mentioned frequently include the Republican governors of two big industrial states, Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and George E. Pataki of New York, as well as Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma and former Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole. In the meantime, Mr. Gore was making his case for the presidency in Mr. Bush's own backyard, traveling to Texas to criticize his rival's reign as governor, which got some Texans' dander up. ''Texas isn't nearly as backward and third world as the Gore campaign would make us out,'' said Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly magazine. Proud of its homegrown candidate, Texas is probably not too close to call.
 So it is no surprise that Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are making overtures to immigrant communities that may provide the swing vote in California, Texas, Florida and New York. But they are doing so in an atmosphere far calmer than in the mid-1990's, when immigrant-bashing was in vogue and Gov. Pete Wilson of California pushed successfully for Proposition 187, which prohibited illegal immigrants from attending public schools and getting social services. So it is no surprise that Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are making overtures to immigrant communities that may provide the swing vote in California, Texas, Florida and New York. But they are doing so in an atmosphere far calmer than in the mid-1990's, when immigrant-bashing was in vogue and Gov. Pete Wilson of California pushed successfully for Proposition 187, which prohibited illegal immigrants from attending public schools and getting social services. So far, the candidates have focused mostly on useful proposals to reform the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Mr. Gore also supports legislation to grant permanent residency to some 500,000 immigrants who have been in legal limbo since the mid-1980's. But if Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are concerned about fairness, they should be pushing hard to repeal cruel laws that deny immigrants due process of law, impose hardships on thousands of immigrant families and make America less hospitable to asylum seekers fleeing persecution.
 Several high-ranking Republican officials claim Gov George W Bush had extensive face-to-face discussion about vice presidency with former Sen John C Danforth, and that Danforth is in small group of people still in running for No 2 spot on Republican ticket; Danforth seemingly withdrew his name from consideration in June; recent meeting with Bush could mean his resistance has softened; Republicans close to Bush say Richard B Cheney, who is suprevising vice presidential selection process for Bush, is himself a leading contender for the job (M) Gov. George W. Bush had an extensive face-to-face discussion about the vice presidency with former Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri early this week, according to several high-ranking Republican officials, and one of those Republicans said that Mr. Danforth was in a small group of people still in the running for the No. 2 spot on the Republican ticket. Gov. George W. Bush had an extensive face-to-face discussion about the vice presidency with former Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri early this week, according to several high-ranking Republican officials, and one of those Republicans said that Mr. Danforth was in a small group of people still in the running for the No. 2 spot on the Republican ticket. Mr. Danforth emerged today as someone near the top of Mr. Bush's list a day after Republicans close to the Texas governor said that Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary, who is supervising the vice presidential selection process for Mr. Bush, was himself a leading contender for the job. One Republican close to Mr. Bush had described Mr. Cheney as the leading candidate at this point, and a high-ranking Republican official said today that Mr. Danforth's emergence did not change Mr. Cheney's status. But Mr. Bush is not expected to make a final decision until Sunday night, and Republicans close to the campaign, along with Mr. Bush's advisers, have cautioned that it is still impossible to predict with any certainty what Mr. Bush will do. High-ranking Republicans also said today that Mr. Cheney and Mr. Danforth might not be the only prospects that Mr. Bush was considering. Mr. Bush's aides have said that the governor would most likely announce his decision next week, probably no earlier than Tuesday. But the aides declined to indulge any speculation about whom Mr. Bush might choose. In June, Mr. Danforth, who retired from the Senate in 1994 after 18 years there, apparently withdrew himself from consideration, saying that he would prefer not to be offered the job. But his long meeting with Mr. Bush in a Chicago hotel on Tuesday, which was first reported by ABC News, suggested either that his resistance had softened or that he was leaving some room open to be persuaded to become the Texas governor's running mate if Mr. Bush asked him. Several knowledgeable Republicans said that Mr. Danforth's wife, Sally, was also present, and that Mr. Cheney, in his role as chief of the selection process, attended part of the meeting as well. Mr. Danforth was the only potential vice-presidential candidate, in addition to Mr. Cheney, with whom Mr. Bush has met over the last week.
 But since the exit of John McCain, who managed to make campaign finance reform seem romantic, it's been hard to find real human passion anywhere but on a fictional TV drama.  It's impossible to tell what George W. Bush and Al Gore really care about, besides not making mistakes. The producer muses that the best way for a convention to win an audience is to pay people to watch -- let viewers win money by guessing how many times George W. Bush will use the word ''heart'' in his speech. ''America should import the British system for one convention week. You have the two parties on opposite sides of a big convention center, like  Parliament, jeering, pointing across the aisle, while Bush and Gore debate each other extemporaneously. You'd have to have somebody in the role of the speaker, Betty Boothroyd -- maybe Judge Judy.
 Correction:  July 26, 2000, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a festival in Bloomington, Ind., to celebrate the publication centennial of the Oz books truncated the original title. It was ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.'' The article also gave a misspelled surname in some copies for an actor who played a Munchkin in the 1939 movie based on it. He is Clarence Swensen, not Swenson. In some copies the article also misspelled the name of the theater where a play, ''Oz,'' was staged as part of the festival. It is the Buskirk-Chumley, not Bushkirt-Chumley. Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a festival in Bloomington, Ind., to celebrate the publication centennial of the Oz books truncated the original title. It was ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.'' The article also gave a misspelled surname in some copies for an actor who played a Munchkin in the 1939 movie based on it. He is Clarence Swensen, not Swenson. In some copies the article also misspelled the name of the theater where a play, ''Oz,'' was staged as part of the festival. It is the Buskirk-Chumley, not Bushkirt-Chumley.
 Sensing people's growing fears about details of their lives falling into the hands of wrongdoers, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have begun speaking out about protecting private information. And debates in Congress have tackled the issue of guarding the privacy of medical and financial records on the Internet.
 Gov Paul E Patton of Kentucky, ally of Vice Pres Al Gore's, urges Gore to pay more attention to Kentucky, noting that Gov George W Bush has edge in polls there and has been raising lot of money in state; Patton says Gore is finally on right track, attacking Bush's record as governor of Texas (S) Gov. Paul E. Patton of Kentucky has good ties to Vice President Al Gore and will help preside over the Democratic National Convention next month, when Mr. Gore is officially nominated. But he worries about how Mr. Gore is playing around the country, especially in Kentucky, considered a swing state this year. A few weeks back, Mr. Patton, who has a tendency to say precisely what is on his mind, urged Mr. Gore to pay more attention to Kentucky, noting that Gov. George W. Bush had an edge in the polls there and had been raising a lot of money in the state. Gov. Paul E. Patton of Kentucky has good ties to Vice President Al Gore and will help preside over the Democratic National Convention next month, when Mr. Gore is officially nominated. But he worries about how Mr. Gore is playing around the country, especially in Kentucky, considered a swing state this year. A few weeks back, Mr. Patton, who has a tendency to say precisely what is on his mind, urged Mr. Gore to pay more attention to Kentucky, noting that Gov. George W. Bush had an edge in the polls there and had been raising a lot of money in the state. Now Mr. Patton has some more political analysis and advice for Mr. Gore -- very frank and pointed analysis and advice. Asked the other day how the Gore campaign was shaping up, he told The Courier-Journal of Louisville that the vice president's problems in Kentucky, as in the nation as a whole, were largely traceable to a lack of personality. Simple as that. ''The problem with the whole campaign,'' the governor said, ''is that people know Gore and he evidently doesn't have that personality that is causing people to come to him.'' Mr. Patton indicated that he thought Mr. Gore, with his latest round of attacks on Mr. Bush's record as governor of Texas, was at last on the right track. ''What he has to do right now,'' Mr. Patton said, ''is he's got to bring George W. Bush's record out. We're exactly where we were in 1988, with a sitting vice president and an attractive governor who can make a good speech -- and you know who won that one.'' In 1988, Vice President George Bush, Governor Bush's father, defeated Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, who had led in the polls through most of the early and middle going.
 Bush Seeking Safe Choice  Gov. George W. Bush seems to be steering toward the safe and solid in seeking a vice president, partly because the job is increasingly seen as more than an understudy role. Democrats have unveiled a plan for their August convention that is intended to gently disengage Vice President Al Gore from President Clinton, while still celebrating Clinton's economic policies.
 Melanie Quinn letter responds to July 21 letter that suggested Republican presidential candidate George W Bush demonstrate his respect for pro-choice Republicans by selecting pro-choice vice-presidential running mate (M) A July 21 letter concludes that if George W. Bush is to respect the pro-choice members of his party by selecting a pro-choice running mate, as suggested in a July 19 editorial, by the same theory Al Gore should choose an anti-abortion running mate to respect the views of Democrats who are not pro-choice. A July 21 letter concludes that if George W. Bush is to respect the pro-choice members of his party by selecting a pro-choice running mate, as suggested in a July 19 editorial, by the same theory Al Gore should choose an anti-abortion running mate to respect the views of Democrats who are not pro-choice.
 Go to work, watch the news: the sound of institutions competing to be ''family friendly'' can be deafening. ''Let us create a family lobby as powerful as the gun lobby,'' Al Gore says, and every issue, from gun control to tax reform, is now presented as being good for children. The unintended result of all this is that the 13 million childless baby boomers are left bristling because their lives -- whether chosen or the result of circumstance -- don't seem to count. This simmering resentment might not qualify as a ''movement'' (a word that is thrown around too often, as if anger does not exist unless it is organized), but it certainly represents a deep divide and a ripe opportunity for sniping between neighbors, between co-workers, between those who have and those who have no interest.
 After breaking free from photographers and scribling scribes, Mr. Eszterhas retreated to a corner of the theater lobby and reviewed the evening. ''George Bush just exploded on stage,'' he said admiringly. His own performance, limited to a brief reading, he dismissed with a wave of his cigarette. ''I've done very few readings,'' he said. ''It's a problem for me, because I have bad polyps on my sinuses.''
 The Secret Service was worried enough about the difficulties in securing Pershing Square in downtown Los Angeles that it moved Vice President Al Gore from the Biltmore Hotel there to Century City, several miles away from the convention site. And the federal court hearing on the security zone was so crowded with demonstrators this week that even some news organizations could not get in to cover it. For their part, Democratic Party officials and aides to Mr. Gore are having to walk a delicate line between making sure their typically fractious party is not seen as trying to stifle peaceful protests, while exercising diplomacy with a police department and local establishment whose help they need to have a successful convention.
 Mr. Norcross, it was said, was through. All that was missing was for someone like Vice President Al Gore to gather the humiliated chieftains together with their vanquishers, pass around a peace pipe, mumble something about the good of the party, and offer a token tribute to the South.
 It would be marvelous to see both George W. Bush and Al Gore follow the Reagan and Clinton examples. But they may not find that easy. As a political heir, Al Gore would be hard pressed to produce a platform that matched Mr. Clinton's in sweep and novelty. His draft platform's most surprising element is the number of positions that dart to the left of the Clinton administration. For example, the 1992 platform emphasized the wonder of world trade; the 2000 draft emphasizes protecting American jobs. Pundits have chalked this up to Mr. Gore's need to lasso disgruntled liberals threatening to vote for Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate. This fall's campaign should show us whether Mr. Gore's evolution was an act of political positioning or conscience. George W. Bush's draft platform will almost certainly try to placate the Republican right while reaching out to disaffected moderates. Just as Mr. Clinton borrowed from earlier Republicans, Mr. Bush may find himself consulting the president's 1992 playbook for hints on how to move the Republican image toward the center. But Governor Bush can find an even more irresistible model in his own family history. When Eisenhower ran for re-election in 1956, he asked his platform committee chairman to engineer a centrist document. Ike wanted to banish the memory of the hard-right platform of 1952, demanded by his rival, Robert Taft, which had embarrassed him. Eisenhower also wished to counter what he privately considered to be the troglodyte Republican leaders of Congress. Ike did not call his doctrine ''compassionate conservatism.'' He called it ''modern Republicanism.'' But the idea was roughly the same. The platform chairman Eisenhower put on the case was his frequent golfing partner, the senator from Connecticut and the grandfather of this year's presidential nominee: Prescott Bush.
 But in kicking off his bid for re-election in the backyard at his 85-year-old mother's house, Mr. Lieberman could not quell growing speculation he is on a short list of high-profile Democrats who will be seriously considered as a running mate for Vice President Al Gore at the party's Convention Aug. 13-17 in Los Angeles. But in kicking off his bid for re-election in the backyard at his 85-year-old mother's house, Mr. Lieberman could not quell growing speculation he is on a short list of high-profile Democrats who will be seriously considered as a running mate for Vice President Al Gore at the party's Convention Aug. 13-17 in Los Angeles. It's equally important that we address a major threat to our water supply -- the gasoline additive MTBE, which is potentially toxic and has leaked into our ground water supply and has contaminated the water we drink and bathe in.  Q. There has been a lot of speculation about the vice presidency, that you are on a short list of potential running mates for Vice President Al Gore. What have you heard about your chances?  A. Obviously I'm honored to have my name mentioned for the vice presidency and I would have to seriously consider such an offer. It makes my mother proud just to be mentioned as a possibility. But I don't expect it to happen. Right now the only office I intend to seek this year is re-election to the U.S. Senate.  Q. You are an Orthodox Jew. Is the country ready for a Jewish vice president, or even president?  A. I think this is a remarkably tolerant country at this time. I honestly don't think any candidate for national office will lose because of his or her religion, race, gender, or nationality. I think the public is so fair and sophisticated they are going to judge candidates for national office based on his or her qualities and capacity to do the job.  Q. If elected vice president, would your duties in any way be curtailed by being an Orthodox Jew, for example not being able to work on Saturdays or high holy days?  A. I have always tried to separate pure politics on the Sabbath, which I  don't do, from governmental responsibility. It seems to me my religion, as I understand it, not only permits me to fulfill important work associated with being a public servant, but actually requires me to do so because people are depending on me. I don't see that as an issue at all.  Q. What led you to so strongly criticizing President Bill Clinton for his involvement with Monica Lewinsky?  A. It was one of the hardest decisions I've ever made in my public life because President Clinton is a friend and I have tremendous admiration for him for the job he's done as president. But I was so upset by what he had done and the fact he hadn't leveled with the American people. I felt it wasn't going to get better until somebody who was his friend and supporter came publicly with honest and open criticism.  Q. You knew Bill Clinton in the early 1970's when you first ran for elected office in the State Senate and he was a student at Yale. Any recollections about the president at that time?  A. In 1970, when I first campaigned for office, I was the reform candidate running against the incumbent Democrat, and most of the political organizations -- most of the grown-ups -- were supporting the incumbent. I had a bunch of kids working for me.
 Democrats unveil details for national convention intended to gently disengage Vice Pres Al Gore from Pres Clinton and establish Gore as independent leader while still celebrating Clinton policies that have helped create longest economc boom in nation's history; Clinton will address convention in prime time on opening day, Aug 14, but Democrats will have Clinton and Gore make joint appearance somewhere outside convention location in Los Angeles to show changing of the party's guard; Democrats draw lessons from 1988 Republican convention, when Pres Reagan symbolically passed torch of leadership to Vice Pres George Bush in brief ceremony at Air Force base near convention (M) Democrats unveiled details today for their convention intended to gently disengage Vice President Al Gore from President Clinton and establish him as an independent leader while still celebrating the Clinton policies that have helped create the longest economic boom in the nation's history. Over four days, from Aug. 14 to 17, the convention would build gradually from heralding Mr. Clinton's record and policies to the highlights of Mr. Gore's biography to a climax on Thursday, when Mr. Gore would be nominated. Democrats unveiled details today for their convention intended to gently disengage Vice President Al Gore from President Clinton and establish him as an independent leader while still celebrating the Clinton policies that have helped create the longest economic boom in the nation's history. Over four days, from Aug. 14 to 17, the convention would build gradually from heralding Mr. Clinton's record and policies to the highlights of Mr. Gore's biography to a climax on Thursday, when Mr. Gore would be nominated. Drawing lessons from the 1988 Republican convention, the Democrats will have Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore make a joint appearance somewhere outside the convention location in Los Angeles to show a changing of the party's guard. In 1988, President Reagan symbolically passed the torch of leadership to Vice President George Bush in a brief ceremony at an Air Force Base near the convention in New Orleans. But unlike the 1988 event, the Democrats said Mr. Clinton's appearance would be substantive and extensive. Though aides want to use the convention to move Mr. Gore out of the president's shadow, Mr. Clinton remains very popular with many Democrats, and the Gore campaign does not want to appear to be shunting him to the side. The convention's overall themes, ''Progress and Prosperity'' and ''People, not the Powerful,'' have been drawn from the oratory of Mr. Gore's recent campaign appearances, where he has attacked big oil and drug companies and his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, saying Mr. Bush is beholden to special interests. On Tuesday, under the theme ''You ain't seen nothing yet,'' a favorite stump line of Mr. Gore's, some of the party's most prominent leaders would talk about the important choices facing the nation. On Wednesday, with the theme ''The Principled Fighter,'' the convention would begin focusing more heavily on Mr. Gore, using testimonials and videos to highlight his biography, from his time as an Army reporter in Vietnam to his work as an investigative newspaper reporter in Nashville to his years as a congressman and senator from Tennessee.  ''The vice president is famous but still not well known,'' said an adviser to Mr. Gore. ''We believe that the more people learn about him, the more they like him. And I think a lot of the things we present to people that night will be new.'' Mr. Gore would spend the first three days of the convention campaigning around the country. Because the television networks are not planning to devote much prime time coverage to the convention, the Gore campaign planned to use the vice president's off-convention events to try to pick up additional television coverage.
 Democrats worry about outpouring of enthusiasm from labor union members for Ralph Nader, who is running for president on Green Party ticket; they fear Vice Pres Al Gore could lose in Midwestern swing states; this also worries labor leaders such as John J Sweeney, AFL-CIO president, who repeatedly urges union members to back Gore, saying that if Gov George W Bush wins and works with Republican Congress, he might push through legislation to weaken unions and job safety laws; AFL-CIO has endorsed Gore's candidacy, but two of most powerful unions in Midwest, Teamsters and United Auto Workers, have flirted with Nader and have not endorsed Gore; photo (M) Mr. Nader -- whose words, though not his speaking style, are laced with emotion -- then laid into Vice President Al Gore and other Democrats, saying they have done little for labor because they have been able to take labor's support for granted. This outpouring of enthusiasm for Mr. Nader worries many Democrats, who fear that so many steelworkers, auto workers, teamsters and other union members will vote for him this fall that Mr. Gore could lose in Ohio and other Midwestern swing states. For the Democrats, an added concern is that two of the most powerful unions in the Midwest, the Teamsters and the United Auto Workers, have flirted with Mr. Nader and have not endorsed Mr. Gore, even though the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is backing the vice president. Many steelworkers are still angry at Mr. Gore because he backed the agreement to normalize trade relations with China, which many union members fear will accelerate the exodus of American factories to China. Although Mr. Nader is best known for his crusading on consumer protection and the environment, he has grown closer to labor unions in recent years, fighting with them against the China trade deal, the World Trade Organization and the North American Free Trade Agreement. All the steelworkers here hailed Mr. Nader, but several said they would still vote for Mr. Gore because they feared Gov. George W. Bush would win if Mr. Nader drained too many votes from the vice president. The excitement generated by Mr. Nader also concerns some labor leaders. John J. Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, has repeatedly urged union members to back Mr. Gore, saying it is important to prevent Mr. Bush from winning because working with a Republican Congress, he might push through legislation to weaken unions and job safety laws. George Becker, president of the United Steelworkers of America, was one of labor's most vociferous critics of the China deal, but he says it is time to line up behind Mr. Gore. He said in an interview that labor's support for Mr. Nader was modest and would grow smaller, and he predicted that many union members leaning toward Mr. Nader would ultimately vote for Mr. Gore upon realizing that Mr. Nader cannot win. ''There are two viable candidates, Al Gore and George W. Bush, and we're picking the one closest to the viewpoints of our members and the issues of working people,'' Mr. Becker said. ''Nader's a fine man. He takes a lot of positions that are near and dear to us. But he is not a viable candidate. In that regard, anybody who would support Ralph Nader we think would lessen Al Gore's chances of winning.'' David Leland, chairman of the Ohio Democratic Party, said that the race between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush was close in his state, but that he did not think Mr. Nader would hurt the vice president. Recent polls show Mr. Nader getting 4 percent of the vote in Ohio, compared with more than 10 percent in California, but Mr. Leland said those were high-water marks that were bound to fall. ''Most people know a vote for Ralph Nader is a wasted vote at best and a vote for George Bush at worst,'' he said. Mr. Becker said he hoped Mr. Gore would become more outspoken on workers' issues to excite union members about his candidacy. Indeed, on Monday, Mr. Gore is scheduled to hold a town hall meeting in Cleveland with 75 steelworkers from Ohio, Pennsylvania, Indiana and Illinois. Asserting that he should be included in any presidential debates, Mr. Nader said he would seek to force Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush to address work-related issues, like occupational safety, that have been largely ignored during the campaign. ''Gore will tell you, 'I'm for you. I'm going to fight for you. I'm for a ban on using replacement workers in strikes,' '' Mr. Nader said. ''But what has he done in eight years? I don't care what you're for. I want to know what you've done. Talk is cheap.''
 But other agreements have recently come to light through government investigations and private lawsuits; they involve tamoxifen, the breast cancer drug; Cardizem CD, a heart medication; K-Dur, a potassium supplement, and Cipro, an antibiotic. And these deals, like the Hytrin case, are causing consternation among judges and regulators,  legislators like Mr. Waxman and Vice President Al Gore, who said in a recent interview that such agreements ''perpetrate a fraud on the American people by denying them the benefits of competition.''
 Advisers to Gov George W Bush say that in choosing running mate, Bush is steering clear of glamour and gloss--and more toward safe and solid; advisers say Bush's leading choice is Richard B Cheney; Cheney, who is orchestrating search for running mate, is respected but hardly electrifying former defense secretary and former congressman; another candidate is Sen John Danforth, who initially took himself out of running; others who are thought to have survived homestretch are Gov Frank Keating of Oklahoma and Gov George E Pataki of New York (M) When George Bush turned to Dan Quayle in 1988, his media adviser, Roger Ailes, hoped that the young senator would have such sex appeal that women might try to tear at his clothes. When George Bush turned to Dan Quayle in 1988, his media adviser, Roger Ailes, hoped that the young senator would have such sex appeal that women might try to tear at his clothes. But this time, advisers to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas say he seems to be steering clear of the glamour and gloss -- and more toward the safe and solid. As Mr. Bush secludes himself at his Texas ranch this weekend to make up his mind on his most momentous campaign decision so far, a leading choice, his advisers say, is Richard B. Cheney. It could be, of course, that Mr. Bush is using the speculation over Mr. Cheney as a distraction while he readies his true decision -- and has a colossal surprise in mind. Maybe (with help from his father) he can persuade Gen. Colin L. Powell after all. Maybe there is even a mystery selection. But Bush advisers and friends of General Powell insist that he is not interested, leaving the focus on Mr. Cheney and others. That may be by design. Mr. Bush's advisers say the governor is so confident he will win that he is focused less on bald electoral calculations for Nov. 7 -- like whether his running mate would make a state more competitive -- and more on whom he wants beside him on Jan. 20, when he expects to be sworn in as the next president. The announcement of Mr. Bush's choice is not expected before Tuesday. Another reason Mr. Bush appears less concerned about a No. 2 with pizazz is his recognition that, thanks to Bill Clinton, the role of the vice president has broadened. In picking Al Gore, Mr. Clinton made the vice presidency more than an understudy's job. It is now one that voters expect to be filled with a person of substance. Mr. Bush himself made clear this week that he was looking beyond Election Day.  ''There's been the time in the past where people, competent people, said, 'Well, let's just pick the vice president. Don't worry, we'll dump him once we get elected,' '' Mr. Bush said on CNN's ''Larry King Live.'' Mr. Bush may be moving toward a less flashy choice because there are only so many flashy possibilities. Several advisers agreed that there was only one marquee candidate who would add value to the ticket -- General Powell -- and that Mr. Bush would snap him up if he thought General Powell was interested. Many advisers said Senator McCain would also enliven the ticket, but they questioned how well Mr. Bush would tolerate Mr. McCain only 18 steps from the back door of the Oval Office. Some Bush friends also said the governor would cringe at the perception that he was forced to turn to Mr. McCain to assure victory. Mr. Kemp suggested that if Mr. Bush were able to get General Powell, that might not be a panacea. ''The fact that he doesn't want it,'' he said, ''makes them want him even more.'' If Mr. Bush picked Mr. Cheney, he would win plaudits from Republicans who think Mr. Cheney would bring dignity, weight and foreign policy skills to the ticket. And while he has a solidly conservative voting record in Congress, Mr. Cheney has always worked well with moderates. Since 1995, Mr. Cheney has headed Halliburton, an energy services and construction company. He served as President Gerald R. Ford's chief of staff, then was a congressman from 1979-1989. He then was President Bush's defense secretary, where he was a major figure in the Persian Gulf war. Others warned that Mr. Cheney, 59, is from a small state, Wyoming, that is already a safe bet for Mr. Bush to win. And, they said, he is risky because of his health: he has had three heart attacks. If he picks Mr. Keating, Mr. Bush would win raves from Republicans who admire Mr. Keating's handling of the Oklahoma City bombing and his credentials as a former prosecutor. Another plus is that he is Roman Catholic, and Mr. Bush has been trying to reassure Catholics after opponents suggested he was anti-Catholic. Others warn that he is from a state that is safely Republican and that his conservative background would not broaden the ticket. There are pros and cons to the other prospects. Governor Ridge, for one, has a riveting rags-to-respectability biography and could help carry his battleground state. But some conservatives would deride his abortion rights stand. Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska has a compelling military record and he has the foreign policy expertise that Mr. Bush lacks. But he is relatively green on the national stage. Mr. Pataki hails from a big state, but not even his own advisers predict that he could deliver it to the Republicans. A seemingly trivial factor is that Mr. Pataki stands about a half-foot taller than Mr. Bush, and nominees never like being overshadowed. Another possibility is Representative John Kasich of Ohio, who would bring vitality and a knowledge of Congress. But he has what some Bush advisers say is the Quayle problem: he exudes youthfulness -- and seems to lack gravitas. One who clearly has star quality is Senator Fred Thompson of Tennessee. He was a movie actor, after all. But some Bush advisers express concern that as a single man, Mr. Thompson would not project the appropriate family image. The new imperatives for a running mate have made the selection process complicated, if not confounding. Mr. Bush, and Mr. Gore, face often conflicting pressures: they want running mates who can be effective on the stump and in governing. They want someone who can excite party members but also attract independents. They also want drama. But they have to be mindful that reaching for the spectacular can be like a blind date with history. The result can be fresh and intoxicating -- like Mr. Gore eight years ago -- or disastrous. When Mr. Mondale picked Ms. Ferraro, he thought she would be an instant draw for women. He was wrong. Four years later, the elder Bush thought voters would find Mr. Quayle fresh and exciting. They did not, but the ticket won anyway. The selection of Quayle did carry shock value. He was so little known, even by Mr. Bush's own aides, that in New Orleans, the convention site, they busily photocopied his biography in the Almanac of American Politics so they could brief reporters on him. Governor Bush's aides said their candidate has learned from his father's experience that he need not be fixated on springing a surprise (though he does like surprises) and that, more important, the campaign has to be well prepared before announcing the choice. Mr. Bush also learned a lesson from watching his father serve as Ronald Reagan's No. 2 for eight years: he wants someone who is as faithful to him as his father was to Mr. Reagan but who also offers sound advice and does not stir the pot.
 Gov George W Bush sets aside presidential race to join 950 mourners at memorial service in Atlanta for Sen Paul Coverdell of Georgia, who died July 18; Coverdell was chief liaison in Senate to Bush's presidential campaign; 50 senators and representatives from both parties recall Coverdell as man who defied bitter political partisanship, and as self-effacing man and tireless worker; photo (M) Mr. Coverdell, who died Tuesday at age 61, was a quietly influential member of the Republican leadership. An ally and friend of President George Bush, Mr. Coverdell was the chief liaison in the Senate to the presidential campaign of Mr. Bush's son, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Coverdell, who died Tuesday at age 61, was a quietly influential member of the Republican leadership. An ally and friend of President George Bush, Mr. Coverdell was the chief liaison in the Senate to the presidential campaign of Mr. Bush's son, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Today, Governor Bush and more than 50 senators and representatives from both parties -- including Senators Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, and Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts -- joined 900 other mourners in an emotional memorial to a man who defied the bitter political partisanship that grips the Capitol today. President Bush did not attend, but his tribute was read by a family friend of the Coverdells in the packed Peachtree United Methodist Church in the fashionable Buckhead section of town. ''He loved politics and was a clear example of politics being a noble calling,'' President Bush wrote. ''He leaves behind a legacy that quiet is good, caring about the other guy matters.'' On a day of celebrating Mr. Coverdell's life, even the fevered pitch of the presidential campaign was temporarily laid aside. Before and after the service, Governor Bush declined to comment on reports that Richard B. Cheney, the former secretary of defense, had risen to the top of his list of potential running mates. Lawmakers attending the service, including other Republican vice presidential candidates like Fred Thompson of Tennessee and John McCain of Arizona, were whisked to waiting cars or buses. But one Senate Republican, Mike DeWine of Ohio, said a Bush-Cheney ticket this fall would be a winning combination.  ''Dick Cheney has got what it takes,'' Mr. DeWine said.
 The Clinton administration endorses some of these steps, while Gov. George W. Bush emphasizes tax cuts that would leave low-income workers with more take-home pay. But college has become the favored approach, the one that business most applauds. Nearly $13 billion in federal funding has gone this year into college scholarships and tax credits for college tuition. Mr. Bush favors similar subsidies and so does Vice President Al Gore.
 Officials said several arsons have occurred in recent months in Brooklyn. In June, Ramon Sanchez, 26, was arrested in connection with at least 19 fires in the Bushwick section, including one that killed a child. He is being held at Rikers Island while he awaits trial.
