 BAN ON EXECUTING PREGNANT WOMEN  Vice President Al Gore, who supports abortion rights, had said earlier this month that if a pregnant woman faced execution, ''The principle of a woman's right to choose governs in that case.'' Today the House voted unanimously that it did not. In reaction to Mr. Gore's statement that pregnant women on death row should be able to choose whether they are executed before the birth of their child or after, the House voted, 417 to 0, to prohibit any state from executing a pregnant woman. No one has shown that the circumstance has ever arisen. The sponsor of the bill, Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida, said unborn children had committed no crime. Abortion-rights advocates said the bill was intended to advance the cause of abortion opponents by elevating a fetus to the status of a child. Congress already bars the execution of pregnant women for federal crimes. The bill now goes to the Senate, where its future is uncertain. BAN ON EXECUTING PREGNANT WOMEN  Vice President Al Gore, who supports abortion rights, had said earlier this month that if a pregnant woman faced execution, ''The principle of a woman's right to choose governs in that case.'' Today the House voted unanimously that it did not. In reaction to Mr. Gore's statement that pregnant women on death row should be able to choose whether they are executed before the birth of their child or after, the House voted, 417 to 0, to prohibit any state from executing a pregnant woman. No one has shown that the circumstance has ever arisen. The sponsor of the bill, Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida, said unborn children had committed no crime. Abortion-rights advocates said the bill was intended to advance the cause of abortion opponents by elevating a fetus to the status of a child. Congress already bars the execution of pregnant women for federal crimes. The bill now goes to the Senate, where its future is uncertain. BUSH PERE IN THE BACKGROUND  Gov. George W. Bush's wife, Laura, and his 24-year-old nephew, George P. Bush, will have featured roles at next week's Republican National Convention in Philadelphia. And George P.'s father, Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, will be doing the rounds of television interview shows off the convention floor. But former President George Bush and his wife, Barbara, the biggest Bush stars at the show other than the nominee, will remain mainly in the background, as they have throughout most of the campaign, with no speaking roles that might steal the limelight from their son. ''We want to be careful it doesn't turn into a Bush family reunion,'' one of the convention's co-chairmen, Andrew Card, said yesterday. Mr. Card said Laura Bush would speak to the convention on one of the early nights and that later in the week, George P. Bush and his Mexican-born mother, Columba, would have a featured role, mainly to underscore the work they have been doing in recent months to promote George W.'s candidacy among Hispanics and younger voters.
 Excerpts from announcements by Gov George W Bush and Dick Cheney that Cheney will be Bush's running mate Following are excerpts from the announcement yesterday by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Dick Cheney that Mr. Cheney would be Mr. Bush's running mate, as recorded by The New York Times: Statement by Mr. Bush Following are excerpts from the announcement yesterday by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Dick Cheney that Mr. Cheney would be Mr. Bush's running mate, as recorded by The New York Times: Statement by Mr. Bush I have to admit something. I didn't pick Dick Cheney because of Wyoming's three electoral votes, although we're going to work hard to earn them. I picked him because he is without a doubt fully capable of being the president of the United States. And I picked him because he will be a valuable partner in a Bush administration. Well, this is obviously a very special moment for Lynne and me. Three months ago, when Governor Bush asked me to head up his search team I honestly did not expect that I would be standing here today. When the governor first asked whether or not I would consider being a candidate, I respectfully declined. I was deeply involved in running a business, enjoying private life, and I certainly wasn't looking to return to public service. But I had an experience that changed my mind this spring. As I worked alongside Governor Bush I heard him talk about his unique vision for our party and for our nation. I saw his sincerity, I watched him make decisions, always firm and always fair. And in the end, I learned how persuasive he can be. So this morning when the governor called and asked me to join him as the vice-presidential nominee, I accepted with enthusiasm. . . . Governor Bush is seeking not only to win an election, but also to lead our nation. He's confronting the tough issues: strengthening Social Security and Medicare, reforming our public schools, cutting taxes and rebuilding America's military. He's shown an ability here in Texas to bring Republicans and Democrats together in the public interest. I've watched him put his compassionate conservative philosophy to work in this great state with tremendous results. He's proven himself a leader with consistency and conviction.
 Lynne V Cheney, wife of Dick Cheney, newly named to be Gov George W Bush's running mate, is unusually high-profile figure with national reputation as opponent of 'political correctness' and public record even more conservative than Cheney's; has been cultural warrior and darling of right; photo (M) Smiling alongside Dick Cheney in Texas today as he became Gov. George W. Bush's running mate was Mr. Cheney's high school sweetheart and wife of 36 years. Smiling alongside Dick Cheney in Texas today as he became Gov. George W. Bush's running mate was Mr. Cheney's high school sweetheart and wife of 36 years. As chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities during the Reagan and Bush administrations and later as a television, newspaper and magazine commentator, Mrs. Cheney has been a cultural warrior and darling of the right, accusing those she calls cultural relativists of taking over American art, literature and education. In fact, Mrs. Cheney is one of her party's most forceful figures, and some Republicans think she deserves a cabinet post in a new administration and even belonged on Mr. Bush's list of vice-presidential prospects. Friends of Mrs. Cheney say she has made no secret about political ambitions of her own. Indeed, in introducing Mr. Cheney as his running mate today, Mr. Bush also singled her out, describing her as ''a leader in education reform in all America, developing high standards and a sound curriculum for our public schools.'' After the Bush administration, she became a senior fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, where she promoted her vision of a more wholesome, morally correct, educationally rigorous America. She also sometimes sat in the conservative chair on the CNN television program ''Crossfire,'' where she denounced what she described as declining cultural standards, especially in the schools.
 Gov George W Bush's campaign says Bush personally screened Dick Cheney before choosing him as running mate; says Cheney screened his other possible running mates, continuing search process even after he knew he was in running, to make sure Bush had other options; Bush says he named Cheney to head search process only after Cheney declined his offer of vice presidential nomination in Mar (M) In the end, it was Gov. George W. Bush himself who did the final, most sensitive background check on the man who was supposed to be the one running the vice presidential screening process. So just as Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary, had met with other finalists to go over questions about their personal lives and finances, Mr. Bush questioned Mr. Cheney. As Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman put it, ''In this case, Governor Bush served as the chair of the search committee.'' In the end, it was Gov. George W. Bush himself who did the final, most sensitive background check on the man who was supposed to be the one running the vice presidential screening process. So just as Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary, had met with other finalists to go over questions about their personal lives and finances, Mr. Bush questioned Mr. Cheney. As Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman put it, ''In this case, Governor Bush served as the chair of the search committee.'' And that night he called Mr. Bush to tell him there was no reason why he could not accept the nomination. Yet at the same time, he continued the search process, Ms. Hughes said, because he wanted to make sure Mr. Bush had other options. Mr. Bush's courtship of Mr. Cheney began in March, just after the Republican primaries had ended. Mr. Bush said he asked if Mr. Cheney would be willing to be considered as a running mate. ''At the time,'' Mr. Bush said today, ''he said no.'' In the interim, Mr. Bush sent out hundreds of letters to party leaders asking for their input. A list of vice-presidential finalists received detailed questionnaires asking about their health, their finances, their voting records, their military records. The questionnaires came back to the campaign. But this month once again, Mr. Bush circled back to Mr. Cheney. It was the Fourth of July weekend, and the two men were reviewing options at Mr. Bush's ranch. After lunch, the two men walked out to the back porch and once again Mr. Bush asked Mr. Cheney whether he would be willing to be considered. ''I was impressed,'' Mr. Bush said today, ''by the thoughtful and thorough way he approached his mission. And gradually I realized that the person who was best qualified to be my vice-presidential nominee was working by my side.'' Still, the search continued. That week Mr. Bush discussed the vice presidency with Gov. George E. Pataki of New York on a campaign trip into New Jersey and New York. A day later, on July 15, Mr. Bush summoned his three top aides -- Ms. Hughes, Karl Rove and Joe Allbaugh -- to meet with him, his wife, Laura, and Mr. Cheney. ''We talked through the ramifications of the leader of the search becoming a potential candidate in that search,'' Ms. Hughes said. Mr. Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, declined today to spell out the considerations but said, ''Obviously, they were not grave.'' Mr. Bush's aides said Mr. Cheney's past was not unknown territory. Mr. Cheney, who had a long government career, had been screened by the F.B.I. three times and had undergone Senate confirmation hearings. As defense secretary under former President Bush, he had held the nation's highest security clearance. Governor Bush decided he wanted an independent review of Mr. Cheney's health. He called his father, the former President, and asked him to ask his friend the noted Houston heart surgeon, Denton A. Cooley, to speak to Mr. Cheney's doctors. On July 18, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney met with another of the vice-presidential contenders, John C. Danforth, a former senator from Missouri, and his wife. Ms. Hughes said Mr. Bush himself at some point talked with Mr. Cheney about his personal and financial background, but she did not provide further detail. Since leaving his defense post, Mr. Cheney has been the chief executive officer of the Halliburton Company, a worldwide oil field services company that has paid him millions of dollars in salary and stock options. There are signs that Mr. Bush's father was taking an interest in the search, and a specific interest in Mr. Cheney. Ms. Hughes today described the former president's role as ''that of a loving father,'' ready to lend an ear to his son. Asked if the former president supported Mr. Cheney above all candidates, she said she was ''sure he spoke highly of several of them.'' She said she did not know whether he had personally called Mr. Cheney to lobby him. This morning, Mr. Bush called Mr. Cheney at his home in Dallas and asked him to be his running mate. Hours later they stood together here in Austin before a crowd waving red white and blue pompoms. ''In the end,'' Mr. Cheney said of Mr. Bush, ''I learned how persuasive he can be.''
 Bush Names Cheney As G.O.P. Running Mate  Gov. George W. Bush formally introduced Dick Cheney, a former defense secretary and a longtime family friend, as his choice for vice president, praising Mr. Cheney, 59, as a man of ''great integrity, sound judgment and experience.'' The Gore camp expressed relief at Mr. Cheney's selection and, citing his Congressional record, quickly sought to portray him as far outside the mainstream. While Mr. Cheney handled the screening of the other prospects for the ticket, Mr. Bush himself conducted the interview of Mr. Cheney about his finances and personal life. Bush Names Cheney As G.O.P. Running Mate  Gov. George W. Bush formally introduced Dick Cheney, a former defense secretary and a longtime family friend, as his choice for vice president, praising Mr. Cheney, 59, as a man of ''great integrity, sound judgment and experience.'' The Gore camp expressed relief at Mr. Cheney's selection and, citing his Congressional record, quickly sought to portray him as far outside the mainstream. While Mr. Cheney handled the screening of the other prospects for the ticket, Mr. Bush himself conducted the interview of Mr. Cheney about his finances and personal life.
 Rather than decide on full-scale deployment, Mr. Clinton will limit his decision to whether to begin construction next spring of a radar station on Shemya island in Alaska, Mr. Cohen said. That would leave it to the next president to determine the scope of the project, he said. Vice President Gore generally supports the Clinton approach, while George W. Bush, the presumed Republican candidate, favors a more robust system.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column scores Gov George W Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as running mate; cites Cheney's conservative voting record in Congress In Bushworld, it's always Day 41 of Desert Storm, that glorious day the president's approval ratings soared toward 91. In Bushworld, it's always Day 41 of Desert Storm, that glorious day the president's approval ratings soared toward 91. The Bush convention in Philadelphia will be gauzy, trying to appeal to women, moderates and minorities, showcasing Elizabeth Dole, Condoleezza Rice (also in the bunker at the finest hour), John McCain, General Powell and Laura Bush. The opening theme is ''Leave no child behind.'' It will be delicious to see how the Republicans deal with those Cheney votes against Head Start. The Cheney choice is about the past. But then, W.'s campaign has always been less about vision than vindication. The dauphin must reclaim the throne because the Bushes must restore the halcyon days of the ruling-class court that thrived before that dissolute commoner Bill Clinton usurped it. The Bushes hate being ''psychoanalyzed,'' as they call it. They don't like personal questions. And yet they make many crucial decisions based on personality. I doubt either Bush would have felt comfortable running with a woman. Or with anyone who challenged their egos or made waves, like John McCain. They need a history of loyalty, and they have a preference for deference. Dick Cheney is one of their guys, in the Club. And they know best. Before the Bushes mess up any more vice-presidential picks, for Jeb or George P., they might want to stop checking their gut and start checking the voting record. A ticket with two rich white Texas oilmen who went to Yale, avoided Vietnam and act more moderate than they are? For the Bushes, that's a perfect fit.
 Editorial holds Gov George W Bush's selection of Richard B Cheney as running mate brings hard-line conservative Congressional voting record to ticket, pulling it to right; holds Cheney's competence cannot soften his stark legislative record; notes Bush will have to win over moderate voters he needs in swing states on own Because he never served in Congress, Gov. George W. Bush does not have a voting record. But he acquired one yesterday with the selection of Richard B. Cheney as his running mate. Republicans were cheering the sound judgment and broad foreign policy experience that Mr. Cheney, a former secretary of defense and White House chief of staff, brings to the Republican ticket. But Democrats were eyeing the hard-line conservative votes that Mr. Cheney cast during a 10-year House career. From Vice President Al Gore's perspective, Mr. Cheney adds weight to the G.O.P. ticket, but he also opens up promising lanes of attack. Mr. Bush believes that his running mate brings a resume and a personality that will outweigh any ideological vulnerability. Indeed, Mr. Cheney's vaunted toughness comes wrapped in a genial, Nebraska-born, Wyoming-honed personal manner. His deep experience clearly allows Mr. Bush to argue that he has passed a threshold test for any presidential candidate by picking a partner who would make a plausible successor. On that score, Governor Bush did a much better job than his father did in 1988 by choosing Dan Quayle. Because he never served in Congress, Gov. George W. Bush does not have a voting record. But he acquired one yesterday with the selection of Richard B. Cheney as his running mate. Republicans were cheering the sound judgment and broad foreign policy experience that Mr. Cheney, a former secretary of defense and White House chief of staff, brings to the Republican ticket. But Democrats were eyeing the hard-line conservative votes that Mr. Cheney cast during a 10-year House career. From Vice President Al Gore's perspective, Mr. Cheney adds weight to the G.O.P. ticket, but he also opens up promising lanes of attack. Mr. Bush believes that his running mate brings a resume and a personality that will outweigh any ideological vulnerability. Indeed, Mr. Cheney's vaunted toughness comes wrapped in a genial, Nebraska-born, Wyoming-honed personal manner. His deep experience clearly allows Mr. Bush to argue that he has passed a threshold test for any presidential candidate by picking a partner who would make a plausible successor. On that score, Governor Bush did a much better job than his father did in 1988 by choosing Dan Quayle. Still, Mr. Cheney's competence cannot soften a stark legislative record. Several times in his Congressional career he got a 100 percent favorable rating from the American Conservative Union and zero from the liberal Americans for Democratic Action. He was consistently pro-life, and his opposition to abortion, even in cases of rape or incest, will help Mr. Gore argue that the Bush-Cheney ticket represents a threat to women's right to choose. Mr. Cheney also voted against gun control legislation that came his way, including a bill regulating cop-killer bullets that many other conservatives backed. Mr. Cheney's environmental views will also be a tempting target for Mr. Gore. Mr. Cheney was among the few who voted not to override President Reagan's veto of a Clean Water Act reauthorization in 1987. Then as now, he supported opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling, a talismanic issue among conservationists. He is also on record as opposing the Kyoto agreement on global warming, which Mr. Gore helped to negotiate, as a potential threat to America's national security. While Mr. Cheney never demonstrated the mean streak associated with Newt Gingrich conservatives, his selection indisputably pulls the Republican ticket to the right. This comes after several weeks when it appeared that Mr. Bush would pick a Northeasterner like Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania to put his party nearer the political center. Now it will be up to Mr. Bush himself to pull in the moderate voters he will need to carry swing states outside his Southern and Western base. That positioning exercise may not be easy, especially with Mr. Gore sniping away. A New York Times/CBS poll yesterday suggested that the public, which in February divided equally between ''conservative'' and ''moderate'' when asked to describe Mr. Bush's ideology, now increasingly regards the Texas governor as a conservative. Mr. Cheney's selection is sure to reinforce that impression. In the days ahead, Mr. Cheney will be marketed as someone who brings sound judgment and safe hands to the executive branch. That is a reasonable depiction. By virtue of experience and temperament, he does represent a responsible choice. But the voters will also be asked to factor ideology into their selection this fall. And Mr. Gore, waving a long list of House votes, will not allow Mr. Bush's picture of Dick Cheney to go unchallenged.
 For instance, he voted in 1984 to define ''person'' under discrimination laws to include fetuses. The sponsor of the measure -- which Al Gore, then a congressman, also supported -- said its purpose was to deny federal funds to all institutions performing abortions. Mr. Cheney also supported a constitutional amendment banning abortion, but the issue never came to a vote.
 An article yesterday about George W. Bush's decision to name Richard B. Cheney as his running mate misidentified the agency formerly headed by Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne. It is the National Endowment for the Humanities, not the National Endowment for the Arts. An article yesterday about George W. Bush's decision to name Richard B. Cheney as his running mate misidentified the agency formerly headed by Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne. It is the National Endowment for the Humanities, not the National Endowment for the Arts.
 Career sketch of Richard Bruce Cheney, former defense secretary and congressman, named by Gov George W Bush as running mate; he was born Jan 30, 1941; table of biographical data; photos (M) In choosing Mr. Cheney as his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush has turned to an unflappable Washington insider whose easygoing exterior masks a steely confidence, a man who, once he makes a tough decision, never looks back. Mr. Cheney, 59, who served 10 years in the House of Representatives and four as President George Bush's defense secretary, brings stature, decisiveness and decades of government experience to a campaign sometimes short on all three. He is an Ivy League dropout who  became a doctoral student in political science. He was the No. 2 House Republican on the path to possibly becoming speaker when President Bush plucked him from Congress to run the Pentagon after the Senate rejected his first choice, Senator John Tower of Texas. He was a military neophyte, avoiding the Vietnam War with student and parent deferments, who steeped himself in military tactics and doctrine and became the most pivotal defense secretary since Robert S. McNamara. When Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, it was Mr. Cheney who flew to Saudi Arabia to present King Fahd with President Bush's offer to send up to 200,000 American troops to the kingdom. He clashed with General Powell, who recommended keeping economic sanctions in place longer, and prodded the military to plan a larger, more ambitious counterattack against Iraqi forces. Even General Powell, a close ally, was not above reproach. General Powell recalled in his memoirs that after one meeting with President Bush during the gulf crisis, Mr. Cheney pulled him aside. '' 'Colin,' he said, 'You're chairman of the Joint Chiefs. You're not secretary of state. You're not the national security adviser anymore. And you're not secretary of defense. So stick to military matters.' He made it clear that I had taken liberty for license.'' Indeed, discretion is a Cheney byword. When President Bush met with his foreign policy advisers during the gulf crisis, Mr. Baker and General Powell typically briefed their senior aides afterward. Not Mr. Cheney. BORN: Jan. 30, 1941, Lincoln, Neb.  HOMETOWN: Casper, Wyo.  EDUCATION: Natrona County High School, Casper, Wyo.; B.A., M.A., University of Wyoming; Ph.D. candidate, University of Wisconsin.  CAREER HIGHLIGHTS: 1968-69, Congressional fellow; 1969-70, special assistant to the director, Office of Economic Opportunity; 1971, White House staff assistant; 1971-73, assistant director, Cost of Living Council; 1973-74, vice president, Bradley, Woods, & Company; 1974-75, deputy assistant to President Gerald R. Ford; 1975-76, White House chief of staff; 1979-1989, United States representative at large, Wyoming; 1981-88, chairman, House Republican Policy Committee; 1987, chairman, House Republican Conference; 1988, House Republican whip; ranking Republican member, House Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms Deals with Iran; member, House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence; 1989-93, secretary of defense under President George Bush; 1995-2000, chief executive officer, Halliburton Company, Dallas.  FAMILY: Married to the former Lynne Ann Vincent; two daughters, Elizabeth and Mary.  HOBBIES: Hunting, fishing, hiking and skiing.
 Lynne V Cheney, wife of Dick Cheney, newly named to be Gov George W Bush's running mate, is unusually high-profile figure with national reputation as opponent of 'political correctness' and public record even more conservative than Cheney's; has been cultural warrior and darling of right; photo (M) Smiling alongside Dick Cheney in Texas today as he became Gov. George W. Bush's running mate was Mr. Cheney's high school sweetheart and wife of 36 years. Smiling alongside Dick Cheney in Texas today as he became Gov. George W. Bush's running mate was Mr. Cheney's high school sweetheart and wife of 36 years. As chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities during the Reagan and Bush administrations and later as a commentator, Mrs. Cheney has been a cultural warrior and darling of the right, accusting those she calls cultural relativists of taking over American art, literature and education. In fact, she is one of her party's most forceful figures, adn some Republicans think she deserves a cabinet post in a new administration and even belonged on Mr. Bush's list of vice-presidential prospects. Friends of Mrs. Cheney say she has made no secret about political ambitions of her own. Indeed, in introducing Mr. Cheney as his running mate today, Mr. Bush also singled her out, describing her as ''a leader in education reform in all America, developing high standards and a sound curriculum for our public schools.'' After Bush administration, she became a senior fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, where she promoted her vision of a more wholesome, morally correct, educationally rigorous America.
 Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a festival in Bloomington, Ind., to celebrate the publication centennial of the Oz books truncated the original title. It was ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.'' The article also gave a misspelled surname in some copies for an actor who played a Munchkin in the 1939 movie based on it. He is Clarence Swensen, not Swenson. In some copies the article also misspelled the name of the theater where a play, ''Oz,'' was staged as part of the festival. It is the Buskirk-Chumley, not Bushkirt-Chumley. Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a festival in Bloomington, Ind., to celebrate the publication centennial of the Oz books truncated the original title. It was ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.'' The article also gave a misspelled surname in some copies for an actor who played a Munchkin in the 1939 movie based on it. He is Clarence Swensen, not Swenson. In some copies the article also misspelled the name of the theater where a play, ''Oz,'' was staged as part of the festival. It is the Buskirk-Chumley, not Bushkirt-Chumley.
 William W Goetz letter comments on July 22 profile of Gov George W Bush Re ''After Yale, Bush Ambled Amiably Into His Future'' (front page, July 22): Re ''After Yale, Bush Ambled Amiably Into His Future'' (front page, July 22): George W. Bush blithely dismisses his early absence of focus, saying ''I was young and irresponsible'' and without plans, but ''that's just the way it was.'' Now Mr. Bush has turned out to be a productive and good citizen and may even become a good president. This does not surprise teachers who know all about the the unpredictability of the maturing process and ''late bloomers.'' Before failing students are assigned to academic oblivion, I would hope that Mr. Bush would exercise some of his much publicized ''compassion'' and consider that there may be some who need to ''amble'' a bit.
 Gov George W Bush formally introduces his running mate, Dick Cheney, to cheering crowd, Austin, Tex; lauds former defense secretary and longtime family friend; notes oddity of his months-long search for vice-presidential nominee ending with selection of searcher himself; Cheney hails Bush; Cheney's extremely conservative record in Congress will boost claims by Democrats and liberal interest groups that Bush presidency would tilt sharply to right; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush formally introduced his running mate, Dick Cheney, to a cheering crowd here today, praising the former defense secretary and longtime family friend as a man of  ''great integrity, sound judgment and experience.'' As Mr. Cheney stood almost bashfully at the side of the ebullient Texas governor, Mr. Bush tacitly acknowledged the oddity of his months-long search for a vice-presidential nominee ending with the selection of the searcher himself. Gov. George W. Bush formally introduced his running mate, Dick Cheney, to a cheering crowd here today, praising the former defense secretary and longtime family friend as a man of  ''great integrity, sound judgment and experience.'' As Mr. Cheney stood almost bashfully at the side of the ebullient Texas governor, Mr. Bush tacitly acknowledged the oddity of his months-long search for a vice-presidential nominee ending with the selection of the searcher himself. Mr. Cheney had been tapped by Mr. Bush to supervise that process in late April. But over the ensuing weeks and months, Mr. Bush said, ''I benefited from his keen insight. I was impressed by the thoughtful and thorough way he approached his mission. And gradually I realized that the person who was best qualified to be my vice-presidential nominee was working by my side.'' When Mr. Cheney took Mr. Bush's place at a lectern set up in front of a row of 30 American flags, his remarks -- only half as long as the governor's -- suggested that Mr. Bush had found a No. 2 with precisely the kind of loyalty that the governor had always said he wanted. ''I enthusiastically accept the challenge,'' he told Mr. Bush, ''for this reason: I believe you have the vision and the courage to be a great president. And I want to do absolutely everything I can to make certain that happens.'' Though it had been clear for days that Mr. Cheney would almost certainly be the governor's choice, their joint appearance in a large meeting room here today marked the first formal acknowledgement by the Bush campaign that Bush-Cheney was the ticket with which the Republican Party would try to win the White House. The two men's wives, Laura Bush and Lynne Cheney, shared a modest stage with them. In turning to Mr. Cheney, Mr. Bush chose someone whose extremely conservative record from 1979 to 1989, when he represented Wyoming in Congress and reliably cast votes against abortion rights and gun control, was sure to provide Democrats and liberal interest groups with fodder for their assertions that a Bush presidency would tilt sharply toward the right. The selection also raised questions about how Mr. Cheney, who was entrusted with the task of screening other potential vice-presidential nominees, was put through the process himself. Karen P. Hughes, the director of communications for the Bush campaign, said today that Mr. Bush had taken on at least part of that chore, subjecting Mr. Cheney to the sort of questions about finances and other personal information that Mr. Cheney had asked other contenders. Mr. Bush appeared to accomplish several goals at once by picking Mr. Cheney. He supplemented his own limited career in government, confined to the five and a half years that he has presided over the nation's second-largest state, with the accumulated wisdom of a man who served as chief of staff under President Gerald R. Ford and then spent a decade in the House before his appointment as the defense secretary by President George Bush, the governor's father. And because the selection of Mr. Cheney did not on its face represent an overtly political calculation, it enabled Mr. Bush to maintain his assertion that he is someone more interested in good government than political gamesmanship, someone more deeply wedded to principles than to polls. There was no discernible electoral strategy at work: Mr. Cheney maintains homes in Texas and Wyoming, two states that Mr. Bush should easily win in November. Some of the remarks that Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney made today amounted to a preview of that pitch. ''Governor Bush is seeking not only to win an election, but also to lead our nation,'' Mr. Cheney said in a voice that was softer, deeper and steadier than Mr. Bush's. Minutes earlier, Mr. Bush had said, ''I have to admit something. I didn't pick Dick Cheney because of Wyoming's three electoral votes, although we're going to work hard to earn them. I picked him because he is without a doubt fully capable of being the president of the United States. And I picked him because he will be a valuable partner in a Bush administration.'' The word ''partner'' suggested something else Mr. Bush had been looking for: someone with whom he felt a strong sense of comfort and an equally strong sense of trust. Mr. Cheney clearly fit that bill, partly because of his history with Mr. Bush's father, partly because he helped the governor assemble a team of foreign policy advisers last year, then got to know Mr. Bush even better in the last three months. ''He's obviously family-tested -- loyal all the way back,'' said Bruce Buchanan, a historian who teaches courses on the presidency at the University of Texas and has closely followed Mr. Bush's career. ''He's comfortable. They've developed a relationship as a consequence of this search process.'' Professor Buchanan suggested that Mr. Cheney could also help fill any deficit of substance that voters might perceive in Mr. Bush. ''It's in keeping with the great pains that he has taken all along to build a shadow government that's made up of people who quiet the fears that he's shallow and out of his depth,'' he said. Many prominent Republicans sold the selection a different way: as evidence that Mr. Bush, 54, was so secure in his own abilities and confident in his own leadership that he would recruit a teammate like Mr. Cheney, 59, who looks at least 10 years older than the governor and has a much longer political resume. Alternately, Republicans said Mr. Cheney's selection was proof that Mr. Bush was earnestly filling in the gaps in his own experience. In fact, Mr. Lott added, he told Mr. Cheney several months ago that he would be the best choice for Mr. Bush. Senator John McCain of Arizona, whom many House Republicans had promoted for a place on the Bush ticket, said today that Mr. Cheney's ''leadership skills are proven in many areas.'' At least a few other Republicans were left scratching their heads. They questioned why Mr. Bush, who has voted to expand the party's appeal and bring a fresh perspective to Washington, would pick a running mate with such conservative bearings and such strong ties to the Republican establishment of the past. And they questioned why Mr. Bush, long eager to emerge from his father's shadow, would summon it anew with the choice of someone from his father's cabinet. Another Republican strategist said: ''For all the running away he's done from his father, now he's Velcroed himself to the old man. It's the old Bush. It's just unfortunate. The Democrats are gloating.'' Ms. Hughes said today that the only active role former President Bush had played in the process, other than as a sounding board for his son, was to call Dr. Denton Cooley, a prominent cardiac surgeon who is a family friend, and ask him for his opinion on Mr. Cheney's health. Mr. Cheney suffered three mild heart attacks more than a decade ago and had bypass surgery in 1988. Mr. Bush's advisers moved quickly today to dispel any doubts about Mr. Cheney's physical fitness for the long road to November, and possibly beyond. The Bush campaign released letters from Mr. Cheney's doctors at George Washington University that provided a detailed synopsis of his medical history. At a news conference after Mr. Bush's introduction of Mr. Cheney, Ms. Hughes was even able to answer a question about the specific food allergy mentioned in one of these reports. The allergy was to pomegranates, she said. Ms. Hughes also made a point of mentioning that when Mr. Bush, at home in the governor's mansion this morning, called Mr. Cheney's house in Dallas to offer him a place on the Republican ticket, Mr. Cheney was exercising on his treadmill. Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney did not take questions from reporters, instead sticking to the statements they had prepared. But Mr. Cheney appeared on CNN's ''Larry King Live'' tonight to give his first interview as Mr. Bush's running mate. He said the role he would play in a new, second Bush administration would be that of a frank but discreet adviser. ''He very much values people who level with him, who tell him exactly what they think,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''I'm most effective when I'm able to speak my piece, but also when I do it privately.'' He said he had found a real chemistry with Mr. Bush, and earlier in the day he, Mr. Bush and Ms. Hughes had provided some details about the evolution of the relationship between the two men. According to these accounts, Mr. Bush had asked Mr. Cheney in March, right after the governor effectively secured his party's presidential nomination, if he would be willing to be considered for the vice presidential nomination. Mr. Cheney said no. But about three weeks ago, Ms. Hughes said, Mr. Bush asked Mr. Cheney again, and drew a different response. ''This time,'' Mr. Bush said, ''he said he was willing to talk with his family and consider it.'' He smiled broadly, and Mr. Cheney reached over to his wife, Lynne, patted her on the shoulder, then held a pair of crossed fingers in the air. The crowd of about 200 supporters and friends of Mr. Bush laughed loudly. Mr. Cheney provided an unusual physical counterpoint to Mr. Bush, whose facial expression and demeanor conveyed an almost boyish excitement. Mr. Cheney, by contrast, seemed to be trying to hide his grin. He often cast his eyes downward and could not decide what to do with his hands, which were alternately deep in his pockets or clasped modestly in front of him. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TEXAS GOVERNOR  Correction:  August 6, 2000, Sunday  A front-page article on July 26 about the selection of Dick Cheney as George W. Bush's choice for vice president misidentified Bruce Buchanan, who teaches courses on the presidency at the University of Texas and has closely followed Mr. Bush's career. He is a professor of government, not a historian. A front-page article on July 26 about the selection of Dick Cheney as George W. Bush's choice for vice president misidentified Bruce Buchanan, who teaches courses on the presidency at the University of Texas and has closely followed Mr. Bush's career. He is a professor of government, not a historian.
 The Image: Unflappable  In selecting Dick Cheney as his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush got someone wise in the ways of Washington. The Image: Unflappable  In selecting Dick Cheney as his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush got someone wise in the ways of Washington. The Screening: By Bush  It was the Texas governor himself who did the final background check on the man who was running his search for a running mate. The Democrats: 'Relief'  Advisers to Vice President Al Gore said they were relieved and even happy at the Republican choice of Dick Cheney.
 Texas business climate has been lucrative for both Gov George W Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney; Cheney, Halliburton Co chief executive since 1995, has gotten annual salary and bonus of $1.3 million to $3 million, along with stock options and stock (M) The business climate of Texas -- entrepreneurial, energy-based and big -- has been lucrative for both George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney. For Mr. Bush, the sale of an ownership stake in the Texas Rangers baseball team netted a profit of $14.9 million two years ago, from an investment of $606,000 nine years before. And with a legendary Texas financier, Richard E. Rainwater, as his investment adviser, Mr. Bush has had investment income of more than $1 million a year in the last two years, in addition to his $115,345 salary as Texas governor. The business climate of Texas -- entrepreneurial, energy-based and big -- has been lucrative for both George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney. For Mr. Bush, the sale of an ownership stake in the Texas Rangers baseball team netted a profit of $14.9 million two years ago, from an investment of $606,000 nine years before. And with a legendary Texas financier, Richard E. Rainwater, as his investment adviser, Mr. Bush has had investment income of more than $1 million a year in the last two years, in addition to his $115,345 salary as Texas governor.
 Rand Corp national study finds class size in early grades and access to preschool seem to increase student achievement, particularly in poor communities, more than salaries, education or experience of teachers; state-by-state analysis of standardized test results suggests efforts to raise student achievement have been effective, with math scores climbing steadily across nation; finds Texas and handful of other states that led in adopting new standards and accountability systems have shown particular gains; both Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush highlight report on their campaign Web sites (M) Both Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore immediately highlighted the report on their campaign Web sites, with Mr. Bush celebrating the declaration of his state as a national leader and Mr. Gore noting that class-size reduction and universal preschool -- programs praised in the report -- form the centerpiece of his education agenda. ''I am proud of the results we have achieved in education in Texas,'' Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican nominee, said in a statement. ''As president, I will achieve the same results, ensuring that no child is left behind.'' But William A. Galston, a senior adviser to Mr. Gore, the all-but-named Democratic nominee, pointed out that Mr. Bush did not even become governor until 1995, near the end of the period studied.
 Gov George W Bush seen taking least adventurous and least sensational course possible in choosing Dick Cheney as vice presidential running mate; choice is deeply revealing about his approach to politics and governing; shows him so confident of winning that he is looking more for partner who can help him in White House than during campaign and unafraid to surround himself with more experienced hands; photo (M) In the most momentous decision of his campaign thus far, Gov. George W. Bush took the least adventurous and least sensational course possible. The selection of Dick Cheney was deeply revealing about Mr. Bush's approach to politics and to governing. It underscored that Mr. Bush is generally not a bold risk taker in his public life. He is so confident that he will win the election (too confident, some Republicans say) that he was looking more for a partner who could help him in the White House than on the stump. He wanted someone beside him who is utterly loyal, and with whom he is comfortable. In the most momentous decision of his campaign thus far, Gov. George W. Bush took the least adventurous and least sensational course possible. The selection of Dick Cheney was deeply revealing about Mr. Bush's approach to politics and to governing. It underscored that Mr. Bush is generally not a bold risk taker in his public life. He is so confident that he will win the election (too confident, some Republicans say) that he was looking more for a partner who could help him in the White House than on the stump. He wanted someone beside him who is utterly loyal, and with whom he is comfortable. And his decision suggests that Mr. Bush would be a president who, despite his own lack of seasoning on the national stage, is not afraid to surround himself with more experienced hands. Mr. Cheney brings so few obvious  political advantages to the ticket that it is clear that Mr. Bush determined that whatever may win him the White House, it would not be whom he picked as his No. 2. Even though his decision has dribbled out over the past few days, Mr. Bush's choice had been so unexpected that as recently a week ago, virtually every prominent Republican insider was tossing out names like Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma, Senator John McCain of Arizona, former Senator John Danforth of Missouri and -- everyone's favorite -- Gen. Colin L. Powell. Though Mr. Bush made no secret of his attraction to General Powell, his calculation was that a choice with more sizzle (and with potential liabilities) was not worth the gamble to his election -- or to his happiness in the Oval Office. Even as Democrats were gleefully digging out Mr. Cheney's conservative voting record in Congress, Bush advisers said they were confident he would never embarrass the ticket. Mr. Bush also passed up an opportunity to try to break the Republican Party's abortion barrier by daring to go with a supporter of abortion rights, like Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania or Gov. George E. Pataki of New York. This less ambitious objective of Mr. Bush was settling on a No. 2 who passes what Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, calls the John Rocker test. Mr. Bush's play-it-safe approach may well have stemmed from a determination not to repeat mistakes of the past, namely his father's selection of Dan Quayle. Again and again, his advisers said over recent months that Mr. Bush was insistent less on bringing added value to the ticket and more on not doing anything to  hurt it. Mr. Cheney stood placidly next to Mr. Bush, his hands clasped in front of him. The newly burnished ticket did not even partake in the customary overhead victory clasp. The presidential candidate who is derided by critics as being so unpresidential picked a partner whose presence practically shouts: grown-up. It was a far cry from 1988 when Mr. Quayle, looking very much like George Bush's son, bounced around the stage in Huntington, Ind., appearing so grateful to be picked that he could not contain himself. But while nothing went awry yesterday, it was hardly a rousing debut. It did not approach the energetic tableau eight years ago in Little Rock, when Bill Clinton and Al Gore and their families joined for one of that campaign's most memorable moments. There is no chance that Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney will be dubbed the ''hunks of the heartland,'' as were Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore. Indeed, many Republicans were jubilant yesterday that Mr. Bush had found a running mate who would not lead delegates at next week's Republican convention to utter the dreaded ''A word'': abortion. Mr. Cheney is, safely, an abortion foe. He is also, safely, conservative, but one who gets on well with moderates. Mr. Bush's lack of interest in a political quick fix that might play well in a particular state or satisfy certain constituencies also shows that he is mindful of history. The last vice-presidential candidate who actually made a difference in the outcome was 40 years ago, when John F. Kennedy picked Lyndon B. Johnson, who assured him that he would carry Texas. The Cheney pick is not devoid of political upsides -- or risks. Mr. Cheney's vast experience in Congress, in the White House and in national security issues will help counter critiques from the Democrats that Mr. Bush is not ready for the White House. While General Powell was not available, it could be that Mr. Bush saw the next best thing in Mr. Cheney, who was also a mainstay of the Persian Gulf war, his father's greatest triumph. In introducing Mr. Cheney, Mr. Bush, in fact, sought to score points for picking a partner for reasons that did not appear baldly political. ''I have to admit something,'' he said. ''I didn't pick Dick Cheney because of Wyoming's three electoral votes.'' Safe it may seem, but not foolproof. One of Mr. Bush's prime advantages over Vice President Al Gore is that he does not have a long trail of Congressional votes to be mined by the opposition. Mr. Cheney does -- and many of his votes are decidedly conservative. For all the stature he brings, Mr. Cheney, who is close to former President George Bush, could suggest to voters that Governor Bush is a daddy's boy. Even with his doctor's stamp of approval, Mr. Cheney's history of three heart attacks is hardly reassuring to some people.
 Commerce Department report indicates that Clinton administration plans to take aggressive new steps to protect domestic steel production from import surges, speeding up its use of anti-dumping measures and providing faster relief for companies and workers; release of report seems timed to help Vice Pres Al Gore shore up political support from steel workers and unions (M) The 240-page report, a copy of which was made available by an administration official, seems timed to help Vice President Al Gore shore up political support from steel workers and unions. Some union leaders sharply criticized Mr. Gore's support for the China trade bill this year, and many have expressed disappointment that the administration has not done more to guard against sudden increases in low-price steel imports. The 240-page report, a copy of which was made available by an administration official, seems timed to help Vice President Al Gore shore up political support from steel workers and unions. Some union leaders sharply criticized Mr. Gore's support for the China trade bill this year, and many have expressed disappointment that the administration has not done more to guard against sudden increases in low-price steel imports.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign seems relieved and even joyful at Gov George W Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as running mate; Gore advisers say choice gives Gore freer hand in picking own running mate; campaign mobilizes to paint Cheney as far outside mainstream; Gore meets with Warren Christopher, head of his search committee; photo (M) The intense speculation that had surrounded Gov. George Bush as he selected a running mate swung today to Vice President Al Gore amid signs that the Gore camp was relieved and even joyful at Mr. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney. Advisers for the vice president said the selection of Mr. Cheney, a 59-year-old oil executive and former defense secretary, gave Mr. Gore a freer hand in picking a running mate. The intense speculation that had surrounded Gov. George Bush as he selected a running mate swung today to Vice President Al Gore amid signs that the Gore camp was relieved and even joyful at Mr. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney. Advisers for the vice president said the selection of Mr. Cheney, a 59-year-old oil executive and former defense secretary, gave Mr. Gore a freer hand in picking a running mate. The Gore campaign quickly mobilized to paint Mr. Cheney as far outside the mainstream, citing his votes against abortion and against the South African government's release of Nelson Mandela. And speculation here was that the Cheney selection elevated certain possibilities for Mr. Gore, like Senators John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina. Mr. Gore met with Warren Christopher, the chairman of his search committee, at Mr. Gore's residence here last night and this morning. The vice president's every move is being examined for its implications in the selection of a running mate. This morning, Mr. Gore described the meeting as part of his effort to maintain a dignified process.. Mr. Gore told reporters that he was down to a short list but did not want to divulge any names. Still, Mr. Gore has managed to bump into several of his prospects along the campaign trail. He attended a fund-raising reception tonight at the Virginia home of Mr. Kerry. On Sunday, he met with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut at the Manhattan apartment of the singer Paul Simon. He begins a vacation on Thursday in North Carolina on an island that is home to Mr. Edwards. Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana will be vacationing nearby. When Mr. Gore had to cancel his appearance at a dinner in Nashville last week, he asked Senator Bob Graham of Florida to fill in. After Mr. Christopher met with Mr. Gore this morning, he met with Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa. Mr. Harkin would not say whether the 40-minute visit focused on his selection or someone else's. The senator, who has met with Mr. Christopher before, could help Mr. Gore with organized labor, farmers and the liberal wing of his party, but at 61, he could be perceived as part of the past and not the future. Amid the names, and with Mr. Bush's selection of Mr. Cheney, talk of former Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine has died down. If Mr. Bush had picked a relative newcomer, like Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma, Mr. Gore might have felt the need to pick an older voice of experience, like Mr. Mitchell. But supporters believe that Mr. Gore already has the experience that Mr. Bush had to seek in a running mate, and some say that frees him to pick someone with a young and vigorous image. Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, called Mr. Cheney a ''retro'' choice, indicating that Mr. Gore wanted someone who speaks to the future. Chris Lehane, also a Gore spokesman, said the selection underscored that ''this really is your father's Republican Party.'' If Mr. Bush had picked a woman, or someone who could have helped the Republicans win a critical state, Mr. Gore might have felt pressured to pick someone with the same appeal. Some in the Gore camp were worried that Mr. Bush would pick either Senator John McCain of Arizona or Gen. Colin L. Powell, both of whom might have electrified voters in a way that would have been difficult for Mr. Gore to counter. As it is, those close to the Gore campaign said, the choice of an older white man who brings little charisma to the ticket and whose home state of Wyoming was already in the Republican column, means that Mr. Gore does not have to match a particular quality or region or find a political superstar. Allan J. Lichtman, a specialist on presidential politics at American University, said: ''This gives Gore an absolute free shot, politically. It puts no pressure on him.'' Mark Mellman, a Democratic consultant, said that the Cheney choice could even provide some momentum to Mr. Gore's candidacy. He said that Mr. Cheney's past heart problems prompted a flurry of stories about his health, thus squandering a chance for a spurt. The Gore campaign is retreating from its earlier consideration of trying to cut into Mr. Bush's ''bounce'' from the Republican convention by announcing the Democratic running mate shortly after the Republicans leave Philadelphia. Instead, one possibility was to set a date the following week in which Mr. Gore would announce his choice, a process that advisers said would bring more dignity to the selection. Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic nominee in 1988, said in an interview that the choice of Mr. Cheney ''should not make one particle of difference'' for Mr. Gore. Whatever Mr. Bush's choice, Mr. Dukakis said, Mr. Gore is still under obligation to pick someone who could step into the job of president.
 Dick Cheney's doctors say Gov George W Bush's designated running mate is in excellent health and takes many drugs for heart disease and other medical conditions (M) Dick Cheney, Gov. George W. Bush's newly announced running mate, is in excellent health and takes many drugs for heart disease and other medical conditions, his doctors said yesterday. ''He is up to the task of the most sensitive public office,'' Mr. Cheney's personal physician, Dr. Gary Malakoff, said in a letter dated July 22 and released by the Bush campaign yesterday. Dick Cheney, Gov. George W. Bush's newly announced running mate, is in excellent health and takes many drugs for heart disease and other medical conditions, his doctors said yesterday. ''He is up to the task of the most sensitive public office,'' Mr. Cheney's personal physician, Dr. Gary Malakoff, said in a letter dated July 22 and released by the Bush campaign yesterday.
