 Governor Bush's Journey, ninth article of series about lives of presidential candidates, examines how George W Bush evolved from heavy-drinking, fun-loving oilman struggling to salvage his business and hold on to his marriage, to multimillionaire, overwhelmingly popular governor of Texas. happily married man and about-to-be-crowned Republican nominee for president; acquaintances say one of keys to his turnaround was his succession of failures in politics and business, which humbled him and left him much more likable; say another key was pressure from Mrs Bush to stop drinking, which Bush did at age 40; Bush's life detailed; photos (L) It was a sedate cocktail party on a summer evening in Kennebunkport, Me., when the wild man of the Bush clan wobbled up to an old friend of his parents, a prim, well-dressed matron who had recently turned 50, her hair pulled tightly back from her forehead in the most severe way. It was a sedate cocktail party on a summer evening in Kennebunkport, Me., when the wild man of the Bush clan wobbled up to an old friend of his parents, a prim, well-dressed matron who had recently turned 50, her hair pulled tightly back from her forehead in the most severe way. It was a vintage Bush moment, recounted by friends, the kind of incident that made young George's buddies laugh and cringe at the same time. He could be hilarious company, but also often outrageous and childish. Some acquaintances were offended by what they saw as Mr. Bush's arrogance and immaturity, by his penchant for drinking too much and thinking too little. Even his wife, Laura, wanted him to grow up. ''Bush was acting like a little kid'' in those days, recalled Mel Turner, a fellow Republican activist in West Texas in the 1970's and 80's. ''He was an immature rich-kid brat.'' Not everyone is that harsh, and many of his friends welcomed the ''bombastic Bushkin,'' as they called him, as a breath of fresh air. But the upshot was that as he approached 40, an age when Al Gore was already a senator running for president, George W. Bush was just a heavy-drinking, fun-loving oilman struggling to control his temper, salvage his business and hold on to his marriage. Then Mr. Bush did grow up. A classic late bloomer, Mr. Bush offers reassurance for 40-year-olds everywhere. Just 14 years later, he is a multimillionaire, a successful businessman who turned around the Texas Rangers and prospered with them; the overwhelmingly popular governor of Texas, the only one to be elected to a second consecutive four-year term; the about-to-be-crowned Republican nominee for president, running ahead in the polls; and, apparently most important of all in his own priorities, the very happily married husband of Laura. Mr. Bush redeemed himself and is today very much a product of that redemption. On the campaign trail, it lends him an air of authenticity, allowing him to come across as a decent man today without the baggage of having always been a squeaky-clean, apple-polishing mama's boy. There is a popular image of Mr. Bush's younger days, fueled by late-night television jokes, suggesting that he spent much of the 1970's stupefied in a drug-fueled haze. But Mr. Bush's elliptical comments suggesting that he used drugs before 1974 may have led people to think that he was wilder than he really was, and the fuller portrait of him in the 1970's and early 1980's indicates that his behavior was more callow than criminal. Mr. Bush's problem, it seems, was not so much that he was dissolute as that he was irresolute. He continued plodding along, acting young and irresponsible when he was well into middle age, until he faced a personal crisis. A common criticism of Mr. Bush is that he has enjoyed a charmed life, without ever having to struggle, and there is something to the idea that he has been incredibly lucky and privileged at many junctures. But the truth is also more complex, and on his own terms life in the 1970's and 80's was no stroll through a sun-dappled park. With oil prices plunging, Mr. Bush struggled to keep his business going. He was deeply pained that he had lost money that friends had invested with him. And most cutting of all, some friends say, he worried that his wife was so sick of his boorish behavior that she would consider leaving him and taking their twin daughters. These pressures, instead of breaking Mr. Bush, changed him. But one of the keys to his turnaround seems to have been his succession of failures in politics and business, which acquaintances said humbled him and left him much more likable. Another was pressure from Mrs. Bush. So Mr. Bush gave up alcohol and turned toward religion. He remade himself, and then his tremendous people skills, backed by his family connections, took over and propelled him in both business and politics. What makes George Bush tick? The younger George Bush is more complicated, and for him the answer reflects one of the critical differences between him and his father: George W. is fiercely competitive, but for most of his life he was not ferociously ambitious. That combination helps explain both the stuttering first two-thirds of his life and the triumphant latest third. Normally, competitive people are also ambitious. But Mr. Bush has been an anomaly, for from childhood he was always enormously competitive in certain areas -- playing baseball, winning friends, making people laugh, giving great parties -- without being particularly focused on the future. Friends say that if there is one overriding reason that Mr. Bush gravitated toward politics it is not so much overweening ambition as a series of personal encounters with successful politicians; after rubbing shoulders with them, he concluded: I can do better than these bozos! Looking at the careers of President Clinton or Vice President Al Gore, one gets the sense of a man running a marathon, resolutely pushing on with thoughts of glory at the finish tape. Mr. Bush's career, in contrast, brings to mind a cheerful hitchhiker who has the incredible good fortune to be picked up by a series of limousines. ''I don't know whether I'll be your president,'' Mr. Bush said in an interview, adding: ''But you know, I've got the sense of, if it's meant to be, fine. And if it's not meant to be, you know, heck, it's not something I planned my life to be anyway.'' It was only when Mr. Bush arrived at Harvard Business School in the fall of 1973 that he began to buckle down and prepare more rigorously for the future. After graduation in 1975, Mr. Bush still did not know what he wanted to do with his life. He spent the summer in China, where his father had taken a job as chief United States envoy, and this was an occasion when his unfamiliarity with foreign policy had practical consequences. Mr. Bush had hoped to date Chinese women, but as any student of international relations could have told him, Chairman Mao was still ruling China, the Cultural Revolution was under way and China's women were unwilling to give up their Little Red Books to engage in counterrevolutionary entanglements with visiting Americans. Eventually Mr. Bush took up a family friend's invitation to return to Midland, Tex., where he had spent his childhood. He decided to start in the oil business just as his father had. ''It smelled right and it felt right,'' Mr. Bush recalled, adding, ''I really wanted to be my own man, my own businessman.'' By all accounts, Mr. Bush worked hard to build up his oil business and, in 1978, to run for Congress in an unsuccessful campaign. He married Laura and stopped bringing his laundry over for his friends' wives to wash. Yet while there is something to that, Mr. Bush also seems to have retained a good bit of immaturity even as he forged ahead in the business world. Young people often found him charming, fun and exciting to be around, as well as tremendously friendly and likable. But others sometimes saw him as arrogant and childish. ''My impression at that time was that he was a little immature,'' recalled Curtis Webster, a local banker and city councilman. Mr. Webster remembered a time when he and a friend met Mr. Bush on the street, and Mr. Bush play-punched the friend on the arm. On another occasion, Mr. Bush barged in late at a Republican reception at the Midland Hilton. He greeted everybody with a bit too much ebullience (''Hey, here I am, did anyone miss me?'') and then came up behind a dignitary in midconversation, tapping him on the far shoulder so the man turned to find nobody at all. Some of Mr. Bush's friends tittered, but others present saw it as confirmation that Mr. Bush had a few rough edges. The election defeat in 1978 was a major blow to Mr. Bush and his friends, but many people in the area thought it was the best thing for his personality. ''I've heard a lot of people say that the experience changed him, made him more humble,'' said Johnnye Davis, a local Republican activist who raves about Mr. Bush but also recalls a ''cocky side'' that turned some people off. That cockiness seemed to retreat as Mr. Bush faced difficulties in the business world and struggled through a business downturn. In a sense, Mr. Bush's strength lay in salesmanship. Then as now, he was a brilliant fund-raiser, and through his family and father's friends raised millions of dollars to drill for oil. But he never found much petroleum, and then in the mid-1980's oil prices virtually collapsed, so that his investors -- like many others -- did poorly. According to a company prospectus, Mr. Bush raised $4.67 million from his limited partners, but his company returned only $1.55 million in distributions (plus hefty tax write-offs). Meanwhile, Mr. Bush structured the deals so that he did pretty well for himself even as his investors suffered. It was not a bad arrangement for himself, and Mr. Bush's longtime friend and accountant, Robert A. McCleskey, says that Mr. Bush's net worth rose from $50,000 in 1975 to more than $1 million by 1988. That is not, Mr. McCleskey notes, the record of a man who is a failure in business. Still, it was humiliating. Investors had lost money, and everybody knew that Mr. Bush had essentially failed in creating a viable company. ''He became a much more likable person in a few years after he got here,'' Mr. Angelo said of Mr. Bush. ''He had the reputation when he came here of being cocky and arrogant, and he lived that down.'' By all accounts, a crucial factor in the taming of George W. Bush was his marriage in 1977. As a friend from Yale days, Donald B. Ensenat, says, ''Laura changed him.'' Laura Bush comes across as quiet and meek, and because she started off as a school librarian Mr. Bush used to tease that her idea of a speech was saying, ''Shhhhhh.'' But friends say that she can be a tough woman who deflates her husband when she feels it is necessary. ''Laura can be plenty tough, and she can chew him out,'' Mr. McCleskey said, chuckling. ''I saw them once, when he was giving orders to all these people and rattling off commands, and she just looked at him and said, 'Bushie, you're not president yet!' '' When others laughed at his raucous style and impishness, it was Mrs. Bush who told him to pipe down. When others offered him another beer, Mrs. Bush told him to cool it. ''She holds his feet to the fire,'' said Mike Barker, a West Texas journalist who has known Mr. Bush since before he was married. ''My impression is that privately she tells him exactly what she thinks.'' Mutual friends say that Mrs. Bush was attracted to her husband's impishness and boisterousness but also, over time, wearied of it. ''Laura gets a lot of credit'' for calming her husband, mused Elsie Walker, Mr. Bush's cousin. ''She loves George's fun side, but after a while she got tired of George's edges that came from the drinking.'' Mrs. Bush increasingly began to lean on her husband to quit drinking, friends say. Mr. Bush says he does not know if he was actually an alcoholic, but acknowledges that he was drinking too much, and others share that assessment. He was not a mean drunk, but when lubricated he could be loud, obnoxious and hardly the kind of father a mother wanted around her young daughters. Mr. Bush has told several friends over the years that he was forced to choose. ''Laura said, 'It's me or the bottle,' '' one longtime friend quoted Mr. Bush as saying. ''She said it to me maybe 50 times.'' Mr. Bush has contested the idea that the marriage was ever so severely strained, and some friends say they saw no signs of strain beyond typical marital spats. One confidant believes that Mrs. Bush may never have quite given an ultimatum but that Mr. Bush told friends she had because he felt in his mind that he had to choose -- that unless he gave up liquor he would lose his daughters, whom he treasured above all. In any case, even those who say that the marriage was seriously troubled say that Mr. Bush always appeared to be faithful to his wife and shunned opportunities for flings when they came along, as they sometimes did. He could be indiscreet about his love life before marriage, friends say, but always insisted that he had been true to Laura. Then in the summer of 1985 Mr. Bush met with Billy Graham -- a meeting engineered by his parents -- at the family compound in Kennebunkport. They had lunch on the patio overlooking the ocean, dinner by the fire and long conversations as they strolled along the shore. Mr. Bush was inspired to begin reading the Bible daily (which he says he still does), and back in Midland he began attending a Bible study class. Mr. Bush had grown up in a religious household, attending First Presbyterian Church in Midland, but it was an austere, restrained Yankee faith. After his daughters were born, he switched to his wife's church, First United Methodist, but a close friend says that in those days he went to church each Sunday more for the sake of his daughters than because of any deep inner commitment. Yet after the meeting with Mr. Graham and his Bible study sessions, Mr. Bush became increasingly serious about his religion. He is at home discussing religious matters with evangelical leaders in a way his father never was. Mr. Bush is publicly guarded about his beliefs (partly because of a much cited incident in which he suggested that non-Christians could not get to heaven), but by all accounts, his faith has developed into something that is an important part of his inner life and that was a significant element in his maturing. In July 1986, a year after he began studying the Bible seriously, George and Laura Bush went with a half-dozen friends to celebrate their collective 40th birthdays at the luxurious Broadmoor resort in Colorado. There was one evening when they all stayed up late, drinking a bit too merrily. The next morning, Mr. Bush has recalled, he woke up feeling befuddled -- and quietly resolved that he would never touch alcohol again. Friends say he told nobody, not even his wife, until weeks after their return to Midland. He simply drank sodas instead of beers, and it was many weeks later that he finally explained to his friends that he had given up liquor. Mr. Bush worked harder and mellowed a bit, so that while he remained mischievous he was less likely to offend. He became a better father. He grew up. While he has buckled down in recent years, Mr. Bush even now on the campaign trail comes across as unusually relaxed or complacent, depending on one's point of view. He often takes Sundays off, he reserves time for jogging or working out, and in contrast to Mr. Gore he gives the impression that he still would rather spend an evening joking with friends than reading a health-care policy analysis. ''Somebody said, 'Well, what are you going to do after you're governor?' '' Mr. Bush mused. ''Or, 'If you don't win president, what are you going to do?' I mean, I just don't worry about those things. I kind of figure life is going to work its way out somehow.'' Nothing could be more antithetical to the way George W. Bush has lived his life. He is a cheery guy whose success has arisen not from self-doubt but from self-confidence, and when setbacks have arisen he has normally shrugged and moved on. Deep disappointment washed over Mr. Bush, for example, one April afternoon when he was a junior at Yale. He fervently wanted to follow his father and grandfather into Skull and Bones, the most exclusive of Yale's secret societies, but word trickled out on ''tap day'' that he would not be among those invited for membership. Mr. Bush was understandably subdued as he ran into a fraternity brother, Robert A. F. Reisner, near the Yale Co-op bookstore. Mr. Bush explained that he was deeply disappointed by failing to keep up the tradition. But he added that he was ready to move on. Mr. Bush need not have been so stoical. Luck stood by him, as it usually has, and that night he was tapped into Skull and Bones after all. Mr. Bush has also held on to a bit of his bombastic style and needling humor. When his father was president and invited Queen Elizabeth to the White House for a state banquet in May 1991, his mother introduced him to the queen -- and he promptly began telling a yarn about how he had embroidered his new cowboy boots with the phrase ''God Save the Queen.'' Mrs. Bush explained tartly to Queen Elizabeth that she had seated George well away from Her Majesty, ''for fear of him saying something.'' Then, the Bushes have recounted, George confessed to the queen that he was his family's black sheep and added, to his mother's horror, ''Who's yours?'' Governor Bush's Journey This is the ninth article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will look at Al Gore's entry into politics.
 Gov George W Bush kills efforts by fellow Republicans to allow voters in all states to cast primary ballots that actually count; plan, designed by Republican National Committee, was intended to lengthen primary season by making big states vote last; plan envisioned primary season beginning in February in smallest states and ending in biggest states in May; high-level Bush aide says Bush campaign fears its re-election efforts would be hindered if new calendar lets states shift from primaries to caucuses and state conventions in 2004 (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, on his way here for a triumphal nomination, ended the last bit of uncertainty surrounding next week's convention by killing efforts to allow voters in all states to cast primary ballots that actually counted. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, on his way here for a triumphal nomination, ended the last bit of uncertainty surrounding next week's convention by killing efforts to allow voters in all states to cast primary ballots that actually counted. On May 12, Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, told reporters that Mr. Bush had no position then on the plan and would have none later. But this morning Mr. Rove passed the word to members of the convention rules committee that the campaign wanted it killed, and the committee duly voted to kill it. Mr. Bush's intervention on the primary proposal bluntly brushed aside several months' work of party leaders, like the Republican chairman, Jim Nicholson, to design a new system, and there was a bit of mystery today surrounding the Bush camp's reasons. The people Mr. Rove talked to either declined to quote his stated reasons or dismissed them as implausible. Most members put the last-minute move down to a desire to have a convention utterly free of conflict, even if the fight would take place hours before prime time. One high-level Bush aide said the campaign feared its re-election efforts would be hindered if a new calendar led states to shift from primaries to caucuses and state conventions in 2004. Some rules committee members said Democrats would keep states like California and New York from changing the dates of primaries, forcing Republicans in those states to use caucuses. The aide called caucuses a ''breeding ground'' for trouble. Republican caucuses often fall under control of the party's most right-wing elements. ''Karl did express some concern to several members of the rules committee, saying we were concerned this would put the Republicans at a competitive disadvantage,'' said Karen P. Hughes, a Bush spokeswoman. She said the Bush campaign also had concerns ''that it would limit the number of candidates who are able to participate in so many places all at once.'' Morton Blackwell, a committee member from Virginia, said one virtue of the Republican Party was that its rules were ''locked in concrete'' from one convention to the next. He said if the national committee was given this authority, which the Democratic National Committee already has, ''we could have heaven knows what imposed on us from the top.'' That vote was 72 to 28, even though the Bush campaign took no stand on it. One indication of the utter control displayed by the Bush campaign over the plan to string out the primaries was the unwillingness of the losers even to complain about it during the meeting. Indeed, the Bush position was never mentioned, except when Tom Sansonetti of Wyoming, the chairman of the rules committee, told the meeting that the Bush campaign had no position. That was minutes before Mr. Rove told him things had changed. Mr. Sansonetti said in an interview that Mr. Rove had told him the Bush campaign thought the plan was flawed because candidates would have to undergo heavy, tiring travel in February, when a dozen very small states would vote. That objection, also cited today on the Bush campaign plane by a spokesman, Scott McClellan, had never been raised in any meeting on the plan, where the early, small-state campaigning was specifically designed to keep any candidate from dominating all the early states, and thereby to give underfinanced hopefuls a chance to make an impression by an early victory. David Norcross, a rules committee member from New Jersey who had been among the plan's most enthusiastic supporters until this week, said the Bush campaign had raised the travel question with him, too, along with the problem that some states might face if Democrats blocked any change. He said no one from the Bush camp had mentioned a desire to avoid a floor fight to him. The closest anyone came to admitting that motive was when Ms. Hughes, the Bush spokeswoman, said, ''Obviously we want our convention to focus primarily on Governor Bush and his positive proposal for America, but we wanted people to be heard in the process.'' But Tom Rath, a committee member from New Hampshire, disagreed. He said, ''The race ends politically a lot earlier than it ends mathematically.'' He said that although Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore were seen as certain winners after the March 7 primaries, they did not yet have the delegates needed for nomination. Those majorities were reached on March 14.
 To understand why the conventions are the way they are, and why the G.O.P. chose Philly, we might think of the conventions as a movie. The Democrats' movie is lush: Al Gore and Bill Clinton soar into town on Air Force One and Two and sweep into the homes of Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg in long processions of limousines, and then the crown passes from Mr. Clinton to Mr. Gore in downtown's Staples Center while klieg lights illuminate the liquid Southern California sky. It's a pleasant image, and it's O.K. for a TV movie of the week. But where is the drama? Where is the ''arc,'' as we say? Mr. Gore goes from a mansion on Observatory Circle off Massachusetts Avenue to mansions in Malibu? That's no arc. To make it better, we throw in a generous slice of ''Rocky,'' the ultimate movie of Philadelphia and the redemption of the underdog. After Dubya and Dick Cheney have frightened off the first group of attackers, they think they are safe, and start to unwind with some Tex-Mex food and beer. But when they leave the tavern, they're quickly surrounded by Pat Buchanan and Ralph Nader and a howling mob of environmental protectionist agitators. Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney have to battle against unheard-of odds to get through (think of Richard Nixon besieged in Caracas in 1958 or maybe of those little children lost in the forest in ''Hansel and Gretel'') to make it back to the convention, which has been moved to the front of the Philadelphia Art Museum. They break free of the pursuers, and then, to the soaring music of ''The Whiffenpoof Song,'' dance around and shadow-box before they go inside to the exultation of the masses of delegates. As an exhausted but defiant Governor Bush takes the stage, he turns his head and bellows, ''Noooo inheritance tax. . .'' and the G.O.P. goes wild. (It even sounds a little like ''Yo, Adrian. . .'')
 CLINTON CRITICIZES BUSH  As hundreds of Democrats feasted on lobster and clams yesterday at a fund-raiser  for Representative Patrick J. Kennedy in Barrington, R.I., President Clinton served up some partisan zingers.  Mr. Clinton mocked Gov. George W. Bush for his gee-whiz attitude toward the presidency. ''I've been governor of Texas. My daddy was president. I own a baseball team. They like me down there,'' Mr. Clinton said, imitating Mr. Bush. ''Everything is rocking along hunky-dory. Their fraternity had it for eight years. Give it to ours for eight years.'' The president said the Republicans were trying to blur the serious policy differences, especially over how to handle the budget surplus, between Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore. ''That's the message, isn't it? Blur, blur, blur,'' he said. The president helped Mr. Kennedy raise $450,000 for his Congressional campaign and then flew to Boston, where two events last night collected $950,000 for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. CLINTON CRITICIZES BUSH  As hundreds of Democrats feasted on lobster and clams yesterday at a fund-raiser  for Representative Patrick J. Kennedy in Barrington, R.I., President Clinton served up some partisan zingers.  Mr. Clinton mocked Gov. George W. Bush for his gee-whiz attitude toward the presidency. ''I've been governor of Texas. My daddy was president. I own a baseball team. They like me down there,'' Mr. Clinton said, imitating Mr. Bush. ''Everything is rocking along hunky-dory. Their fraternity had it for eight years. Give it to ours for eight years.'' The president said the Republicans were trying to blur the serious policy differences, especially over how to handle the budget surplus, between Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore. ''That's the message, isn't it? Blur, blur, blur,'' he said. The president helped Mr. Kennedy raise $450,000 for his Congressional campaign and then flew to Boston, where two events last night collected $950,000 for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. POLLS GIVE BUSH A WIDER LEAD  Vice President Al Gore had appeared to be steadily chipping away at Gov. George W. Bush's lead in the polls, and in several had almost pulled even. But since Tuesday, when Mr. Bush picked Dick Cheney to be his running mate, the Texas governor has reopened the gap to double digits, two polls indicated. A Time magazine poll released yesterday found that Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore by 16 percentage points, 52 percent to 36 percent. Ralph Nader of the Green Party had 5 percent, and Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party 4 percent. A CNN-USA Today Gallup Poll on Thursday had Mr. Bush ahead of Mr. Gore by 11 points, 50 percent to 39 percent. Mr. Nader had 4 percent and Mr. Buchanan 1 percent. Both polls had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.
 Gov George W Bush flies to Arkansas, Pres Clinton's home territory, proclaiming that he intends to contest areas that Democrats won solidly in last two presidential elections; Bush is in five-day march to Republican National convention that will take him through highly contested states of Missouri, Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia and Pennsylvania; photo; map (M) Brimming with confidence, Gov. George W. Bush flew into President Clinton's home territory today, proclaiming that he intended to contest areas that the Democrats won solidly in the last two presidential elections. With his stop in the rolling green farm country in the northwest corner of Arkansas, Mr. Bush began a five-day march to the Republican National Convention that will take him through the highly contested states of Missouri, Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia and Pennsylvania. Brimming with confidence, Gov. George W. Bush flew into President Clinton's home territory today, proclaiming that he intended to contest areas that the Democrats won solidly in the last two presidential elections. With his stop in the rolling green farm country in the northwest corner of Arkansas, Mr. Bush began a five-day march to the Republican National Convention that will take him through the highly contested states of Missouri, Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia and Pennsylvania. In the district where a young Bill Clinton lost a race for Congress at the age of 28, Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, were greeted by a roaring crowd packed into a high school auditorium and chanting a football fight cheer. Dozens of children were arrayed on the stage behind them and a banner proclaimed, ''Renewing America's Purpose.'' Mr. Bush pointed to two local boys-made-good -- Senator Tim Hutchinson and his brother, Asa, the congressman who gained renown as one of the impeachment managers who prosecuted Mr. Clinton. ''They whispered something in my ear that made Dick Cheney and I feel really great,'' Mr. Bush said. ''They told us we're going to carry Arkansas next fall. They told us not to worry about the last two election cycles. Something else is taking place in this state.'' Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney took turns taking shots at the integrity and trustworthiness of the president, who was impeached, but later acquitted for his efforts to cover up his affair with Monica S. Lewinsky. Neither man mentioned impeachment directly or even Mr. Clinton's name, but again and again they harked back to the Lewinsky scandal. Mr. Cheney said he and his running mate were ''on a great crusade to restore dignity and integrity to Washington.'' And as the crowd cheered he called Mr. Bush ''the man who is going to give our kids and our grandkids a government we once again can be proud of.'' Mr. Bush praised Mr. Cheney in turn, and in the process took a shot at Mr. Clinton for his effort to sidestep questions about Ms. Lewinsky. ''This man is a good man,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Cheney. ''He's a solid man. He's a man who understands what the definition of is is.'' As he began his swing into the Republican convention, Mr. Bush had some good news -- two new polls showing him in the lead. Even in Arkansas, a Mason-Dixon poll just last week showed Mr. Bush leading Vice President Al Gore, 46 to 40 percent. It had a four-point margin of error. The Democrats kept up their assault on Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney as the ''big oil dream ticket,'' and circulated a Reuters report from 1999 saying that Mr. Cheney, the chief executive of the Halliburton Company, a worldwide oil services firm, had praised an OPEC decision to cut oil production. Karen Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman, said that Mr. Cheney had been speaking at a conference of industry analysts and telling them of projections by economists that OPEC would cut production and that the ''price situation'' for the industry would improve. ''Unlike the Clinton-Gore administration, he was not caught napping about OPEC's actions,'' Ms. Hughes said. From the moment he came aboard his campaign plane this morning, with his wife, Laura, Mr. Bush seemed relaxed and in good spirits. He ambled down the aisle joking with reporters and anticipating his nomination speech next Thursday. ''I'm really looking forward to this speech,'' Mr. Bush said. ''This is going to be an unbelievably interesting moment in my life -- to walk out on that stage and to speak from my heart for however long it takes to get through the speech.'' The Bush campaign has worked hard to plan a feel-good Republican convention with none of the sharp conservative edges of the past. The evening proceedings will have star turns for nonpoliticians -- a single mother, a teacher, a union member, a grandmother and granddaughter. On Monday and Tuesday nights Mr. Bush will be beamed by satellite into the convention from places around the country. He is to arrive in Philadelphia on Wednesday morning at a Latin American music festival, symbolic of Republican efforts to reach out to Hispanics. And on Thursday night one of the speakers welcoming him will be a Democrat, Jan Bullock, the wife of the late Lt. Gov. Ray Bullock of Texas, a Democrat who worked closely with Mr. Bush. Even today on what was supposed to be a partisan tour, Mr. Bush tried to soften the tone. Before his rally he toured the Jones Center for Families, a community center founded by a family that ran one of the nation's largest trucking businesses. ''We're here to hear and see and feel first hand the acts of this particular platoon in the armies of compassion,'' Mr. Bush said. As he took a quick tour of the center's computer operation, one of the first people to greet him was Charles A. Huffer, who tightly gripped the governor's hand and began speaking. Mr. Bush looked bewildered and brushed him off quickly.
 Democratic Party's newest tool of disruption is Texas Truth Squad, 14 elected officials and citizens bearing tales of Gov George Bush-induced woe from Lone Star State; they are crossing country, with their final destination Philadelphia, where Republican National Convention will begin on July 31; Truth Squad is just one cog in Democratic machine created to mock and contradict Republicans during their convention (M) ''I'm looking for some Bush to whack,'' Harry Fred Scott, a retired postal worker and dedicated Democrat, growled today in his East Texas drawl as he boarded the coach bus loaded with boisterous Texans and emblazoned with a blue banner that read, ''Don't mess with America.'' He was referring to his governor, George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. And whack away he did. In Cincinnati, he and his fellow Texans asserted that their state lagged behind the nation in school test scores. In Dayton, they complained about a dysfunctional health care system. In Columbus, they fretted about smog-filled skies. ''I'm looking for some Bush to whack,'' Harry Fred Scott, a retired postal worker and dedicated Democrat, growled today in his East Texas drawl as he boarded the coach bus loaded with boisterous Texans and emblazoned with a blue banner that read, ''Don't mess with America.'' He was referring to his governor, George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. And whack away he did. In Cincinnati, he and his fellow Texans asserted that their state lagged behind the nation in school test scores. In Dayton, they complained about a dysfunctional health care system. In Columbus, they fretted about smog-filled skies. ''We have soccer moms whose children can't play soccer'' because of air pollution, Tamara Maschino told reporters outside a senior center here. ''And I hold George W. Bush personally responsible.'' From the Democratic National Committee, the people who came up with the chicken that chased President George Bush in 1992 and the cigarette that dogged Bob Dole in 1996, comes the party's newest tool of disruption: the Texas Truth Squad, 14 elected officials and citizens bearing tales of George Bush-induced woe from the Lone Star State. They have traveled through Kentucky and Ohio on their way to West Virginia and Philadelphia, where the Republican National Convention will begin on Monday. Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, are expected to take the same route on their way to the convention, and the Democrats wanted to get there first to muddy the waters a bit. ''The Bushes are coming and the Bushes will get you,'' Mr. Scott bellowed at older citizens in Dayton. Throughout the week, a team of surrogate speakers, led by the party's chairmen, Joe Andrew and Edward G. Rendell, will hold daily news conferences attacking the Republican ticket. The party has purchased billboard space near the convention center carrying the message: ''I know what you did in Texas.'' A Web site loaded with anti-Bush broadsides will go online on Sunday, at www.iknowwhatyoudidintexas.net. At the heart of it all, teams of researchers at the national committee's offices in Washington and the Gore 2000 headquarters in Nashville will issue floods of faxes and e-mail messages in a minute-by-minute effort to rebut virtually everything every Republican says from the convention stage in Philadelphia. ''I call this the slaughterhouse,'' said Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore's campaign manager, as she strolled into the team's glassed-enclosed office in Nashville recently. ''They may look like gentle people. But they are killers.'' Led by David Ginsberg, a pot-bellied, chain-smoking, bearded, balding and brainy 25-year-old, the Gore researchers were often stunningly successful in undermining the daily messages of Bill Bradley during the Democratic primaries. In Iowa, they inundated reporters with information about a vote Mr. Bradley cast against flood relief for farmers, and the issue dogged Mr. Bradley for days. Later, when Mr. Bradley attacked Mr. Gore for supporting the tobacco industry two decades ago, Mr. Ginsberg was ready with a compilation of quotes from Mr. Bradley vowing to avoid negative campaigning. More recently, the Gore team's researchers pulled repeated all-nighters compiling thick dossiers on every potential Republican vice-presidential candidate. The one man they failed to study closely was the one who was chosen. But as soon as Mr. Cheney's name emerged last weekend, they went into overdrive. And the moment Mr. Bush made his choice official on Tuesday morning, Mr. Ginsberg had already distributed a detailed analysis of Mr. Cheney's voting record in Congress, which was so conservative that it surprised even some Republicans. ''I think we vetted Cheney better than Bush did,'' one adviser to Mr. Gore bragged. The Democrats also firmly believe that good research fuels better pranks. When a D.N.C. researcher learned that the Bush campaign was selling George W. Bush bottled water that came from Kentucky, they ordered several cases and gave it out to reporters. ''This is George W. Bush's message in a bottle,'' Mr. Andrew said at a news conference in Oregon last Tuesday. ''Don't drink the water in Texas.''
 Republicans fight passionately over abortion, with anti-abortion forces eaily prevailing, as platform committee makes its way through document intended to balance party's core conservatism with Gov George W Bush's effort at more centrist appeal; Bush had earlier indicated that he wants no changes in abortion plank, which calls for ban on abortion without exception; photo (M) Republicans fought passionately today over abortion, with the anti-abortion forces easily prevailing, as the platform committee made its way through a document intended to balance the party's core conservatism with Gov. George W. Bush's effort at a more centrist appeal. Republicans fought passionately today over abortion, with the anti-abortion forces easily prevailing, as the platform committee made its way through a document intended to balance the party's core conservatism with Gov. George W. Bush's effort at a more centrist appeal. Today's vote was not surprising; Mr. Bush and Republican leaders had indicated early on that they wanted no changes in the abortion plank, which called for a ban on abortion without exception, and the appointment of judges who respected ''the sanctity of innocent human life.'' They were keenly aware that four years ago, the party's nominee, former Senator Bob Dole, sought to add a ''tolerance'' clause, only to suffer an embarrassing defeat at the hands of the anti-abortion forces. The day's deliberations reflected a party acutely aware of Mr. Bush's political needs, and his efforts to appeal to swing voters on issues like education, but also unwilling, at times, to compromise on core beliefs.  Some of the biggest fights, for example, came on the platform's section on education, with conservatives resisting a strong federal role on what they argued should be a matter for state and local communities and families. The 1996 platform, for example, called for the abolition of the Department of Education; the draft developed by party leaders and the Bush forces did not. But conservatives amended that draft in subcommittee today to say that the role of the federal government in education ''must be progressively limited,'' and were clearly resistant to much of the detailed education agenda put forward by the Texas governor.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column says Gov George W Bush recognizes that at this crisis-free moment of maximum American contentment and minimal American political involvement, relentlessly beatific imagery and oratorical Muzak really can carry the day; notes that Republican National Convention is programmed to be as soothing as a lullaby; suspects that Vice Pres Al Gore's frenetic style and frequent changes of costume are all wrong for this easy-listening time; drawing (M) The press is bored. The public is bored. Even Dick Cheney looks bored. It wasn't until George W. Bush chose a man who makes Brian Lamb seem like Jerry Springer that I fully appreciated the sheer genius of his presidential campaign. What Governor Bush recognizes is that at this crisis-free moment of maximum American contentment and minimal American political involvement, relentlessly beatific imagery and oratorical Muzak really can carry the day. Repeat ''compassionate conservatism,'' ''a tone of civility,'' ''inclusion,'' ''tolerance'' and ''heart'' often enough and no one's going to look too hard at the fine print. Especially if you're posing in ''inclusive'' photo ops worthy of a Benetton campaign. The press is bored. The public is bored. Even Dick Cheney looks bored. It wasn't until George W. Bush chose a man who makes Brian Lamb seem like Jerry Springer that I fully appreciated the sheer genius of his presidential campaign. What Governor Bush recognizes is that at this crisis-free moment of maximum American contentment and minimal American political involvement, relentlessly beatific imagery and oratorical Muzak really can carry the day. Repeat ''compassionate conservatism,'' ''a tone of civility,'' ''inclusion,'' ''tolerance'' and ''heart'' often enough and no one's going to look too hard at the fine print. Especially if you're posing in ''inclusive'' photo ops worthy of a Benetton campaign. The non-ideological swing voters likely to decide this election take one look at Mr. Cheney, or catch one monotonous sound bite, then promptly trance out and forget what the Democrats are barking about. Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne, once wrote a novel about a vice president whose death was kept secret, and while this scenario may not be literally true in the case of her husband, it is metaphorically so. The mild, round, expressionless Mr. Cheney is like a deadening cushion that will soften, absorb or deflect any rhetorical weapons that Al Gore might hurl at him -- much as Mr. Bush's mastery of don't-worry-be-happy theatrics has ever since his campaign made its sole major slip-up to date, the detour to Bob Jones. The Texas governor has even managed to play down his role as the country's Lord High Executioner by suppressing the smirk and invoking the deity once Gary Graham was dead. Democrats, frustrated by both Mr. Bush's affable image and the small target offered by his slim resume in public life, claim to be ecstatic about gaining Mr. Cheney as a fatter target. If so, they are delusional -- or at least hopelessly out of touch with the culture in which this campaign is unfolding. In a time of what Jesse Jackson has aptly named ''prosperity fatigue,'' more Americans care about who is going to be voted off the island on ''Survivor'' or who will succeed Kathie Lee Gifford on the Regis morning ticket than who will be the next vice president. After ''Survivor,'' just in time for the debates, come the Olympics, another distraction from what is already proving a stealth election year. This month 43 percent of Americans told pollsters they wouldn't watch the G.O.P. convention -- a rise from 23 percent in '96. A Pew survey shows that the number of those thinking ''quite a lot'' about the election is also down steeply from the same summer juncture of both '96 and '92. ''Even most registered Republicans'' are unaware that their party's convention is looming, according to Harvard's Vanishing Voter survey. This is a boon to the Bush campaign. Contrary to the conventional wisdom, it was a plus, not a minus, when the Cheney announcement was knocked off the evening news lead by the Concorde crash and the collapse of the Mideast peace talks. A few seconds of Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney in a warming Prince-Hal-and-Falstaff pose served to convey the campaign's desired message, with no time left for dissonant interference. The same goes for the convention next week. Programmed to be as soothing as a Claritin commercial -- even Clinton-bashing is on mute -- the G.O.P. spectacular in Philadelphia will defy in-depth network coverage. If channel surfers glimpse a snapshot of the inclusiveness, that's good enough. And that's all most of them will get: such is the state of convention coverage that tomorrow Tom Brokaw headlines a panel at Philadelphia City Hall titled ''Is There a Future for on-the-Air Televised Conventions?'' that (at two hours) is itself scheduled to run longer than the slots the big three broadcast networks have allotted to the convention in prime time most nights. Neither is the traditional civil war over abortion likely to disturb the peace. The religious right can gloat this year, not thunder, since Mr. Cheney is actually to the right of Mr. Bush on the issue -- no easy feat. As for that small band of potentially noisy pro-choice Republican leaders, most I've spoken to this week are ready to declare a truce for a mere pat on the head -- a couple of sentences professing tolerance for their views in a platform that continues to call for the outlawing of all abortions. They aren't getting even that, but don't expect any drama. Hardly had the Cheney announcement dashed pipe dreams of a Tom Ridge or George Pataki than some pro-choicers began retreating to the line that Mr. Bush is O.K. because he has promised not to make a pro-life stance a ''litmus test'' for Supreme Court nominees. That's a flimsy straw to cling to, given that the governor's favorite sitting justices are the vehemently anti-choice Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia and that his appointee as the top health official in Texas, Dr. William Archer, is not only anti-choice but against giving teenagers birth-control information that might prevent unwanted pregnancies. But as Susan Cullman of the Republican Pro-Choice Coalition points out, the Bush campaign is betting that its disciplined focus on education uber alles and equally disciplined silence about abortion will neutralize his anti-choice stance to busy suburban voters. And she may be right. A single photo op with a few hand-picked homosexuals papered over Mr. Bush's career-long failure to speak up for civil rights for gay people. Should anyone bring up his non-compassionate record on AIDS -- in fact a nonexistent record in his first five years as governor of a state with the fourth-highest caseload -- a hospital visit could turn the tide. To learn the genesis of this campaign technique, look not to old Reagan-Bush strategies but to Dana Milbank's recent Washington Post account of Mr. Bush's stint as owner of the Texas Rangers. The salesmanship used to boost that struggling baseball franchise seems a blueprint for the campaign. To ensure favorable press coverage, Mr. Bush flattered reporters and gave them ''a great press box.'' Though catering to the rich by adding a profusion of luxury boxes to his new stadium, he hired an architect to camouflage the class distinctions from the hoi polloi. ''I'm not so sure you can segue from baseball to a presidency,'' Mr. Bush said modestly to Mr. Milbank, ''but there are some lessons about management, about developing a strategy. Baseball is a marketing business.'' Al Gore is in the marketing business too, but his frenetic style and frequent changes of costume are all wrong for this easy-listening time. He's a manic stickler for details going up against a calm stickler for generalities. The vice president's best hope may be that Mr. Bush is as complacent as the sure victor the G.O.P. nominated in Philadelphia 52 years ago, Thomas Dewey. But Mr. Gore is no Harry Truman. Plain speaking is not, shall we say, his forte, and his attack rhetoric merely plays into the Republicans' hands by paradoxically making him, not Mr. Bush or Mr. Cheney, seem more like a slashing politician of the despised Gingrich era in Washington. Expressing his frustration with the Bush campaign's success in theatrics while on the stump this week, Mr. Gore told the crowd, ''You and I know this is not about show business.''
 New Primary System Is Quashed by Bush Camp  Gov. George W. Bush ended the last bit of uncertainty surrounding the Republican convention next week by killing an effort to allow voters in all states to cast primary ballots that actually counted. The Republican National Committee's plan was intended to lengthen the primary system by making the big states vote last. Members of the committee attributed the Bush camp's opposition to the plan to a desire to have a convention free of conflict. Republicans fought passionately over abortion at a meeting on the party platform, with the anti-abortion forces easily prevailing, as the platform committee made its way through a document intended to balance the party's core conservatism with Governor Bush's attempt at a more centrist appeal. Governor Bush flew into Arkansas, proclaiming that he intended to contest areas in President Clinton's home territory that the Democrats won solidly in the last two presidential elections. With his stop in the rolling green farm country in the northwest corner of Arkansas, Mr. Bush began a five-day march to the Republican National Convention that will take him through the battleground states of Missouri, Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia and Pennsylvania.
