 The killing of Private Winchell as he slept renewed the debate over the Clinton administration's policy on gays, and the issue has permeated the presidential campaign. Vice President Al Gore vows to allow gays to serve openly. His Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, supports the existing policy.
 Vice Pres Al Gore asserts that Gov George W Bush's handling of Texas budget proves he would be an incompetent steward of national economy, inclined to squander the surplus on tax cuts for the rich; photo (M) Cramming several weeks of attacks on Gov. George W. Bush of Texas into one speech, Vice President Al Gore asserted today that the governor's handling of the state's budget proved he would be an incompetent steward of the national economy, inclined to squandering the surplus on tax cuts for the rich. Brimming with confidence in a speech before the leaders of 30 transportation unions, almost all of which have endorsed him, Mr. Gore wove together themes he had spun out separately in recent weeks, creating a tapestry of harsh questions about his Republican rival's fitness to be president. Cramming several weeks of attacks on Gov. George W. Bush of Texas into one speech, Vice President Al Gore asserted today that the governor's handling of the state's budget proved he would be an incompetent steward of the national economy, inclined to squandering the surplus on tax cuts for the rich. Brimming with confidence in a speech before the leaders of 30 transportation unions, almost all of which have endorsed him, Mr. Gore wove together themes he had spun out separately in recent weeks, creating a tapestry of harsh questions about his Republican rival's fitness to be president. Mr. Bush, the vice president said, had frittered away a $6.4 billion surplus in Texas on tax cuts favoring the wealthy, leaving the state with a $610 million budget shortfall because of cost overruns in some programs. The governor, Mr. Gore said, could be expected to do the same in Washington, leaving no money for government programs that are particularly important to working people, like Social Security and Medicare. ''One year ago, Texas had the biggest budget surplus in that state's history,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Governor Bush's top priority was a big tax break for the powerful interests. And now, in the midst of the strongest national economy ever in history, Texas has virtually eliminated that surplus and has a budget shortfall. ''Now, Governor Bush wants to bring those same budget-busting tax policies to the nation as a whole,'' Mr. Gore continued. ''Which do you think is more important, his rhetoric or his record?'' The vice president sarcastically accused Mr. Bush of having misplaced his priorities by using the surplus for tax cuts instead of improving services. ''If you were governor of a state that had the worst record of any state in giving health care to the families of your state, and then all of a sudden you found yourself with the biggest budget surplus in the history of your state, don't you think you would consider using some of that surplus to maybe move your state from No. 50 to, say, 45 or maybe even higher?'' Mr. Gore said, eliciting titters from his audience. ''I would, of course, and shoot higher than that.'' Mr. Bush's aides said the Texas budget was firmly balanced and would actually finish the coming fiscal year with a $1.4 billion surplus. The $610 million shortfall, caused by unexpectedly high expenditures on Medicaid and prison programs, will be quickly resolved with supplemental appropriations, they said. And the aides said much of Mr. Bush's tax cut was devoted to reducing sales and property taxes for middle-income Texans, not just the rich. ''If this election comes down to Governor Bush's fiscal leadership versus Al Gore's credibility, we're going to win in a landslide,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign. Mr. Gore, wearing a conventional red tie with white shirt and black suit instead of his trademark khakis and polo shirt, seemed especially relaxed and confident today as he addressed his enthusiastic audience, which repeatedly interrupted him with standing ovations. Working to pump the labor leaders, whose help will be vital in getting out the Democratic vote this November, Mr. Gore ticked off a series of pro-union pledges:  raising the minimum wage, enacting legislation to remove obstacles to organizing unions, making health insurance more accessible, ensuring that women receive equal pay for equal work. And in a subtle response to the criticisms of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president who contends that Mr. Gore is virtually a carbon copy of Mr. Bush, the vice president urged the crowd to ''fight off any cynics who say that they're all the same and it doesn't make any difference.'' ''It does make a difference,'' Mr. Gore continued. ''It makes a difference whether or not we're going to fight to keep Social Security or not. It makes a difference whether or not working families are going to get health care and their kids are going to get good public schools.''
 ''Obviously, it's a problem for Al Gore right now, and it's a problem for a lot of my colleagues,'' he said. ''It's a problem, and it's embarrassing, but you know, it happened. No matter how careful you are, it's impossible given the size of these campaigns and thousands of donors, to ensure that somebody doesn't reimburse a contributor.''
 Former Defense Sec Richard B Cheney, who heads Gov George W Bush's search for vice presidential nominee, emerges as leading contender for job; reportedly changes voter registration from Texas to Wyoming to make selection possible; reportedly became Bush's top choice in recent days; change of registration is needed to pave way for likely selection by avoiding problems under 12th Amendment to Constitution, which forbids Electoral College voters to choose candidates from their state as both president and vice president; photo (M) Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary who is heading Gov. George W. Bush's search for a vice presidential nominee, has emerged as a leading contender for the job, changing his voter registration today to make his selection possible, Republicans close to the governor said this evening. Mr. Bush is not expected to announce his final decision for several days, and one Republican cautioned that he still planned to do some thinking over the weekend. Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary who is heading Gov. George W. Bush's search for a vice presidential nominee, has emerged as a leading contender for the job, changing his voter registration today to make his selection possible, Republicans close to the governor said this evening. Mr. Bush is not expected to announce his final decision for several days, and one Republican cautioned that he still planned to do some thinking over the weekend. But Republicans close to Mr. Bush said that Mr. Cheney, whose wealth of government experience includes a stint as White House chief of staff under President Ford and a long career as a congressman from Wyoming, had become a top choice of the governor's in recent days. They said that his change of registration from Texas to Wyoming was needed to pave the way for his likely, though still not assured, selection. One Republican close to Mr. Bush said the former defense secretary was now the leading candidate, though cautioned that Mr. Bush still had not come to a final decision. Another Republican familiar with the governor's thinking said Mr. Cheney was among the few finalists. Yet another Republican, who is close to the former defense secretary said, ''Bush really, really, really likes Cheney.'' The Bush campaign did not offer confirmation, but did nothing to dampen the speculation about Mr. Cheney. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, told reporters at his Texas ranch today that he was going to think ''long and hard'' at the ranch this weekend and review the options that had been carefully prepared by Mr. Cheney himself. By the end of the weekend, Mr. Bush said, ''I'll be a lot closer to the decision.'' When Mr. Bush announced this spring that Mr. Cheney, who had been his father's defense secretary, would lead his search, he praised Mr. Cheney, an executive at the Halliburton Company, a Dallas energy company, and said that his role would not preclude him from being considered for the No. 2 job himself. ''I trust Dick Cheney's judgment; I know his character,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's obviously an important decision for me and I can't think of a better person to work with on making that decision.'' But other Republicans said Mr. Cheney, 59, had repeatedly insisted he did not want the job. In recent weeks, however, as Mr. Keating had looked as if he was emerging as Mr. Bush's favorite, prominent Republicans began lobbying Mr. Bush for Mr. Cheney. Many of them felt that Mr. Keating was too conservative and not impressive enough to win independent and swing voter. And several Republican Party officials pressed Mr. Cheney to reconsider. ''There was a huge movement for this,'' one Republican said, ''and it started several weeks ago. This did not come out of the blue.'' A Republican familiar with the conversations said that Mr. Bush's father had also been an active advocate for Mr. Cheney. Though Mr. Cheney's health could become an issue, one Republican familiar with the past few days' events said the Bush campaign had checked on his medical records and health with the doctor who had performed the heart surgery. Concerns about whether Mr. Keating would have enough appeal had caused other Republicans to begin pressuring the Bush campaign to consider the governor's former primary rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona. About 60 House Republicans petitioned Mr. Bush today on Mr. McCain's behalf, and Mr. Ridge,  Republicans said, implored Mr. McCain to reconsider in a telephone conversation on Tuesday. An associate of Mr. McCain's said the senator told Mr. Ridge that he would prefer not to be asked but would accept the vice presidency if offered it by Mr. Bush. Mr. McCain said today, however, ''I don't believe anything has changed'' since he told Mr. Bush in May that he did not want to be considered for the ticket. And Mr. Bush gave no indication he would be influenced by the pressure from House Republicans. He said simply that he was sure that Mr. McCain would be a ''loyal soldier for my candidacy.'' Like Mr. McCain, Mr. Cheney would bring a wealth of experience in national security to the ticket. He was a strategist of the Persian Gulf war as defense secretary under Mr. Bush's father. He has good relations with Republicans in Congress, where he was a party whip, and he has served in the White House, as chief of staff to Gerald Ford. And unlike Mr. McCain, he has no further political ambitions of his own, Republicans said, and would be devoted solely to the Bush presidency.
 Presidential campaign of Gov George W Bush mounts a furious counteroffensive to Vice Pres Al Gore's charge that Bush has mismanaged Texas economy; Gore appears to hit a nerve that suggests the emergence of a line of attacks that might have some staying power; photo (M) For much of the late spring and summer, on issues ranging from education to the environment, Vice President Al Gore dissected and disparaged Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, and the Texas governor never failed to fight back. He stood before television cameras to dismiss what he said were gross distortions, and his advisers churned out news releases that contradicted Mr. Gore's claims. But never has the Bush campaign mounted as furious a counteroffensive as it did day after day this week, in response to the vice president's latest salvo: that the Texas governor had mismanaged his state's finances, creating serious cost overruns that jeopardized the state's fiscal health. At long last, the Gore campaign seemed to hit a nerve or at least stoke an outrage that suggested the emergence of a line of attack that might have some staying power. For much of the late spring and summer, on issues ranging from education to the environment, Vice President Al Gore dissected and disparaged Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, and the Texas governor never failed to fight back. He stood before television cameras to dismiss what he said were gross distortions, and his advisers churned out news releases that contradicted Mr. Gore's claims. But never has the Bush campaign mounted as furious a counteroffensive as it did day after day this week, in response to the vice president's latest salvo: that the Texas governor had mismanaged his state's finances, creating serious cost overruns that jeopardized the state's fiscal health. At long last, the Gore campaign seemed to hit a nerve or at least stoke an outrage that suggested the emergence of a line of attack that might have some staying power. The Bush campaign set up conference calls between reporters and Republican and even Democratic lawmakers who said that an estimated $610 million in unanticipated expenses in Texas would be more than covered by a budget surplus of more than $1 billion. The campaign arranged for Mr. Bush to read a statement publicly denouncing Mr. Gore's tactics on a day when the governor had not planned to make any public appearances. His aides approached major television networks about booking Mr. Bush's senior advisers on weekend news programs. And the language Mr. Bush used to castigate his Democratic rival grew sharper than ever. ''I now know what Bill Bradley meant when he said, 'How can we trust this man as president when we can't trust him as a candidate?' '' Mr. Bush told reporters today at his ranch near Crawford, referring to Mr. Gore's opponent in the Democratic primaries. ''I'm beginning to get a feel for why he uttered those words.'' But was he also beginning to get a little nervous? Republican and Democratic strategists said that Mr. Gore's attack on Mr. Bush's experience and ability as a fiscal manager marked an important moment in the presidential race for several reasons, a situation clearly reflected by the Bush campaign's aggressive reaction. These strategists said that by calling Mr. Bush's aptitude for fiscal responsibility into question, Mr. Gore was challenging Mr. Bush on an issue -- the ability to manage the economy and sustain prosperity -- on which Republicans have often maintained an advantage over Democrats in voters' minds. Additionally, Mr. Gore was doing it in the context of the ever-expanding surplus projections that have become one of the brightest legacies of the Clinton administration. ''Bush's two main strengths are education and the economy, and you don't give when your opponent strikes at your strengths,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster. ''This is still a race about pocketbook issues, and it's where Bush's strengths really lie.'' Other Republican strategists said that while voters often had difficulty making sense of competing education proposals and seldom supported candidates on the basis of rival philosophies about the environment, they understood money, and Mr. Gore's claim that Mr. Bush was not managing it properly amounted to perhaps the boldest attack yet on Mr. Bush's Texas record. That record, several strategist said, was perhaps the principal credential that Mr. Bush carried into this race. ''Polling shows that the view of him as a successful governor is an essential reason why people believe he has the capacity to be a good president,'' said one Republican strategist. ''The Bush campaign can't afford to have that pillar shaken.'' Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said that the vigor that the Bush campaign was bringing to the rebuttal of Mr. Gore's charges about the Texas budget was an offensive of its own, aimed at showing voters how readily Mr. Gore would alter facts to tear down his opponent. ''The question's going to turn on Al Gore's credibility,'' he said in an interview today. ''This is so clear-cut. In the post-Clinton era, one of the key questions is whether voters want four more years of honesty problems.'' But Mr. Gore and his aides were bubbling with confidence today, saying that the questions they had raised about the Texas budget embodied and brought into vivid relief the larger concerns they had been trying to highlight about Mr. Bush's experience and what they see as his nonchalant approach to governing. To hammer home that last point, the Gore campaign has been repeating one of Mr. Bush's quips about the Texas budget. Asked about the budget recently, Mr. Bush alluded to his presidential hopes and said, ''I hope I'm not here to deal with it.'' And Mr. Gore, in a speech before labor leaders in Washington today, said, ''I think that this week will be looked back upon as a turning point.'' The Gore campaign also clearly saw its current line of attack in the context of Mr. Bush's campaign proposal for an enormous tax cut, something that voters have not demonstrated a sharp appetite for and that Mr. Gore has said would endanger continued prosperity. The Gore campaign cited recently released estimates about the cost overruns, primarily in its Medicaid and state prison programs, as evidence that the state budget was out of whack. Mr. Bush's aides said that the state's expected surplus of $1.1 billion would take care of the expenses, and on Thursday, when Mr. Gore came to Texas to denounce Mr. Bush's record on the governor's home turf, the state's Republican comptroller held a news conference in which she raised the surplus estimate to $1.4 billion. But Mr. Gore did not seem to be cowed, and the Bush campaign stepped up its fight today. Mr. Fleischer said that it had asked Republican members of the House and Senate budget committees to hold news conferences in their districts and talk to reporters to make the case that Mr. Gore was playing fast, loose and dishonest with the facts. The Bush campaign also arranged a conference call so that reporters could talk to Representative John Kasich, an Ohio Republican, who is chairman of the House Budget Committee. ''By contrast,'' Mr. Kasich continued, ''four of the eight budgets submitted by the Clinton-Gore administration over the past eight years have left the budget in deficits.'' Several strategists said that part of what the Bush campaign was doing was serving notice to Mr. Gore, at a time when the presidential race is heating up and more voters may begin to pay attention, that it would not let any charge go unanswered. David Doak, a Democratic strategist, said that the motivation behind the response by Mr. Bush and his advisers might be pure anger, amplified by the awareness that Mr. Gore was taking a page out of the kind of assault Mr. Bush's father waged against former Gov. Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts during the 1988 presidential campaign. ''Never underestimate the possibility that he may have just made Bush mad,'' Mr. Doak said. ''These guys are human. They have emotions and feelings and pride and competitiveness.''
 Gov George W Bush gives reporters a tour of his 1,500-acre ranch near Crawford, Tex, which would be a kind of western White House if he wins the presidency; does not pretend to work the land, calling himself a windshield rancher (M) ''It's going to be a little dusty,'' Gov. George W. Bush announced as he walked toward a sport utility vehicle and set off down one of the chalky dirt roads that snake through his roughly 1,500-acre ranch near this blink-and-you've-missed-it town. He was not kidding. The wheels turned, the vehicle lurched forward and a thick, grimy powder filled the air, already heavy from the 100-degree heat. The cattle up ahead looked torpid and ornery. Mr. Bush looked happy and utterly relaxed. ''It's going to be a little dusty,'' Gov. George W. Bush announced as he walked toward a sport utility vehicle and set off down one of the chalky dirt roads that snake through his roughly 1,500-acre ranch near this blink-and-you've-missed-it town. He was not kidding. The wheels turned, the vehicle lurched forward and a thick, grimy powder filled the air, already heavy from the 100-degree heat. The cattle up ahead looked torpid and ornery. Mr. Bush looked happy and utterly relaxed. Here it was: the Texas governor's idea of heaven. Not a cabin on Tahoe or a chalet in Vail but a remote patch of land without a remotely decent restaurant or hotel nearby. During the Republican primaries, Mr. Bush openly pined for it, telling an audience or two how eager he was to return. After he clinched the party's presidential nomination, he arranged his schedule so he could spend most weekends here, even though it meant advisers sometimes had to make the two-hour drive northwest from Austin to see him. ''I'm what you call a windshield rancher,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I get in my pickup and drive all over the place, ranching through the windshield.'' But there is also plenty of relatively flat land with grass that looks desperate for some liquid refreshment. It is in no sense a conventional vacation or weekend home, and that is one of the reasons Mr. Bush likes it so much. It fits his vision of himself as a kind of rugged, simple man without finicky airs or fancy appetites, and it fits into his claim of being someone whose soul is rooted somewhere far from Washington. A house for the Bushes is under construction on the property, and as Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, walked reporters through the structure, the Texas governor said he had made few demands about the design. ''And a good shower,'' Mrs. Bush added. ''And a good shower,'' Mr. Bush agreed. ''That's about all that I care about.'' At their side was the architect they had hired for the project, and the house that they modestly described as a three-bedroom ranch sprawled over perhaps 4,000 square feet, although it was impossible to know. The architect had been forbidden by the Bushes from providing the dimensions, just as he was not allowed to estimate how much the construction would cost. The tour that Mr. Bush gave today also reflected his diligent efforts over the last several months to forge a friendly, informal relationship with the press corps. He invited representatives of most of the nation's largest daily newspapers and all of the major television networks. ''You never forget you're running for president,'' Mr. Bush said, even on more than a thousand acres far from the madding crowd. ''But it gives me perspective. It gives me a lot of balance.''
 Cheney as Bush Favorite  Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary who is heading Gov. George W. Bush's search for a vice presidential nominee, has emerged as a leading contender for the job, changing his voter registration to make his selection possible. Vice President Al Gore asserted that Governor Bush's handling of the Texas budget proved he would be an incompetent steward of the national economy, inclined to squandering the surplus on tax cuts for the rich.
 Article in ongoing series, Governor's Bush's Journey, examining political career of Gov George W Bush; Bush drifted aimlessly for five years after graduating from Yale University, living in three states, holding three full-time jobs and learning to fly fighter planes in Air National Guard; friends and acquaintances recall him as stable, outgoing, hardworking, idealistic young man who cherished his family and was simply trying to figure out his own way in world; photos (M) George W. Bush left Yale University in the spring of 1968 with a diploma in hand but no plans for what to do with it. George W. Bush left Yale University in the spring of 1968 with a diploma in hand but no plans for what to do with it. And this was a period in which Mr. Bush has seemed to acknowledge trying drugs, if only by not denying that he did. Although he has steadfastly refused to answer directly whether he used marijuana, cocaine or other illegal drugs, he said last August that he could have passed a 15-year F.B.I. background check when his father became president, apparently ruling out drug use since 1974, but not before. Indeed, the interviews and an examination of National Guard records create a complicated and sometimes contradictory portrait of Mr. Bush at that time in his life. Mr. Bush sometimes seemed to inhabit two distinctly different social worlds, on some nights joining poolside parties at the Chateau Dijon, an upscale apartment for young professionals, and on others attending formal dances sponsored by an elite club of 100 bachelors. He counted among his friends people who today say they smoked marijuana back then, and acquaintances say they saw him at a popular nightclub where pot was sometimes smoked. (Mr. Bush says he does not recall going there.) Yet dozens of people who knew him well described him as a conservative who preferred to party with beer. These friends professed to be baffled by the questions of drug use that have cropped up in his presidential campaign. He went for months without a steady job, and the jobs he held all came from associates of his father. And he seemed to inhabit a series of successively cheaper, less exclusive apartments in Houston, a city that was about to boom on oil money. Yet friends and acquaintances recalled Mr. Bush as a stable, outgoing, hardworking, unpretentious, idealistic young man who cherished his family and was simply trying to figure out how to make his own way in the world, something he would do a few years later as he started his own business and ran for Congress. Just before leaving Yale, Mr. Bush was accepted into the Texas Air National Guard, thanks largely to the prominence of his family. It was a path that reduced the chance of his being sent to Vietnam. After a summer of basic training, he spent two years on active duty learning to fly, first in Georgia and later at Ellington Air Force Base, near Houston. Another woman who dated Mr. Bush at the time remembered him as ''very nice, very straight. There was a little tension between the two of us. I was 'little miss liberal.' He was more conventional than people I knew.'' The woman, a former beauty queen who is now a lawyer living outside Texas, asked that her name not be used. Robert H. Gow, a colleague of Mr. Bush's father, who hired young George W. in early 1971 to work at his agricultural and horticultural conglomerate, Stratford of Houston, remembered him as ''a presentable, attractive young college student.'' ''I've heard all this about a wild youth, but I never saw it,'' he said. ''He was wearing a Brooks Brothers suit. He showed up on time and worked well past five, as we all did.''  Mr. Bush was assigned to research small nurseries that Mr. Gow hoped to acquire, a job that occasionally took him to Central America. His new boss had been an executive at the elder Bush's Zapata Oil Company and a guest at the Bush home. He gave his young employee a friendly ear. ''It was a big change from what I knew in New England,'' Mr. Gow recalled. ''One time, possibly at the Bushes', I went to a dinner party where one man was talking about walking on the moon. Another transplanted hearts. Another was digging for gold in Guyana. George and I were talking about drilling for oil at the bottom of the ocean. My father thought everybody in Texas must be mad.'' George W. Bush called it home. Former neighbors at the Chateau remembered the youthful Mr. Bush as a ''regular guy'' who did not try to capitalize on his family name. But the Bush name was hard to miss. In the fall of 1970, his father ran for the Senate against the father of another Chateau resident, Lloyd M. Bentsen III, a member of a powerful and wealthy Texas family. Mr. Bush worked in the campaign. ''We had Bush banners stretched across the street,'' remembered Louis Atlas, a neighbor. ''We had banners on our cars. The girls wore Bush scarves.'' In an interview, Mr. Bush smiled as he recalled his days at the Chateau Dijon. ''I'm a person who makes friends easily,'' he said.  ''It didn't matter whether I'd grown up there and gone to the University of Texas. There were University of Texas people there and a lot of other people. My wife-to-be was living in the apartments, although I didn't know her. She was at the other end -- I was at the sedate end, of course. But we had fun. We had a lot of fun.'' Some of the residents of the Chateau, including Mr. Bush, belonged to a social club that was a far cry from beer parties in someone's apartment. It was the Master's Club, an elite group of about 100 bachelors that held formal dances at local country clubs, allowing its members to keep a toehold in the comfortable, exclusive world in which most of them were raised. In late spring 1971, Mr. Bush moved from the Chateau Dijon to an unfurnished one-bedroom garage apartment at 2039 1/2 South Boulevard, an elegant neighborhood near Rice University. Donald Ensenat, an old friend, shared this apartment for the rest of that year. Rosemary Thornton, whose widowed mother, Georgia Corbett, rented the main house at 2039 South Boulevard, said her mother, who was 75 then, liked to sit out on her patio and would banter with Mr. Bush, who ''had to walk down her driveway to get to his place.'' In the fall of 1971, after a year of work at Stratford, Mr. Bush quit and was unemployed for the next five or six months. In an interview he said he spent the time flying with the Air National Guard. He was 25. In a recent interview, former President George Bush and his wife, Barbara, were both asked whether they worried about their son's nomadic period and both dismissed the question. ''He wasn't aimless,'' Mrs. Bush said. ''I don't know why they say that.'' Governor Bush echoed the thought. ''I think they must have had pretty good confidence in their ability to raise children,'' he said, ''plus they had other children to worry about, too. A teenager is a heck of a lot harder to raise than a guy who has just gotten out of college.'' Even though his parents profess to have had little concern at the time, one of his father's friends came forward in May 1972 to offer him a job. Jimmy Allison, a former newspaper publisher in Midland, Tex., who had served as a political adviser to the elder Bush, recruited Mr. Bush to go to Alabama to join the Senate campaign of Winton M. Blount, a Republican novice running against a powerful Democratic incumbent, John J. Sparkman. In a recent interview, Mr. Bush described Mr. Allison, now dead, as ''an older figure who served as a mentor in a way, a wonderful friend.'' Nee Bear, who dated Mr. Bush at the time, said she was struck by how hard Mr. Bush worked for Mr. Blount. ''He wanted to be a hands-on guy,'' remembered Ms. Bear, who first met Mr. Bush while working on the campaign. ''He put bumper stickers on in the parking lot, and believe me, that is the pits. At that time in Alabama, people would spit on you if you were a Republican.'' Kay Blount Miles, who worked in the office for her father's campaign, remembered Mr. Bush as ''funny and fun to be around. He was good at keeping the office up. He worked as part of the team. I never felt he was somebody from the outside coming in.'' Mr. Bush, who monitored the polls, kept the bad news to himself. Not until Election Day did he warn Devere Mclennan, who worked for him and shared an apartment with him, what to expect. ''George explained to me we weren't going to win,'' said Mr. Mclennan, who was expecting a victory. In an interview 28 years later, Mr. Bush remembered the numbers. ''We all teamed together and helped Red get about 36 percent of the vote,'' he said with a short laugh, ''in spite of the fact that Nixon had gotten 72 percent of the vote. The ticket-splitting was phenomenal.'' When Mr. Bush went to work on the campaign he was still obligated to serve in the National Guard, and accordingly he sought a transfer to Alabama. His original request, to serve with the 9921st Air Reserve Squadron in Montgomery, was rejected because the unit would not meet his military obligation. He requested another assignment in July, and the Texas Air National Guard recommended letting him serve with another Montgomery group, the 187th Tactical Recon Group, from September to November 1972. On Sept. 15, 1972, the head of personnel for that unit wrote: ''Lieutenant Bush should report to Lt. Col. William Turnipseed, DCO, to perform equivalent training.'' Questions about Mr. Bush's military service arose in May when The Boston Globe  quoted Mr. Turnipseed, who retired as a general, as saying Mr. Bush never appeared for duty. In an interview, Mr. Bush disagreed. ''I was there. I know this guy was quoted as saying I wasn't, but I was there.'' Emily Marks, who worked in the Blount campaign and dated Mr. Bush, said she recalls that he returned to Montgomery after the election to serve with the Air National Guard. National Guard records provided by the Guard and by the Bush campaign indicate he did serve on Nov. 29, 1972, after the election. These records also show a gap in service from that time to the previous May.  Mr. Bush says he made up for the lost time in subsequent months, and guard records show he received credit for having performed all the required service. Back in Houston, Mr. Bush went to live in a four-unit apartment building at 2910 Westheimer, a busy east-west artery. His downstairs neighbor, a florist, had a dog and refused to let the landlord spray pesticides, Ms. Munson recalled, and ''the roaches were just terrible.'' Asked about other women in Mr. Bush's life at the time, Ms. Bear said: ''Not that summer. Well, I don't know. I spent a good deal of time with him. Mr. Lothario I never got the idea that he was. Do you get the impression he's a big romantic? I don't. He never was wolfish. He was a decent guy. He would never be a kiss-and-tell guy. Never.'' In January 1973, Mr. Bush went to work for a Houston youth program, Professional United Leadership League, or PULL, set up by John L. White, a former professional football player who knew Mr. Bush's father. ''John had a vision of matching off-season athletes with city kids in the Third Ward, and he wanted me to come work with him,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It was 27 years ago, so I don't remember the exact incident where John and I met each other, but I went down, and it was a great experience. Ms. Bear recalled that Mr. Bush ''was trying to get a lot of the baseball players from the Astros and professional athletes to come there and show kids there was a way out. He spent time and energy on those children. He wasn't a dilettante who comes in and says, 'This will look good on my resume.' It was during this time that Mr. Bush applied to Harvard Business School, a move for which he thanks Mr. White. ''A friend of mine sent me the application, and I really didn't seem to be that interested,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And his attitude was, 'Well, it's a great challenge, and you ought to try it.' '' George Bush's Journey This is the seventh in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will look at George W. Bush's entry into politics. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: GOVERNOR BUSH'S JOURNEY  Correction:  July 27, 2000, Thursday  An article on Saturday about Gov. George W. Bush's life in the five years after he left Yale misstated the name of an agricultural company that hired him in 1971. It was Stratford of Texas, not Stratford of Houston. An article on Saturday about Gov. George W. Bush's life in the five years after he left Yale misstated the name of an agricultural company that hired him in 1971. It was Stratford of Texas, not Stratford of Houston.
 Correction of July 21 article about Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign trip to Texas Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's campaign trip to Texas referred incorrectly to remarks made by Gov. George W. Bush in response. He read a statement to reporters; it was not merely distributed. Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's campaign trip to Texas referred incorrectly to remarks made by Gov. George W. Bush in response. He read a statement to reporters; it was not merely distributed.
