 ''It would be a misinterpretation of this paper to say, 'There's a genius spot in the brain,' '' said Dr. Marie T. Banich, a cognitive neuroscientist at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Dr. Robert J. Sternberg, a psychologist at Yale University who wrote a ''Perspectives'' essay to accompany the new study, said in an interview: ''This is a very narrow view of intelligence. Many psychologists are obsessed with I.Q.-type tests, but such tests don't tell you who is going to be successful in life and who isn't.'' He pointed out in his Perspectives piece that Vice President Al Gore, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and former Senator Bill Bradley all scored just middling-well on the verbal portion of the College Boards, yet all, he said, would be considered exceptionally successful Americans. Correction:  July 22, 2000, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's campaign trip to Texas referred incorrectly to remarks made by Gov. George W. Bush in response. He read a statement to reporters; it was not merely distributed. Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's campaign trip to Texas referred incorrectly to remarks made by Gov. George W. Bush in response. He read a statement to reporters; it was not merely distributed.
 Vice Pres Al Gore blows into Gov George W Bush's home territory, suggesting that Bush has skewed priorities that have made Texas into backwater where big oil interests are more important than children's health; Bush responds; photo of Tore at earlier stop in Cedar Rapids, Iowa (M) Vice President Al Gore blew into Gov. George W. Bush's home territory today to try to undercut the governor's popularity, suggesting that Mr. Bush's priorities were skewed and had made Texas a backwater where big oil interests are more important than children's health. ''Now, this is a wonderful state,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But I think it should be -- and I think most people agree -- it should be a state where it's just as easy to raise a child as it is to set up an oil rig.'' Vice President Al Gore blew into Gov. George W. Bush's home territory today to try to undercut the governor's popularity, suggesting that Mr. Bush's priorities were skewed and had made Texas a backwater where big oil interests are more important than children's health. ''Now, this is a wonderful state,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But I think it should be -- and I think most people agree -- it should be a state where it's just as easy to raise a child as it is to set up an oil rig.'' Mr. Gore also confronted head on the common assumption, backed up in polls, that voters prefer Mr. Bush's personality, warning that the presidency was not a ''popularity contest.'' ''I understand that Governor Bush is a popular and well-liked governor here, and I want to give him some credit on that score,'' Mr. Gore told a hastily arranged forum of a dozen adults, including Democratic state legislators, three single mothers and a few squirming children. ''I think he has a warm and engaging personality but, you know, the presidency is more than just a popularity contest,'' Mr. Gore went on. ''It involves whether or not you're willing to fight for what's right, whether or not you're willing to spend popularity to do difficult, hard things. And that's where you get to priorities.'' Mr. Gore diverted his campaign to Texas today to try to take advantage of questions emerging about the state budget, which has $610 million in cost overruns. The Bush campaign, which called Mr. Gore's visit a gimmick, said the vice president was raising more questions about his own credibility than he was about the stewardship of Texas, accusing him of distorting the budget situation. The state comptroller, a Republican supporter of Mr. Bush, announced today that the state had $1.4 billion in cash on hand, more than enough to cover any spending overruns. Mr. Bush held a brief news conference at the governor's mansion this afternoon and, when asked about Mr. Gore's visit, said, ''I welcome him here.'' But in prepared remarks that were never delivered, Mr. Bush took a tougher line. ''I am disappointed that the vice president of all the United States would come to one of those states and try to mislead people about its budget,'' his statement said. ''Our Texas budget is balanced and in the black. We have a surplus of $1.4 billion in the bank. For Vice President Gore to claim otherwise for his own political purposes is a travesty -- he should be ashamed.'' Dan Bartlett a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said Mr. Gore's chief distortion was painting a $1.7 billion tax cut pushed by Mr. Bush and his allies as a special break for the oil industry. Mr. Bartlett said that the oil industry's share amounted to just $20 million, and that most of the tax break had been applied to reducing school property taxes. Mr. Gore said the central question was one of priorities. His press secretary, Chris Lehane, said Mr. Bush's priorities ''raise questions about whether he has what it takes to be president.'' This was a theme that Mr. Gore had tried out earlier this spring but dropped when advisers said it was too early to be so negative. It still seemed the major risk today for Mr. Gore, which is why he opened his remarks with a nod to Mr. Bush's congeniality, Gore supporters acknowledged. Still, his advisers said this would become a central theme as the campaign developed. For his setting today, Mr. Gore chose a hotel on the outskirts of town, nailing down the details about midnight the night before. His format was intimate: people  sat on chairs and a couch next to Mr. Gore, who was facing a bank of cameras, including those of CNN, which broadcast the event live. On the blue-curtained backdrop, aides had pinned Lone Star flags, suggesting that the vice president was staking a claim in the heart of Bush territory. Whether Mr. Gore changes the minds of many Texans remains to be seen, but they were not really the audience today. At the moment, nearly three-fourths of the state's voters say they support Mr. Bush. Gore aides conceded that today's event was aimed chiefly at voters beyond Texas, particularly swing voters, women and core Democrats who may find the governor an appealing figure, but who would be offended at what Mr. Gore tried to portray as Mr. Bush's disregard for health care, children and the environment. One of Mr. Gore's most serious charges was that Texas had not only favored oil companies and other special interests over health care for children, but that it had deliberately made applying for children's health insurance a cumbersome process, so the state would have more money available for the oil companies. ''If a state finds ways to discourage families from signing up for CHIP, the state saves money in its budget,'' Mr. Gore said, referring to the government Children's Health Insurance Program. ''If they create obstacles, and families get the idea they shouldn't participate, the state can use the money for other things, like a tax break for the oil companies.'' Mr. Bartlett, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said Mr. Gore was blurring the line between Medicaid and the health insurance program. He said that applications for the children's health program were simple and could be mailed in. Mr. Bartlett also said that, contrary to Mr. Gore's assertion, Texas was one of 12 states, not the only one, that required people to reapply every six months for Medicaid. As for Mr. Gore's comments on Mr. Bush's personality, Mr. Bartlett said: ''This contest is going to be, 'Who do the American people trust with their money and their priorities?' And if we're going to base this on the fiscal stewardship of Texas compared to the lack of Al Gore's credibility, we relish the fight.''
 David Letterman invites Al Gore and George W Bush to appear on his television program for full-scale debate; says Gore has accepted (S) David Letterman said on his late-night talk show this week that he had asked Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to appear on his program for a full-scale debate, and that Mr. Gore had immediately accepted. David Letterman said on his late-night talk show this week that he had asked Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to appear on his program for a full-scale debate, and that Mr. Gore had immediately accepted. A spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, Mindy Tucker, said yesterday that the Bush campaign had just received the invitation and was ''happy to consider the offer.'' Getting Mr. Gore to consent to the encounter was not that hard. Chris Lehane, his campaign press secretary, said that the vice president has already accepted about 40 invitations to debate Mr. Bush. Both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have already been guests on Mr. Letterman's show, though Mr. Bush made an uncomfortable appearance on the program by satellite during the primaries that was widely viewed as a political minus for him.
 Vice Pres Gore's criticisms of social and environmental conditions in Texas, home state of his presidential rival, prickle Texans, who have long believed that outsiders do not understand their outsized state and never will; several declare themselves Proud of Texas Committee to defend honor of state, although news release fails to mention that four of five members are also supporters of Gov George W Bush; Texans discuss stereotypes old and new (M) For months, Vice President Al Gore and other national Democrats have depicted George W. Bush's Texas as all but a third-world country. Pollution? Mr. Gore says Texas is the most polluted state in America. Poverty? Mr. Gore says that too many of Texas' people are poor and that the state does too little for them. Mr. Gore even came to Texas today to continue the criticism, questioning Mr. Bush's handling of the state budget and his priorities as governor. Lagging schools, children without health insurance, pockets of disease -- Mr. Gore's ever-expanding list of Texas woe leaves out mosquitoes and big hair, but it does go on. For months, Vice President Al Gore and other national Democrats have depicted George W. Bush's Texas as all but a third-world country. Pollution? Mr. Gore says Texas is the most polluted state in America. Poverty? Mr. Gore says that too many of Texas' people are poor and that the state does too little for them. Mr. Gore even came to Texas today to continue the criticism, questioning Mr. Bush's handling of the state budget and his priorities as governor. Lagging schools, children without health insurance, pockets of disease -- Mr. Gore's ever-expanding list of Texas woe leaves out mosquitoes and big hair, but it does go on. ''Texas isn't nearly as backward and third world as the Gore campaign would make us out,'' protested Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly magazine. ''I personally am starting to get offended.'' Last week Mr. Levy and four other Texans, none of them unfamiliar with politics or publicity, declared themselves the Proud of Texas Committee. They wrote to Mr. Gore, pledging to defend the honor of their state against his ''misrepresentations.'' In another era, that might have involved pistols; in modern Texas, a news release sufficed. (The release neglected to mention, however, that four of the committee's five members are campaign contributors to Governor Bush, a fact Democratic officials happily pointed out.) Because below-average immunization rates in Houston and elsewhere made Texas ''ripe for epidemic'' -- a playful political swipe that angered local health officials. (In reply, Bush campaign aides noted that Houston's mayor, Lee Brown, is a Democrat and a Gore supporter.) Campaigning across the country, Mr. Gore regularly blames Mr. Bush for statistics that show Texas leads the nation in many pollution categories, has one of the highest numbers of children lacking health insurance and still lags in many national education rankings. In recent days, with state spending overruns causing headlines here, Mr. Gore has denounced Texas' fiscal ''mess.'' ''If Governor Bush ran America the way he has run the state of Texas, our prosperity would vanish and our progress would be blocked,'' Mr. Gore said in San Antonio today at a meeting with parents of children who have no health insurance. Mr. Bush and his staff have aggressively contested Mr. Gore's attacks, accusing him of misrepresenting some facts and taking others out of context. They say that pollution has declined during the five and a half years of the Bush administration and that the state is doing more to insure poor children. They point to national studies showing educational gains in the state, and fiercely rebut Mr. Gore's fiscal criticism, noting that the state today announced a budget surplus. Mr. Gore does have some admirers in Texas, and they maintain that regardless of any bruised feelings, the criticism is unavoidable and necessary. ''It's one thing to have your own family point out that you have an ugly house, it's another to have someone else say it,'' said Jim Hightower, the liberal Democrat and former state agriculture commissioner who now writes books and is host of a radio talk show. ''But there it is. It seems to me that we're not in a very good position to whine about what Gore is saying.'' Mr. Gore, of course, is not indulging in a radical new political tactic. In fact, his role model could well be Mr. Bush's father. In 1988, Vice President George Bush toured Boston Harbor to harangue his Democratic opponent, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, about pollution. And in 1992, when Mr. Bush, as president, belittled Bill Clinton's Arkansas as a ''small state,'' Ross Perot, the Reform Party's nominee and himself a Texan, found the theme hard to resist. ''I could say that I ran a small grocery store on the corner,'' Mr. Perot offered as an analogy. ''Therefore I extrapolate that into the fact that I could run Wal-Mart. That's not true.'' Other affronts are subtler. Gregory Curtis, who recently stepped down as editor of Texas Monthly, recalls that guests at a cocktail party in New York seemed genuinely surprised that he had bought his tailored suits in Texas. Mr. Curtis used one of his final columns before leaving the magazine to excoriate the national media, especially The New York Times, accusing them of portraying Mr. Bush and Texas unfairly. The outside criticism has in recent weeks spurred a modest tizzy in the state media, spilling from news accounts of the latest Gore broadside to editorial musings about what it all means to Texas. ''Gov. George W. Bush has more than a presidential campaign at stake,'' William McKenzie of The Dallas Morning News wrote in an editorial last week. ''The idea of Texas itself also is at play in his race for the White House.''
 BRADLEY TO CAMPAIGN IN HOMETOWN  Former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey will campaign in his hometown of Crystal City, Mo., on Saturday with Gov. Mel Carnahan, a Democrat who is trying to unseat Senator John Ashcroft, a one-term Republican, in one of the year's hardest-fought Congressional races. The event will be part of a four-day, 22-stop train tour across Missouri by Mr. Carnahan that is intended to recreate the 1948 whistle-stop tours around America by another Missourian, President Harry S. Truman. Mr. Bradley will be campaigning for just the second time since he dropped out of the Democratic presidential primaries in March; last week, he endorsed Vice President Al Gore in Wisconsin. Although Mr. Bradley lost the Missouri primary to Mr. Gore, he remains wildly popular in Crystal City, the small town on the Mississippi River where he kicked off his presidential campaign last year. BRADLEY TO CAMPAIGN IN HOMETOWN  Former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey will campaign in his hometown of Crystal City, Mo., on Saturday with Gov. Mel Carnahan, a Democrat who is trying to unseat Senator John Ashcroft, a one-term Republican, in one of the year's hardest-fought Congressional races. The event will be part of a four-day, 22-stop train tour across Missouri by Mr. Carnahan that is intended to recreate the 1948 whistle-stop tours around America by another Missourian, President Harry S. Truman. Mr. Bradley will be campaigning for just the second time since he dropped out of the Democratic presidential primaries in March; last week, he endorsed Vice President Al Gore in Wisconsin. Although Mr. Bradley lost the Missouri primary to Mr. Gore, he remains wildly popular in Crystal City, the small town on the Mississippi River where he kicked off his presidential campaign last year. BUSH LEAD SLIPS IN OHIO  Gov. George W. Bush has lost some ground to Vice President Al Gore in Ohio, considered a swing state in the fall election, a new poll shows. The poll, released yesterday by the University of Cincinnati's Institute for Policy Research, has Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore by four points in a two-candidate field, 49 percent to 45 percent, and by six points, 47 percent to 41 percent, in a four-candidate field that includes Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party and Ralph Nader of the Green Party. In April, a poll by the institute gave Mr. Bush a nine-point lead over Mr. Gore in a two-candidate race and an eight-point lead when Mr. Buchanan and Mr. Nader were included. In both polls the third-party candidates had 4 percent or less. The new poll, which surveyed 537 likely voters from July 5 to 13 and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points, also found that roughly a third of Bush and Gore supporters might switch their vote to another candidate before Nov. 7.
 Richard Malwitz letter questions logic of July 19 editorial urging George W Bush to select pro-choice running-mate (S) In ''A Pro-Choice Chance for Mr. Bush'' (editorial, July 19), you urge Gov. George W. Bush to choose a pro-choice running mate to respect the views of Republican Party members ''who do not march in lockstep'' with the anti-abortion wing of the party. In ''A Pro-Choice Chance for Mr. Bush'' (editorial, July 19), you urge Gov. George W. Bush to choose a pro-choice running mate to respect the views of Republican Party members ''who do not march in lockstep'' with the anti-abortion wing of the party. What about those who are registered Democrats and pro-life? Does that mean Vice President Al Gore should choose a pro-life running mate to respect those of us who will not walk in lockstep with the pro-choice wing of our party?
 Vice Pres Gore's criticisms of social and environmental conditions in Texas, home state of his presidential rival, prickle Texans, who have long believed that outsiders do not understand their outsized state and never will; several declare themselves Proud of Texas Committee to defend honor of state, although news release fails to mention that four of five members are also supporters of Gov George W Bush; Texans discuss stereotypes old and new (M) For months, Vice President Al Gore and other national Democrats have depicted George W. Bush's Texas as all but a third-world country. Pollution? Mr. Gore says Texas is the most polluted state in America. Poverty? Mr. Gore says that too many of Texas' people are poor and that the state does too little for them. Mr. Gore even came to Texas today to continue the criticism, questioning Mr. Bush's handling of the state budget and his priorities as governor. Lagging schools, children without health insurance, pockets of disease -- Mr. Gore's ever-expanding list of Texas woe leaves out mosquitoes and big hair, but it does go on. For months, Vice President Al Gore and other national Democrats have depicted George W. Bush's Texas as all but a third-world country. Pollution? Mr. Gore says Texas is the most polluted state in America. Poverty? Mr. Gore says that too many of Texas' people are poor and that the state does too little for them. Mr. Gore even came to Texas today to continue the criticism, questioning Mr. Bush's handling of the state budget and his priorities as governor. Lagging schools, children without health insurance, pockets of disease -- Mr. Gore's ever-expanding list of Texas woe leaves out mosquitoes and big hair, but it does go on. ''Texas isn't nearly as backward and third world as the Gore campaign would make us out,'' protested Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly magazine. ''I personally am starting to get offended.'' Last week Mr. Levy and four other Texans, none of them unfamiliar with politics or publicity, declared themselves the Proud of Texas Committee. They wrote to Mr. Gore, pledging to defend the honor of their state against his ''misrepresentations.'' In another era, that might have involved pistols; in modern Texas, a news release sufficed. (The release neglected to mention, however, that four of the committee's five members are campaign contributors to Governor Bush, a fact Democratic officials happily pointed out.) Because below-average immunization rates in Houston and elsewhere made Texas ''ripe for epidemic'' -- a playful political swipe that angered local health officials. (In reply, Bush campaign aides noted that Houston's mayor, Lee Brown, is a Democrat and a Gore supporter.) Campaigning across the country, Mr. Gore regularly blames Mr. Bush for statistics that show Texas leads the nation in many pollution categories, has one of the highest numbers of children lacking health insurance and still lags in many national education rankings. In recent days, with state spending overruns causing headlines here, Mr. Gore has denounced Texas' fiscal ''mess.'' ''If Governor Bush ran America the way he has run the state of Texas, our prosperity would vanish and our progress would be blocked,'' Mr. Gore said in San Antonio today at a meeting with parents of children who have no health insurance. Mr. Bush and his staff have aggressively contested Mr. Gore's attacks, accusing him of misrepresenting some facts and taking others out of context. They say that pollution has declined during the five and a half years of the Bush administration and that the state is doing more to insure poor children. They point to national studies showing educational gains in the state, and fiercely rebut Mr. Gore's fiscal criticism, noting that the state today announced a budget surplus. Mr. Gore does have some admirers in Texas, and they maintain that regardless of any bruised feelings, the criticism is unavoidable and necessary. ''It's one thing to have your own family point out that you have an ugly house, it's another to have someone else say it,'' said Jim Hightower, the liberal Democrat and former state agriculture commissioner who now writes books and is host of a radio talk show. ''But there it is. It seems to me that we're not in a very good position to whine about what Gore is saying.'' Mr. Gore, of course, is not indulging in a radical new political tactic. In fact, his role model could well be Mr. Bush's father. In 1988, Vice President George Bush toured Boston Harbor to harangue his Democratic opponent, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, about pollution. And in 1992, when Mr. Bush, as president, belittled Bill Clinton's Arkansas as a ''small state,'' Ross Perot, the Reform Party's nominee and himself a Texan, found the theme hard to resist. ''I could say that I ran a small grocery store on the corner,'' Mr. Perot offered as an analogy. ''Therefore I extrapolate that into the fact that I could run Wal-Mart. That's not true.'' Other affronts are subtler. Gregory Curtis, who recently stepped down as editor of Texas Monthly, recalls that guests at a cocktail party in New York seemed genuinely surprised that he had bought his tailored suits in Texas. Mr. Curtis used one of his final columns before leaving the magazine to excoriate the national media, especially The New York Times, accusing them of portraying Mr. Bush and Texas unfairly. The outside criticism has in recent weeks spurred a modest tizzy in the state media, spilling from news accounts of the latest Gore broadside to editorial musings about what it all means to Texas. ''Gov. George W. Bush has more than a presidential campaign at stake,'' William McKenzie of The Dallas Morning News wrote in an editorial last week. ''The idea of Texas itself also is at play in his race for the White House.''
 Saul Axelrod letter warns against clever manipulation by George W Bush to reassure pro-choice voters on abortion issue (S) Re ''A Pro-Choice Chance for Mr. Bush'' (editorial, July 19): You write that ''a pro-choice running mate would reassure swing voters who worry that Governor Bush is a pleasant man with a secret hard-line agenda.'' Re ''A Pro-Choice Chance for Mr. Bush'' (editorial, July 19): You write that ''a pro-choice running mate would reassure swing voters who worry that Governor Bush is a pleasant man with a secret hard-line agenda.'' Clever manipulation should not reassure you or any American. What would be reassuring would be for Gov. George W. Bush to make direct statements about where he stands and how he would appoint Supreme Court justices.
 Presidential election is very competitive contest, with George W Bush's lead quite slim at time when both he and Al Gore have ample opportunity to surge ahead; analysis of opinion polls and interviews with party strategists reveal enough flux in key states for convention events and fall debates to either overturn or solidify Bush's lead; map; no dominant issue is defining race, so that local considerations might well determine outcome in crucial states (M) Despite the confidence displayed by Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, the presidential election today stands as a very competitive contest, with ample time and opportunity for either him or Vice President Al Gore to surge ahead. At a first glance of the electoral map, opinion polls show Mr. Bush is leading in enough states to assure him an electoral college victory. But in many of those states, the governor's margin is quite slim. Moreover, Election Day is more than three months off, and the contest is entering a crucial phase where the choice of running mates and the message the conventions deliver could define the race. Despite the confidence displayed by Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, the presidential election today stands as a very competitive contest, with ample time and opportunity for either him or Vice President Al Gore to surge ahead. At a first glance of the electoral map, opinion polls show Mr. Bush is leading in enough states to assure him an electoral college victory. But in many of those states, the governor's margin is quite slim. Moreover, Election Day is more than three months off, and the contest is entering a crucial phase where the choice of running mates and the message the conventions deliver could define the race. An analysis of opinion polls state by state, along with interviews with Republican and Democratic strategists in the campaigns and around the country, found enough crucial states that are so competitive that those midsummer events, and the fall debates to follow, could overturn the current standings in state after state. Or they could solidify Mr. Bush's position. For all the emphasis in the news media on national polls, where Mr. Bush has maintained long-standing but narrowing leads, both campaigns are paying closer attention to the outlook in individual states, because the goal for each side is to plot a path to collect the 270 electoral votes needed for victory. On Wednesday, Mr. Gore's top lieutenants held a conference call to make important decisions about which states they should pump more resources into -- or not. Gore campaign officials said they had decided, for instance, not to spend as much in Illinois as they had planned because they felt confident in Mr. Gore's prospects there. Just the same, one Bush campaign official said that Mr. Bush was doing better than he expected in Arizona, Colorado and Montana and, as a result, the campaign could scale back its spending in those states. The state-by-state analysis shows that Mr. Gore is most potent along the coasts, while Mr. Bush has an inland foundation in the South and mountain states. That leaves the race to turn on several states in the industrial Midwest. For now, Mr. Bush appears safe in 18 states with 140 electoral votes, from Texas to Alaska to Virginia. Another 11 states, including Florida, Michigan and Oregon -- with a combined 138 electoral votes -- seem to be leaning his way, though many of them could easily change quickly. If all these states went for Mr. Bush, it would give him 278 electoral votes, 8  more than needed for election. On the face of it, if Mr. Bush won all the states that are safe or lean his way, with a total of 278 electoral votes, he could win without taking any of the tossups. But while many more states are leaning toward Mr. Bush, polls and politicians agree that in several important states, the governor is barely ahead. It would not take a shift of too many voters to deny him Ohio, Missouri and Florida, and then his total would drop precipitously, to 221 electors. Neither campaign agrees with this analysis. The Bush camp still insists that the Governor is comfortably ahead. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, said in an interview that Mr. Gore had made some progress in drawing support from Democrats who had been reluctant to support him. But he said there was no sign that he was pulling any support from Mr. Bush. Republicans have also been encouraged that Mr. Nader has siphoned some support from Mr. Gore in several states, and by Mr. Bush's strength in some historical Democratic pockets, like Minnesota. The race there is a tossup. William M. Daley, chairman of the Gore campaign, disputed the idea of even a tentative Bush advantage. ''I think it's basically a dead heat, basically where it's been for months,'' Mr. Daley said. ''People aren't into it. There's a whole slew of states out there because people aren't focused. Nothing has grabbed them yet.'' Richard Graber, the chairman of the Republican Party in Wisconsin, marveled at polls in his state showing Mr. Bush slightly ahead. ''There is a different energy and a different feel from what we had four years ago,'' Mr. Graber said. ''We were written off very early in the process. There was no money in this state. There was no TV. It was really free ride for Clinton. That's not the case'' this year. The competitiveness of Wisconsin helped explain why that is one of 26 states Mr. Bush has campaigned in since May. Candidates spend very little time in states they expect to lose. Mr. Gore has popped up in Indiana, for example, not once since May, or about as often as Mr. Bush has traveled to Massachusetts (once). Sometimes candidates take an occasional tactical foray designed to befuddle the opposition. Mr. Gore traveled to Mr. Bush's state of Texas today not because he thinks he has a chance there but to draw free national publicity as he condemned the governor's record. And unless there is money to be collected, candidates do not venture into states that they consider sure to win. They campaign, in person and on television, in the states where they think they lead or trail narrowly. For example, starting last month, Mr. Gore began spending heavily on television commercials aimed at 18 states: Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Louisiana, Georgia, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Kentucky, Iowa, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New Mexico, Ohio, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin. Republicans were on the air for two weeks, went off, and then resumed the battle of the airwaves this week. Mr. Rove said the Gore commercials had no impact. ''There are now seven states where we have polling that took place before their advertising and polling that took place after,'' he said. ''And in all seven of the states, we've held ground or moved up. The only way it may have helped is to keep us from moving ahead.'' He said the advertisements were ''based on a flawed assumption that people are going to pay a lot of attention to advertising during the summer.'' But Tad Devine, a top strategist for Mr. Gore, countered that the polls cited by the Bush camp were unreliable. ''That's a little three-card monte on their side,'' he said, arguing that Bush operatives made a ''terrible error in strategic judgment'' by not keep the campaign's commercials running -- and forfeited an opportunity to build bigger leads in several states. Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School at the University of Pennsylvania, disagrees with the Bush camp as well. She is conducting the largest polling operation of the year, 100,000 interviews this year in key states night after night. Dean Jamieson studied the eight states where Mr. Gore (through the financial fig leaf of the Democratic National Committee) spent at least $300,000 more than Mr. Bush (through the Republican National Committee). Those states were Florida, Illinois, Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Oregon, and Pennsylvania. Over all, Dean Jamieson found that Mr. Gore had gained 10 percentage points on average in those states. ''He was closing substantially,'' she said. ''It is reasonable to say the ads worked.'' After months in which Mr. Bush seemed to have the advantage, national polls made public this week showed the race closer than previous surveys by the same organizations. Those national polls, with their consistent methodology, provide a rough guidelines to the contours of any presidential race. ''It's close now, and the movement mainly is on Gore's end,'' said John Zogby, an independent pollster. MICHIGAN -- Leans Bush. He has campaigned hard in the state, and almost all of Mr. Nader's support, eight percent in one recent poll, is coming out of Mr. Gore's base. Hostility from the auto workers and teamsters are making it harder for him to capitalize on economic issues. MISSOURI -- Leans Bush. This is always a swing state, and one that has picked a presidential winner every time since 1956, when it backed Adlai Stevenson. Bush is well-organized, and Gore has not solidified the union support. FLORIDA -- Leans Bush. But this is a wild card. Gov. Jeb Bush, Mr. Bush's brother, said in an interview that he was determined not to let his state slip through. ''I'm certainly not going to be embarrassed and have the state go the other way,'' Mr. Bush said. Nevertheless, Al Cardenas, the state Republican chairman, said he feared that Mr. Gore could pick Bob Graham, the popular Senator from the state, as his running mate, which would force a competition there. ''If Graham gives him a couple of points in Florida, in a tight race we obviously would have to work a little harder,'' Mr. Cardenas said. ILLINOIS -- Leans Gore. Brad Goodrich, the Republican Party's executive director, argues that Mr. Bush holds a slim lead and that Mr. Gore's advertisements have had no effect. But Senator Richard Durbin, a Democrat and a potential running mate, said polling information he had received from Gore headquarters showed the vice president now leading by a few points. Mayor Richard M. Daley of Chicago is expected to work hard for the Gore campaign. OHIO -- Leans Bush. Polls in this state, which has a history of close outcomes, have see-sawed. Robert Bennett, chairman of the state Republican Party, said that while his candidate was ahead, it is not by much. He is well aware that the dynamic could change as the convention opens at the end of the month. ''We could have a blow up at the convention of some sort,'' he said. But David Leland, the state Democratic chairman, said it was no accident that Mr. Gore had ventured to the state at least nine times since the campaign began. ''We won't lose this race for lack of attention,'' he said. PENNSYLVANIA -- Tossup. Mr. Gore is cutting into Republican strength in the Philadelphia suburbs, while Mr. Bush is strong in the southwestern mining counties, and has a strong organization. Mr. Bush would be strongly favored if he chose Gov. Tom Ridge as his running mate, but Senator Arlen Specter fears Mr. Bush could lose support if it appeared that his reason for rejecting Mr. Ridge was the abortion issue. WASHINGTON -- Tossup. Mr. Gore got a boost this week when the Clinton Administration decided not to blow up dams on the Lower Snake River to improve the salmon habitat. The issue had been killing him in Eastern Washington where farmers depend on hydroelectric power.
 ''She's been at the front and center of every Clinton-Gore scandal and this has been the most seedy, shameless and corrupt administration in American history,'' says the letter, first disclosed yesterday by The Associated Press. Mr. Powers also refers to Mrs. Clinton's daughter, Chelsea, noting that Mrs. Clinton did not send Chelsea to school in New York.
 George W Bush's campaign begins running first major television commercials of general election, concentrating on four states that could tip electoral balance (M) Concentrating on four states that political strategists say could tip the electoral balance this fall, the Bush campaign yesterday began running its first major television commercials of the general election, a kind of sunny prologue to the Republican convention that begins in 10 days. The three commercials, produced by the campaign's own advertising agency, Maverick Media, went on the air in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida and Washington State in what Ari Fleischer, a campaign spokesman, described as a ''multimillion-dollar ad buy.'' Bush officials would not say how long the commercials would run, or whether more states might be added. Concentrating on four states that political strategists say could tip the electoral balance this fall, the Bush campaign yesterday began running its first major television commercials of the general election, a kind of sunny prologue to the Republican convention that begins in 10 days. The three commercials, produced by the campaign's own advertising agency, Maverick Media, went on the air in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida and Washington State in what Ari Fleischer, a campaign spokesman, described as a ''multimillion-dollar ad buy.'' Bush officials would not say how long the commercials would run, or whether more states might be added. But the choice of television markets was an instant subject for dissection by Gore campaign officials, who pointed to the inclusion of Florida as a sign that some crucial states which might normally be safely in the Republican column were viewed by the Bush campaign as in need of some media triage. Florida's governor, Jeb Bush, being the brother of the presumptive nominee, gave them additional fodder. ''I think that documents the fact that Florida is really in play,'' said Chris Lehane, the Gore campaign press secretary. ''Right now, it's a virtual dead heat.'' Though Florida's 25 electoral votes went for the Clinton-Gore ticket in 1996, over the past three decades the state voted more typically for Republican presidential candidates. Republicans hold the majority in the state's Congressional delegation, and Florida is the first former Confederate state to have a legislature under Republican control. Tony Welch, a spokesman for the Florida Democratic Party, said newspapers in the state had put the television advertising investment by the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee at about $1 million. ''You don't spend a million dollars in a safe state,'' Mr. Welch said. Aides to Vice President Al Gore would not say whether the campaign would respond rapidly with commercials of its own. Up to now, spots featuring the presumptive nominees have been run exclusively by the Democratic and Republican national committees; the Democrats alone are expected to have spent about $25 million by the time they open their convention in Los Angeles next month. Mr. Fleischer said that the 30-second spots were designed to reinforce presidential qualities of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''The theme running through the ads is leadership. Now is the time in American history we can exercise bold leadership willing to unite America.'' Indeed, the commercials concede a point that Mr. Gore has made a cornerstone of his campaign this summer, that the country is enjoying an unparalleled era of prosperity. The Bush campaign argues in the advertisements that the national economic upswing should be the foundation for a shift to Republican leadership committed to solving complicated problems like how to shore up Social Security and raise standards in schools. In one spot, titled ''Hard Things,'' Mr. Bush looks into the camera and says, ''This is a moment in history when we have a chance to focus on tough problems. It's not always popular to say, 'Our children can't read, or Social Security needs improving, or we have a budget surplus and a deficit of values.' But those are the right things to say.'' While political spots are sometimes tested with focus groups before being put on the air, these were not, said a Bush adviser who spoke on condition of anonymity. But in market surveys of voters, the adviser said, ''consistently, for some reason, Bush scores overwhelmingly higher than Gore on the question of strong leadership.'' Greg Stevens, who made the commercials for Senator John McCain of Arizona during the primaries, said the Bush campaign's selection of states for the media buy was ''probably smart,'' in that ''if they can block him in Florida, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Washington, Gore can't win.''
 David Brooks Op-Ed article reports there is not much romance in George W Bush's professional campaign staff, and finds campaign about as insurgent as General Electric; drawing (M) Has there ever been a presidential campaign headquarters more boring than George W. Bush's? The Bush people don't have staff shake-ups. They haven't had to move the offices so the candidate could find himself. They don't even spend their days gossiping on the phone or backbiting their superiors. The fact is they are grinds. The atmosphere in Austin is dull and professional, according to people who spend a lot of time there. The offices look like they belong to a corporate law firm, and the Bushies squirrel away in their cubicles from dawn till dark. They operate like a White House in waiting, with sophisticated paper routing, West Wing-style briefings, and multilayered speech vetting. One gets the impression that if they ever did have a late night pizza bash, they'd use knives, forks and cloth napkins. Has there ever been a presidential campaign headquarters more boring than George W. Bush's? The Bush people don't have staff shake-ups. They haven't had to move the offices so the candidate could find himself. They don't even spend their days gossiping on the phone or backbiting their superiors. The fact is they are grinds. The atmosphere in Austin is dull and professional, according to people who spend a lot of time there. The offices look like they belong to a corporate law firm, and the Bushies squirrel away in their cubicles from dawn till dark. They operate like a White House in waiting, with sophisticated paper routing, West Wing-style briefings, and multilayered speech vetting. One gets the impression that if they ever did have a late night pizza bash, they'd use knives, forks and cloth napkins. But this season there are no outsiders. The Bush campaign is about as insurgent as General Electric or I.B.M. If the Bushies win, they can cancel the White House orientation because everybody will have already worked there. The foreign policy team is like a Desert Storm reunion tour: Colin Powell, Dick Cheney, Condoleezza Rice, Paul Wolfowitz and Robert Zoellick all worked for President George Bush. One exception is Richard Perle, and he worked in the Reagan administration. On the domestic side are prominent Bush administration alumni like Lawrence Lindsey, Josh Bolton and Michael Boskin. The Bush campaign looks as much like an incumbent campaign as the Gore one. Measured by governing experience, the edge actually goes to the G.O.P. It was not long ago that the Republicans were neck-deep in populism. In the Gingrich era, this was the party of term limits. But now the G.O.P. is enthusiastic about a campaign of seasoned veterans. This really does represent a Risorgimento of the establishment. From the 1970's to the 1990's, the New Right adopted some of the mindset of the New Left. It was better to be an anti-establishment rebel than an insider or a member of the mainstream. It was cool to call yourself a radical and a revolutionary. But since the Gingrich revolution flamed out, the establishmentarians have reasserted themselves. They saw George W. Bush as their vehicle for retaking their party. They chose him as much as he gathered them. So now we have a situation in which the challenger looks like a steadier hand than the sitting vice president. Even as Mr. Bush has been getting gravitas implants from the G.O.P. elder statesmen, Al Gore has adopted the pose of a protean outsider, first moving his headquarters to Nashville from Washington and then posing as a populist to counter the challenge of Ralph Nader. Worse, whereas Mr. Bush has accumulated the 1927 Yankees of foreign policy advisers, Gore  relies on one person, a semi-obscure aide named Leon Fuerth. Whereas Bush stands at the head of a phalanx of sober experts, corporate buddies and G.O.P. bigwigs, Gore keeps his own counsel. There may not be much romance in the Bush campaign. There will be no ''bliss to be alive'' moments. But after a few decades of anti-establishment rhetoric, a little prosaic dullness may fit the national mood.
 Sen John McCain reportedly is willing to run for vice president if George W Bush offers him spot on Republican ticket; turnaround comes as number of Republicans lobby for McCain, but Bush advisers appear skeptical that Bush will consider primary rival; photo of Bush and wife being interviewed by Larry King (M) Months after Senator John McCain adamantly closed the door to accepting his party's vice-presidential nomination, a Republican close to him said today that he would take the No. 2 spot on the ticket if Gov. George W. Bush offered it. Mr. McCain's turnaround, which was described as reluctant, came as a growing number of Republicans lobbied for the Arizona senator as the best possible addition to the ticket. Some House Republicans, looking for help in holding the House majority, were circulating a petition to Mr. Bush that said he and Mr. McCain would make the best ticket. Months after Senator John McCain adamantly closed the door to accepting his party's vice-presidential nomination, a Republican close to him said today that he would take the No. 2 spot on the ticket if Gov. George W. Bush offered it. Mr. McCain's turnaround, which was described as reluctant, came as a growing number of Republicans lobbied for the Arizona senator as the best possible addition to the ticket. Some House Republicans, looking for help in holding the House majority, were circulating a petition to Mr. Bush that said he and Mr. McCain would make the best ticket. The senator signaled his willingness to be Mr. Bush's running mate this week in a telephone conversation with Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, according to the Republican official close to Mr. McCain. The official said Mr. Ridge telephoned Mr. McCain on Tuesday to say that he believed he was no longer in the running for the No. 2 slot and to urge Mr. McCain to put his name into consideration. Despite Mr. McCain's apparent willingness to take the job, several advisers to Mr. Bush were skeptical that the governor would consider him. And Karen P. Hughes, the governor's spokeswoman, said simply, ''Governor Bush has said all along that he takes Senator McCain at his word that he does not wish to be considered for the vice presidency.'' Mr. McCain has long been considered an unlikely choice for Mr. Bush because of the premium that the Texas governor places on loyalty and the sometimes strained relations between the two men. The attention that focused on Mr. McCain today may have been nothing more than the wishful thinking of his loyalists. It also reflected the frenzy of speculation among political insiders about whom Mr. Bush will pick. Mr. McCain was among a number of politicians whose phone numbers were collected today by aides to Richard B. Cheney, the former defense secretary who is heading Mr. Bush's search team, so that the Bush campaign can let them know in the coming days of the Texas governor's decision. Some Republicans believe Mr. Cheney himself is a contender. Mr. Bush was asked about this several times today and did not answer.
 Polls and Interviews Show A Close Presidential Race  The presidential election stands as a very competitive contest, despite the confidence displayed by Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, with ample time and opportunity for either him or Vice President Al Gore to surge ahead, according to an analysis of opinion polls state by state, along with interviews with Republican and Democratic strategists. Texans Take Exception  The crucible of a presidential campaign seems to have exacerbated the gap between the view others hold of Texas and the view Texans hold of themselves. Members of the Proud of Texas Committee have written to Vice President Al Gore, pledging to defend their state against his ''misrepresentations.'' Vice President Gore tried to undercut Gov. George W. Bush's popularity, suggesting that Mr. Bush's priorities were skewed and had made Texas a backwater where big oil interests were more important than children's health. Turnabout for McCain  A Republican close to Senator John McCain said the senator would accept the Republican Party's vice-presidential nomination if Gov. George W. Bush offered it. Mr. McCain had adamantly ruled out such a move several months ago.
