 And both have engaged in a nasty war of words. The advertisers have accused the unions of illegally threatening to blackball nonunion actors who cross their picket lines. Actors have accused the advertisers of trying to destroy their unions. Producers who have chosen to film in the Los Angeles or New York areas have often faced interference from picketers. The unions say they have disrupted numerous shoots, including a campaign spot for Gov. George W. Bush.
 Checking Up on Cheney  A cardiac surgeon in Houston said that Gov. George W. Bush and his father, former President George Bush, had asked him on Friday to consult by telephone with one of Richard B. Cheney's physicians and help determine if Mr. Cheney ''was up to a strenuous campaign.'' Mr. Cheney, the former defense secretary, emerged in recent days as a leading contender for the No. 2 spot on the Republican ticket.
 But all of this could not have happened at a worse moment, just as Vice President Al Gore began paring down the list and getting serious about the search for his own vice president on the Democratic ticket. While no one but Mr. Gore will really know whether Mr. Richardson could have been a strong candidate, others seem to think so. Even now, Mr. Richardson is being mentioned by some Democratic delegates as their choice for the job.
 Already it has become the campaign that people like to complain about. Why isn't Vice President Al Gore less leaden and more popular within his own party? What does Gov. George W. Bush really mean by compassionate conservatism, and does he know enough to be president? Whoever wins, about half of the American people will blame the news media either for giving Mr. Gore a free ride on his campaign fund-raising past or for not quizzing Mr. Bush hard enough about foreign policy. Already it has become the campaign that people like to complain about. Why isn't Vice President Al Gore less leaden and more popular within his own party? What does Gov. George W. Bush really mean by compassionate conservatism, and does he know enough to be president? Whoever wins, about half of the American people will blame the news media either for giving Mr. Gore a free ride on his campaign fund-raising past or for not quizzing Mr. Bush hard enough about foreign policy. These contrasting images are firmly fixed in the public perception, and they point us toward some reasons that with the convening of the Republican convention on July 31, we are going to see an even harsher campaign than anyone expected. The crowning reason for this is that the race is much more competitive than it appeared a few weeks ago. Even though Mr. Gore has been struggling, the national polls last week closed to within a couple of points. And as Richard Berke and Adam Clymer showed in an electoral-vote analysis in The Times on Friday, the contest looks even closer when viewed as a showdown for a handful of swing states including Michigan, Missouri, Florida, Illinois, Ohio, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Slim margins in a few crucial states produce mean campaigns. But that is only part of the story. The personalities of the candidates and their strategic imperatives also play a role. The Bush campaign has to sell a candidate whom people like but view as untested and too much a product of easy street. The Gore campaign has to promote a candidate with plenty of baggage and a considerable ability to irritate people, even within his party's core constituencies. If likability and baggage are allowed to remain key issues, Mr. Gore suffers. If experience and policy expertise come to the fore, Mr. Bush gets in trouble, a key reason for Mr. Gore's renewed assault on the governor's record in Texas. If a contest becomes focused on pocketbook concerns, social issues and ideology, voters tend to scurry back to their home parties. Suburban Republicans really do like tax cuts. Pro-choice women really do have to worry about what a Bush victory would do to the Supreme Court. Mr. Gore needs a big Democratic homecoming, since vice presidents running to keep their parties in power have a hard time attracting crossover voters. In practical terms, that means Mr. Gore needs to have his current poll number, around 41 percent, up to 47 to 49 percent by Election Day. Political professionals will be watching Mr. Bush's post-convention polls to assess the bounce he gets from his television time and his carefully orchestrated vice-presidential search. In the run-up to the election, the most striking point of agreement between strategists in both parties is that the winner will have a very narrow margin. The outcome may depend on whether the fervent Mr. Gore or the more laid-back Mr. Bush is better at making voters comfortable with personal images that are firmly and probably unalterably fixed in the public consciousness.
 ''George Bush should come here and put some meat on the bones of his compassionate conservatism,'' said the Rev. Kermit L. Newkirk, pastor of the Harold O. Davis Baptist Church.
 Dr Denton A Cooley, cardiac surgeon in Houston who is longtime friend of Bush family, says both Gov George W Bush and father, former President George Bush, asked him to consult with one of Richard B Cheney's physicians to help determine if Cheney was up to 'strenuous' campaign; Cheney, former defense secretary who is supervising process by which Bush chooses running mate, has emerged as leading contender for No. 2 spot on Republican presidential ticket, suffered three mild heart attacks more than decade ago but has apparently not had heart problems in recent years; photo (M) A cardiac surgeon in Houston who described himself as a longtime friend of the Bush family said today that both Gov. George W. Bush and his father, former President George Bush, had asked him on Friday to consult by telephone with one of Richard B. Cheney's physicians and help determine if Mr. Cheney ''was up to a strenuous campaign.'' In a telephone interview today, the surgeon, Denton A. Cooley, said that after the Bushes made that request, he spoke almost immediately with Mr. Cheney's physician. And several hours later, Dr. Cooley said, both the governor and the former president got back in touch with him to check his findings about Mr. Cheney, which were favorable. A cardiac surgeon in Houston who described himself as a longtime friend of the Bush family said today that both Gov. George W. Bush and his father, former President George Bush, had asked him on Friday to consult by telephone with one of Richard B. Cheney's physicians and help determine if Mr. Cheney ''was up to a strenuous campaign.'' In a telephone interview today, the surgeon, Denton A. Cooley, said that after the Bushes made that request, he spoke almost immediately with Mr. Cheney's physician. And several hours later, Dr. Cooley said, both the governor and the former president got back in touch with him to check his findings about Mr. Cheney, which were favorable. Mr. Cheney, the former defense secretary and the man supervising the process by which Governor Bush chooses a running mate, emerged over the last two days as a leading contender for the No. 2 spot on the Republican ticket. And one reason many Republican officials were surprised by that development was Mr. Cheney's health. More than a decade ago, he had three mild heart attacks. But Mr. Cheney has apparently not had any heart trouble in recent years, and Dr. Cooley said that he told both of the Bushes, who placed separate calls to him, that Mr. Cheney's physician in Washington ''thought he was certainly capable and fit enough to go through a national campaign.'' Dr. Cooley added that the governor and former president both seemed pleased by that news. Dr. Cooley's actions, first reported today by ABC News, were yet another sign of the seriousness with which Mr. Cheney, whom one high-ranking Republican official described today as the front-runner to share the Republican ticket with Governor Bush, is being considered for the job. On the same day that the Bushes were reaching out to Dr. Cooley, Mr. Cheney changed his voter registration from Texas to Wyoming, a state he represented in Congress for many years, thereby eliminating a potential constitutional hurdle to being the vice-presidential nominee. Additionally, the way in which Dr. Cooley's help was solicited raised questions about the extent of President Bush's involvement in his son's deliberations over a running mate. The Texas governor said on Friday that his father, in whose administration Mr. Cheney served as the defense secretary, had mainly played the role of ''a good listener.'' Asked tonight about President Bush's role, Karen P. Hughes, the communications director for the Bush campaign, said, ''Only the governor can answer that question, and I'm sure he will be happy to once the process is complete.'' Ms. Hughes said she could neither confirm nor deny that Dr. Cooley had acted on the Bushes' request to help assess Mr. Cheney's health. Referring to the various people whose names have been floated as vice-presidential prospects for Mr. Bush, Ms. Hughes said, ''I think it's important to respect the privacy of all these individuals until such time as Governor Bush makes a decision.'' One adviser to Mr. Bush said tonight that the governor had not contacted any of his closest aides or anyone on his list of potential vice presidents to say that he had made his decision, which he is expected to announce sometime this week. The comments of several of Mr. Bush's advisers pointed to Tuesday as the likeliest day for that announcement. Mr. Bush spent today in the peace, quiet and seclusion of his ranch about 90 miles northwest of here, and he did not plan to return to Austin, where the announcement will almost certainly be made, until midday Monday, his aides said. Mr. Bush said on Friday that he would spend the weekend making final deliberations. One of his aides cautioned anew today that despite all the speculation about Mr. Cheney and, to a lesser extent, about former Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri, with whom the Texas governor met for several hours on Tuesday, Mr. Bush might yet have a surprise in store. But a high-ranking Republican official said Mr. Cheney appeared to be the leading candidate. There were other possible indicators that Mr. Cheney might be Mr. Bush's pick. One Republican official said that before Dr. Cooley's telephone call Mr. Cheney had undergone a thorough physical examination last week. Several of Mr. Bush's senior advisers and other prominent Republicans fanned out on the morning news programs, where much of what they said amounted to defenses of potential criticisms of Mr. Cheney's selection and arguments for why Mr. Cheney represented a terrific choice. They repeatedly said, however, that Mr. Bush had not made a decision. On CBS's ''Face the Nation,'' Karl Rove, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign, said that Mr. Cheney's history of heart trouble was not cause for concern. ''Those heart attacks occurred in the 70's and 80's, and he then served as secretary of defense in President Bush's administration and presided over Desert Storm,'' Mr. Rove noted. The three heart attacks, in 1978, 1984 and 1988, that Mr. Cheney, 59, suffered were all mild, and he had bypass surgery in 1988, before his high-profile assignment in the Bush administration. Mr. Cheney had previously served as President Gerald Ford's chief of staff. Dr. Cooley said that what the Bushes wanted to know about Mr. Cheney was ''how fit he was and was he up to a strenuous campaign.'' Dr. Cooley concluded that he was. Although Mr. Cheney and Mr. Danforth, 63, are in many ways dissimilar, both have decades of government experience that stand in bold counterpoint to Mr. Bush's five and a half years as Texas governor, the only office he has held. Some Republican strategists said today that the willingness of Mr. Bush, 54, to turn to older political veterans suggested how confident and comfortable he was with his own abilities. But others said it was a possible sign that Mr. Bush or his advisers were acting to blunt any concerns among voters that Mr. Bush did not have enough seasoning to lead the country.
 Both camps say the sharp differences between the major presidential candidates this year are helping to energize supporters. Vice President Al Gore has called for an array of new restrictions, including licensing new handgun buyers and banning certain inexpensive handguns. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has generally sided with the N.R.A., signing bills allowing people to carry concealed weapons and preventing municipalities from suing gun makers. Much as the N.R.A. has tried to demonize Mr. Gore in its fund-raising efforts as a threat to Second Amendment rights, Handgun Control has sought to cast Mr. Bush as a pawn of the N.R.A. who would team up with a Congress controlled by Republicans to rescind every major gun law on the books. In a recent fund-raising letter, Sarah Brady, chairwoman of Handgun Control, wrote: ''My friend, if you and I truly want a safer America, we cannot allow George W. Bush to be elected president of the United States. A political disaster of that magnitude would mean four long years of being on the defensive.'' Among the Republicans Handgun Control is likely to work against are Representative James E. Rogan of California and Senator John Ashcroft of Missouri. The group has also run advertisements in several cities criticizing Mr. Bush's record on gun control, and plans to buy more air time in closely contested states like Michigan, Pennsylvania and Missouri. ''In swing areas, our mission is to make sure voters, particularly women voters, understand the Bush record,'' Mr. Sudbay said. Modeling itself after Mothers Against Drunk Driving, the Million Mom March will try to help its allies, and hurt its opponents, by staging emotional rallies featuring victims of gun violence or their survivors. The group plans to endorse a presidential candidate -- almost certainly Mr. Gore -- and will get involved in state and Congressional races.
 In 1993, President George Bush authorized a cost-saving program that eliminated accountability for merely ''secret'' material. And the Pentagon last year blocked a proposal by former Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary that would have declassified many of the department's files, while securing the most sensitive nuclear weapons information.
 Presidential candidates, perhaps. Last October, a similarly explosive, uncertain and distant allegation -- almost immediately discredited -- surfaced in a new book about George W. Bush, the Republican presidential front-runner. The Post's initial coverage was limited to a single article on Page 2. A few days later, The Post reported that the author was a convicted felon.
 Sierra Club, one of nation's largest and most influential environmental groups, will endorse Vice Pres Al Gore for president (S) The Sierra Club, one of the nation's largest and most influential environmental groups, will endorse Vice President Al Gore today at a news conference where its president, Robert Cox, will declare that Mr. Gore would be ''the most pro-environment'' president in modern history if elected. Debbie Sease, the Sierra Club's legislative director, said 12 of the group's 15 board members voted to endorse Mr. Gore on Saturday. Only one member wanted to endorse Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate. Among those voting for Mr. Gore was Michael Dorsey, a college professor from Michigan who wrote a memorandum sharply criticizing Mr. Gore last year. The Sierra Club, one of the nation's largest and most influential environmental groups, will endorse Vice President Al Gore today at a news conference where its president, Robert Cox, will declare that Mr. Gore would be ''the most pro-environment'' president in modern history if elected. Debbie Sease, the Sierra Club's legislative director, said 12 of the group's 15 board members voted to endorse Mr. Gore on Saturday. Only one member wanted to endorse Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate. Among those voting for Mr. Gore was Michael Dorsey, a college professor from Michigan who wrote a memorandum sharply criticizing Mr. Gore last year. Ms. Sease said the board members supported Mr. Gore not only because of his strong environmental record, but also because they viewed his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, as a real threat to clean air and water. ''Bush has made it very clear that he plans to undo and undercut and weaken the very provisions that have given us the environmental progress we have had in the last several decades,'' Ms. Sease said. The Sierra Club has already run television advertisements criticizing Mr. Bush in select states. Now, with its endorsement, the organization will also try to mobilize its 600,000 members to work toward Mr. Gore's election. Another major environmental group, the League of Conservation Voters, has also endorsed Mr. Gore. The only other national environmental group that endorses presidential candidates, Friends of the Earth, the smallest of the three, is still weighing whether to support Mr. Gore or Mr. Nader. Although Mr. Gore wrote a book on global warming titled ''Earth in the Balance,'' he has been sharply criticized by some environmentalists, particularly for his strong support of global trade.
 A cardiac surgeon in Houston, who described himself as a longtime friend of the Bush family, said both Gov. George W. Bush and his father, former President George Bush, had asked him to consult with one of Richard B. Cheney's physicians and help determine whether Mr. Cheney ''was up to a strenuous campaign.'' The health checkup was another sign of the seriousness with which Mr. Cheney, who had three mild heart attacks a decade ago, is apparently being considered for the No. 2 spot on the Republican ticket. The surgeon said Mr. Cheney's doctor thought he was ''capable and fit enough.'' A cardiac surgeon in Houston, who described himself as a longtime friend of the Bush family, said both Gov. George W. Bush and his father, former President George Bush, had asked him to consult with one of Richard B. Cheney's physicians and help determine whether Mr. Cheney ''was up to a strenuous campaign.'' The health checkup was another sign of the seriousness with which Mr. Cheney, who had three mild heart attacks a decade ago, is apparently being considered for the No. 2 spot on the Republican ticket. The surgeon said Mr. Cheney's doctor thought he was ''capable and fit enough.''
 The issue flared, briefly but bitterly, on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' today, when Robert Shrum, an adviser to Vice President Al Gore, said Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was giving short shrift to the plight of the elderly. Mr. Shrum said Democrats wanted a drug plan ''that provides for all senior citizens under Medicare,'' while Governor Bush ''wants one that lets seniors go out and beg the H.M.O.'s and insurance companies for coverage.'' Karen P. Hughes, the spokeswoman for the Bush campaign, countered that Mr. Gore had ignored ''bipartisan opportunities'' to pass drug legislation, and said that Mr. Bush was ''committed to reforming and modernizing Medicare to provide prescription drug coverage.'' Geoffrey Garin, a chief pollster for House Democrats, argued, ''George W. Bush has been trying very hard and with some success to avoid any debate about big philosophical questions, but Medicare really is a chance for Democrats to raise a question about the role of government versus the private sector, on a topic where voters have already made a pretty clear decision.'' In the presidential campaign, the contrast is not as clear, largely because Governor Bush has remained vague on Medicare issues. For example, when asked Mr. Bush's position on the Medicare prescription drug bill recently passed by his party in the House, Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said that Mr. Bush ''wants to review the final Congressional product.'' Mr. Bush and his spokesmen have also talked approvingly of the work of the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare, and faulted the administration for blocking its work -- although the commission was advocating a market-oriented plan that by some estimates could have made it significantly more costly for the elderly to stay with traditional fee-for-service Medicare, and raised the eligibility age for Medicare to 67 from 65. Still, the specifics of Mr. Bush's thinking on Medicare may not come until this fall's debates, when Mr. Gore is sure to raise it. Mr. Gore, recognizing his party's longstanding image as the guardian of Medicare, has campaigned hard on the issue, vowing to put Medicare in a ''lock box'' so its $400 billion in surpluses cannot be used for tax cuts or other new spending, and to extend the solvency of the Medicare trust fund to 2030. He has also advocated adding a prescription drug benefit to the traditional Medicare program, in line with his party, and has scoffed at the House Republican plan as ''a pretend plan that even the insurance industry doesn't think will work.'' Mr. Gore is also committed to the ''modernization'' proposals put forth by the Clinton administration, which try to inject more competition among health plans while protecting the fee-for-service program. In the end, Medicare may turn out to be much more of an issue in Congressional elections than in the presidential contest. Several health policy analysts noted that Mr. Bush was far more willing to plunge into the politics of Social Security than Medicare, which remains among the most popular government initiatives. Even so, analysts maintain, this election has big consequences for the program, which was signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson as the centerpiece of the Great Society.
 To get a sense of how dizzily out of whack things have become, all you have to do is consider that George W. Bush's proposed tax cut is $1.3 trillion. There is no way the non-Social Security surpluses projected over the next decade would be able to cover tax cuts of that magnitude.
 By last fall, Mr. Bowlin and Mayor John Kunkel realized that another water source would be needed to prevent an emergency. But the town had floated bonds in the 1980's to build its pumping system and could not afford the money for a new pipeline. So it went looking for money, and received a $200,000 federal grant. It also received a state grant in June, and Gov. George W. Bush declared the town a disaster area. The state grant included $800,000 for materials but required that Throckmorton provide the labor.
