 Editorial on rumored selection of Richard B Cheney as Gov George W Bush's Vice Presidential running mate holds Cheney would bring foreign policy and national security experience to Republican Presidential ticket but would allow Democrats to argue that selection proves that Bush is inexperienced in key areas and is still dependent on former President George Bush's name and advisers Fate and the Bush family -- or maybe it is fate in the form of the Bush family -- seem to have a way of intervening in the life of Richard B. Cheney. In 1989 he was serving as minority whip in the House of Representatives when President George Bush made him secretary of defense after the Senate rejected the nomination of Senator John Tower of Texas. This year Mr. Cheney was out of government and five years into a career as a Texas oil executive when Gov. George W. Bush of Texas made him director of his vice-presidential search committee. It now appears that Mr. Cheney has found himself. Therein hangs a splendid opportunity for political divination. Mr. Cheney's most obvious asset as a running mate is that he could provide an instant gravitas injection for a ticket headed by Governor Bush. Given Mr. Cheney's role in running the gulf war, his presence would shore up Mr. Bush in his weakest areas, foreign policy and national security. The downside is that a Cheney selection would allow Democrats to argue that the lightly experienced Mr. Bush is still dependent on both his father's name and his key advisers. The counterspin from the Bush campaign would be that the candidate is secure enough to surround himself with weighty figures. Fate and the Bush family -- or maybe it is fate in the form of the Bush family -- seem to have a way of intervening in the life of Richard B. Cheney. In 1989 he was serving as minority whip in the House of Representatives when President George Bush made him secretary of defense after the Senate rejected the nomination of Senator John Tower of Texas. This year Mr. Cheney was out of government and five years into a career as a Texas oil executive when Gov. George W. Bush of Texas made him director of his vice-presidential search committee. It now appears that Mr. Cheney has found himself. Therein hangs a splendid opportunity for political divination. Mr. Cheney's most obvious asset as a running mate is that he could provide an instant gravitas injection for a ticket headed by Governor Bush. Given Mr. Cheney's role in running the gulf war, his presence would shore up Mr. Bush in his weakest areas, foreign policy and national security. The downside is that a Cheney selection would allow Democrats to argue that the lightly experienced Mr. Bush is still dependent on both his father's name and his key advisers. The counterspin from the Bush campaign would be that the candidate is secure enough to surround himself with weighty figures. But whatever they say about Mr. Cheney, the Democrats would be relieved to see his name on the ticket rather than that of Gen. Colin Powell. For months, supporters of Vice President Al Gore have spoken of Bush-Powell as a nightmare ticket that would put the election out of reach before it begins. Campaigns, of course, rarely play out in predictable ways, but there is no doubt that Mr. Powell could change the dynamic in a way that no one else could. Instead of excitement, Mr. Cheney offers solidity, unity and, based on his record at defense, toughness. His House record is conservative enough for the Republican right. At 59, he does not represent as big a threat to younger Republicans looking to run for president in four or eight years. Then there is the loyalty issue. Mr. Bush would never have to worry about Dick Cheney's next quote, not the case if he picked a prickly free spirit like Senator John McCain. This record would provide plenty of targets for Mr. Gore, who might also be relieved that Mr. Cheney, a Wyoming native, would not have an obvious impact on the electoral vote. If Mr. Bush does select Mr. Cheney, though, that choice might in some way be connected to Mr. Gore's own service as vice president. President Clinton and Mr. Gore got the public fully accustomed to seeing the vice president cast and marketed as a senior adviser rather than a space holder. If he chooses Mr. Cheney, Mr. Bush will be giving that model a place of even greater prominence.
 SURVEYS OFFER MIXED RESULTS  Gov. George W. Bush continues to lead Vice President Al Gore in a pair of new Research 2000 presidential preference polls from Washington State and Idaho and in an Opinion Dynamics poll from Ohio. But Mr. Gore remains ahead in a new Research 2000 poll from California. In Washington, the new poll, covering 605 voters between July 7 and 10 with a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points, gives Mr. Bush 43 percent to 39 percent for Mr. Gore, with Ralph Nader at 7 percent and Patrick J. Buchanan at 2 percent. The Idaho poll, of 601 voters from July 5 to 8 with a margin of sampling error of four percentage points, has Mr. Bush still ahead of Mr. Gore 57 percent to 21 percent, with Mr. Buchanan at 4 percent and Mr. Nader at 2 percent. In the Ohio poll, covering 501 registered voters on July 19 and 20 with a margin of sampling error of four percentage points, Mr. Bush leads Mr. Gore 43 percent to 34 percent, with Mr. Nader at 6 percent and Mr. Buchanan at 5 percent. The poll in California surveyed 827 voters from July 17 to 19, with a margin of sampling error of 3.5 percent, and has Mr. Gore ahead of Mr. Bush 44 percent to 37 percent; Mr. Nader draws 8 percent and Mr. Buchanan 2 percent.
 New York Times/CBS News Poll finds most Americans perceive pronounced differences in how Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush would handle major issues, despite focus on how candidates are dashing toward middle politically and, in some cases, sounding alike; more than seven in 10 Americans find genuine differences between them, and more than half of public thinks contrasts are more about issues than about personal qualities; voters indicate they are far from having made up their minds, and can be swayed; approximately one-third say they could switch votes before Election Day; significant portions of each candidate's supporters say they have reservations about current favorites; findings of poll detailed; charts (M) As Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush prepare to frame their messages at the national conventions, most Americans say they already perceive pronounced differences on how they would handle health care, taxes, the environment and the selection of Supreme Court justices, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showed. As Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush prepare to frame their messages at the national conventions, most Americans say they already perceive pronounced differences on how they would handle health care, taxes, the environment and the selection of Supreme Court justices, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showed. For instance, 58 percent of Americans said that if Mr. Gore was elected president, he would make health care more affordable for everyone; 36 percent said that of Mr. Bush. Forty-four percent said Mr. Bush would be more likely to reduce taxes; 25 percent said that of Mr. Gore. Seventy percent said Mr. Gore would be likely to make real progress in protecting the environment; 44 percent said that of Mr. Bush. The biggest split came over abortion. Sixty-two percent said Mr. Gore would probably pick Supreme Court justices who would vote to keep abortion legal; 43 percent said Mr. Bush would be unlikely to do so. Mr. Bush continued to lead Mr. Gore among all registered voters, but his advantage was within the poll's margin of sampling error. In a two-person race, registered voters said they would back Mr. Bush over Mr. Gore by 46 percent to 40 percent. In a four-way race, with Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee, and Patrick J. Buchanan, the expected Reform Party nominee, Mr. Bush would draw 44 percent; Mr. Gore, 38 percent; Mr. Nader, 5 percent; and Mr. Buchanan, 3 percent. ''The jury is still out with this campaign,'' Samuel Hathaway, 36, a poll respondent from Vancouver, Wash., said in a follow-up interview. Mr. Hathaway said he planned to vote for Mr. Gore but added that could change his mind. ''I just want to hear more from the campaign itself,'' he said. ''Right now I usually vote Democratic. Al Gore has been around for eight years as vice president so I'm sure he knows how to do the job. But I also like the Reform Party, and I want to hear them out as well.'' A poll respondent who backed Mr. Bush, Kay Wimberly, 47, also said her leanings are by no means irreversible. ''The primary reason I might change my mind is because it's so early on in the campaign,'' said Ms. Wimberly, a graphic designer from La Crosse, Wis. ''A lot of things can come to the surface between now and then. The candidates will make their positions more well known as the election draws nearer. Education is an important issue to me and to the future of this country. I'm not entirely sold on Bush's position because I feel some of his claims are somewhat vague.'' Yet a heartening sign for Mr. Gore as the candidates compete for independent and moderate voters is that the public's impression of Mr. Bush's ideology, while once equally divided between moderate and conservative, is increasingly conservative. By contrast, the perception of Mr. Gore is that he is becoming more moderate and less liberal. Efforts by Republicans to link Mr. Gore to the scandals of the Clinton administration do not seem to have worked. A plurality of voters said the November election was not about Mr. Clinton. And majorities gave Mr. Gore high marks for personal integrity and character -- something they never did for Mr. Clinton. The argument of many Democrats that Mr. Bush lacked sufficient command of issues did not seem to be working either. Despite Mr. Gore's eight years of involvement in policy at the White House, that has not convinced voters that he is any more prepared for the presidency. Sixty-six percent said Mr. Bush has strong qualities of leadership; 55 percent said that of Mr. Gore. More people think Mr. Gore understands the complicated problems a president has to deal with, but the difference was not especially significant. Eighty-four percent said Mr. Gore understands those problems; 73 percent said that about Mr. Bush. And while even Mr. Bush has acknowledged that ''my foreign affairs experience is Mexico,'' voters said they have as much confidence in him as they do in Mr. Gore's ability to deal wisely with an international crisis. For both candidates, voters were roughly split in whether they were confident or uneasy about how they would handle foreign crises. One of Mr. Bush's strengths is that people still see him as eminently likable, while one of Mr. Gore's best assets is that he is seen generally as being on the right side of issues. Mr. Bush drew high marks for straight talk, leadership and trustworthiness, while Mr. Gore was viewed as caring more about the needs and problems of voters. In some areas, the differences were largely of degree. For instance, both men were seen by a majority of voters as pandering -- saying what they think voters want to hear. But Mr. Gore was viewed that way by a larger majority. Mr. Bush continued to be seen favorably by a majority of voters who have formed an opinion of him. Mr. Gore was seen equally favorably and unfavorably, but that was a small improvement from the primary season. While the Times/CBS Poll showed no appreciable tightening of the race, other national polls have shown that Mr. Gore has made some progress in reducing Mr. Bush's advantage. For example, the most recent Gallup Poll measured 48 percent for Mr. Bush and 46 percent for Mr. Gore. Earlier in July, the margin was 9 percentage points. Mr. Gore's supporters said they were marginally more certain about sticking with the vice president than Mr. Bush's backers were. But 4 in 10 of each candidate's supporters said they had reservations about their candidate. One bright spot for Mr. Gore was that he has made inroads in the Northeast since May, when the last Times/CBS poll was taken. But Mr. Gore cannot seem to shake a perception that he is the inevitable loser. Only 29 percent of the voters polled said they expected him to win, compared with 49 percent who said Mr. Bush would win. For all the differences between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, the one issue on which the public sees them both as responsible is on the economy. Roughly three-quarters of Americans think either Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush would likely make sure that the country's economy remained hearty. But taxes, an issue Mr. Bush has championed for months, is beginning to make its way onto the public's list of most pressing concerns. Duane Taff, 33, a radio station music director in Grand Rapids, Mich., said he was leaning toward Mr. Gore. ''If there is an issue between now and November that I feel passionate about, I might go the other way,'' Mr. Taff said. ''Two months ago, an issue like that would have been gas prices, but that's starting to stabilize. Something like that might come up a week before the election. And if one of the candidates makes an effort, and I like his idea on it, I could easily go either way.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore turns focus to environmentalists and labor unions, two important Democratic constituencies, three weeks before Democratic National Convention; addresses gathering in Grand Rapids, Mich, where he is endorsed by Sierra Club; assures unionized workers that strong environmental policies would not necessarily hurt companies or their employees; photo (M) With three weeks left before the Democratic National Convention, Vice President Al Gore turned his focus today to uniting two important Democratic constituencies that have sometimes been at odds: environmentalists and labor unions. At an event on the tree-lined banks of the Grand River in Grand Rapids, Mich., Mr. Gore picked up the endorsement of the Sierra Club, one of the nation's most politically potent environmental groups. But the crowd of nearly 200 people was filled with unionized workers, and Mr. Gore devoted much of his speech to assuring them that strong environmental policies would not necessarily hurt companies or their employees. With three weeks left before the Democratic National Convention, Vice President Al Gore turned his focus today to uniting two important Democratic constituencies that have sometimes been at odds: environmentalists and labor unions. At an event on the tree-lined banks of the Grand River in Grand Rapids, Mich., Mr. Gore picked up the endorsement of the Sierra Club, one of the nation's most politically potent environmental groups. But the crowd of nearly 200 people was filled with unionized workers, and Mr. Gore devoted much of his speech to assuring them that strong environmental policies would not necessarily hurt companies or their employees. Mr. Gore is trying to win the endorsement of the United Automobile  Workers, a political powerhouse in Michigan, where he and his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, are in a closely contested race. But in recent weeks Mr. Gore has had several conversations with Stephen Yokich, the union's president, to try to work out their differences, Democratic officials said. Mr. Gore's aides are hoping that the union's executive committee will vote to endorse him at its next meeting, on Aug. 8, six days before the Democratic convention opens. This afternoon Mr. Gore also took a poke at Governor Bush for the  intense media attention that has been attracted to his efforts to choose a running mate. Mr. Gore suggested that the governor had purposely played out his deliberations in public, in an effort to build excitement about his campaign. ''I've handled my process differently than the Bush campaign has handled theirs,'' the vice president told reporters. ''I've kept it private and, I hope, dignified, out of respect for the individuals, the men and women, who are under consideration. And I am going to continue to approach it that way.'' But just minutes before, in what seemed like a clear attempt to stoke interest in his own deliberations, Mr. Gore's aides notified reporters that he would be meeting on Tuesday morning with former Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher, who is helping him cull his list of prospective vice-presidential nominees. Asked what qualities he was looking for in a running mate, Mr. Gore replied: ''I'm going to pick the person who I believe can become the president on a moment's notice, if necessary; who also has a good working relationship with me, or the prospect of one; and who shares my values, someone who's willing to fight for people and not the powerful.'' Today Robert Cox, president of the Sierra Club, picked up on a theme Mr. Gore has been sounding recently, arguing that Mr. Bush's record as governor of Texas proves that he would support federal policies that would help corporate polluters and ruin the environment. ''If we fail to elect Al Gore, if George Bush becomes president, we could face a very different America,'' Mr. Cox said. ''We could face what the people of Texas face now: air pollution, water pollution, toxic waste, record numbers of violations of our clean-air and clean-water standards, environmental laws unenforced, and corporate polluters unchecked and out of control.'' In reply, Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said the governor had actually reduced air and water pollution in Texas, and he ridiculed the Sierra Club's endorsement of Mr. Gore. In his remarks at the Sierra Club event, Mr. Gore said he had been ahead of his time in understanding environmental problems, having learned about the dangers of pesticides and soil erosion as a boy on his father's Tennessee farm, and about global warming as a college student. In those days, Mr. Gore said, ''if you believed in global warming, people thought you were part of the flat earth society.''
 The case of the man, Roy Criner, who was sentenced to 99 years in prison in 1990 for the rape of a 16-year-old hitchhiker, could land on the desk of Gov. George W. Bush as soon as next week. New DNA tests completed this month persuaded officials in Montgomery County, including the district attorney, the sheriff and the presiding judge, to join Mr. Criner's lawyer in asking that the inmate be freed. The case of the man, Roy Criner, who was sentenced to 99 years in prison in 1990 for the rape of a 16-year-old hitchhiker, could land on the desk of Gov. George W. Bush as soon as next week. New DNA tests completed this month persuaded officials in Montgomery County, including the district attorney, the sheriff and the presiding judge, to join Mr. Criner's lawyer in asking that the inmate be freed. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, said state law required that Mr. Criner's application be approved by the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles before the governor could grant a pardon. But since 1997, the parole board has weighed new DNA evidence favorably in recommending pardons for three other inmates convicted of rape or sexual assault. And in all three cases, the latest of which was in May, Mr. Bush has approved the pardons.
 ''Does the convention make people say, 'Gee, I didn't know Los Angeles was there, maybe I'll go visit?' '' said Andrew Zimbalist, an economics professor at Smith College. ''If you have a lame convention and fairly soporific candidates, it seems unlikely you would say, 'Boy, let's go see where Al Gore got nominated.' ''
 Richard B Cheney, former defense secretary in Bush administration, is back in center of another Bush's political career, poised to provide loyal assistance at pivotal time by becoming running mate for Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush; has become as important to son as he was to father; impending choice reflects high regard in which he is held by former Pres Bush; level of respect was almost bound to be inherited by son; photo (M) In the main lobby of the George Bush Presidential Library, about 90 miles east of here, Richard B. Cheney has a prominent place in an enormous oil painting that is the first and pretty much only thing to catch a visitor's eye. It is a portrait of former President Bush in the Oval Office during perhaps the most critical juncture of his presidency, the Persian Gulf war, and Mr. Cheney, his defense secretary, is in a huddle of advisers helping to guide Mr. Bush through those geopolitical straits. In the main lobby of the George Bush Presidential Library, about 90 miles east of here, Richard B. Cheney has a prominent place in an enormous oil painting that is the first and pretty much only thing to catch a visitor's eye. It is a portrait of former President Bush in the Oval Office during perhaps the most critical juncture of his presidency, the Persian Gulf war, and Mr. Cheney, his defense secretary, is in a huddle of advisers helping to guide Mr. Bush through those geopolitical straits. Now, Mr. Cheney is back in the picture, back in the center of another Bush's political career and poised once again to provide his loyal assistance at a pivotal time. A senior Republican official said today that Gov. George W. Bush, the soon-to-be-crowned Republican presidential nominee, had chosen Mr. Cheney as his running mate and would probably announce his choice on Tuesday. [Page A21.] That development, prophesied for several days, showed that Mr. Cheney had become as important to the son as he was to the father. And to some degree, it undoubtedly reflected the high regard in which former President Bush had long held Mr. Cheney, a level of respect that was almost bound to be inherited by the Texas governor. Governor Bush has told reporters that he spoke repeatedly with his father as he pondered his choice of a running mate, and there were other hints that the former president maintained a watchful eye over the process, and maybe put a finger or two in it as well. On Friday, for example, President Bush called a cardiac surgeon in Houston who is a family friend to enlist his help in determining whether Mr. Cheney, who had suffered mild heart attacks more than a decade ago, was up to the rigors of a presidential campaign. And today, Chase Untermeyer, the director of presidential personnel during the Bush administration, recalled a conversation that occurred about a month ago in Kennebunkport, Me., between the former president and Brent Scowcroft, who served as his national security adviser. According to Mr. Untermeyer, Mr. Scowcroft told Mr. Bush that he had talked to Mr. Cheney in the previous two weeks and that Mr. Cheney had decided he was interested in the vice presidency. ''I remember President Bush making a powerful mental note of that,'' Mr. Untermeyer said in a telephone interview today. ''He expressed great interest and surprise.'' Friends of the former president and advisers to the Bush campaign said they did not know if President Bush and Mr. Cheney had spoken directly over the past few weeks, and the precise nature and extent of the former president's involvement in his son's selection process is unclear. But President Bush apparently knew more than even some of the Texas governor's advisers did. A close friend of the Bush family said that for several days now, President Bush could not resist making friends and associates aware that he possessed the inside scoop on who his son's running mate would be. But whatever President Bush's involvement, it was also clear that his son forged his own bond with Mr. Cheney long before the last few months, when Mr. Cheney supervised a vice-presidential selection process for the Texas governor that ended, oddly enough, with Mr. Cheney as the choice. ''We sat around for two to three hours in the evening, just talking about everything under the sun from foreign policy to domestic politics,'' Mr. Shultz said in a telephone interview today. ''Governor Bush was forever turning to Cheney, asking him what he thought.'' In choosing Mr. Cheney, Mr. Bush turned to someone whose history with the Bush family is a long, rich and active one. And that history, several people who know the governor said, gave the Texas governor the kind of comfort in Mr. Cheney that he almost insists on having in his closest political associates. But with Mr. Cheney's selection, Mr. Bush also summoned the shadow of his father, and was sure to rekindle debates in the coming days over just how firmly his political fortunes were tied to his patrimony. Additionally, Mr. Bush, who has used his status as a governor to style himself as a candidate who would bring an outsider's perspective to Washington, ultimately cast his lot with the ultimate insider, someone who spent more years inside the Beltway than perhaps anyone else on Mr. Bush's list of vice-presidential prospects. Nearly a quarter century ago, Mr. Cheney served as chief of staff for President Gerald R. Ford, and that was when he caught the eye of Mr. Bush's father, who was the director of Central Intelligence, according to the former president's friends. Mr. Cheney, who was in only his mid-30's then, was obviously a rising Republican star. Mr. Bush took ample note of that. ''President Bush noticed that Cheney was a keeper,'' said one close friend. ''President Bush collects people. Smart people do that. Smart people collect people.'' After Mr. Cheney was elected to Congress from Wyoming in 1978, he quickly became one of the leading Republican voices in the House, something Mr. Bush would surely have noticed. As vice president from 1981 to 1989, Mr. Bush played a role as President Ronald Reagan's liaison to Republicans in Congress. But it was not until Mr. Bush was elected president and picked Mr. Cheney to be his defense secretary that the two men truly became friends. ''He wasn't really close to the dad until after the 1988 election, when he joined the Cabinet,'' said one of Mr. Cheney's associates. The associate said that Mr. Cheney, who always sat in the seat just to the left of Mr. Bush during Cabinet meetings, proved his loyalty and discretion, two qualities prized in the Bush family as much as any other. ''When it came to who Bush senior could rely on for total discretion, there was Brent Scowcroft and Dick Cheney,'' the associate said. What finally sealed their bond, friends and associates said, was the Persian Gulf war. Mr. Bush's friends and associates said that he considered the challenge of managing that conflict to be a defining moment not just in his political career but in his life. The former president, in his recently published book of letters and diary entries, wrote about the solace he derived from Mr. Cheney. ''The pressure is constant,'' Mr. Bush wrote in a diary entry on Feb. 20, 1991. But he added that ''oddly enough,'' with Cheney, among others, at his side, ''I still feel content.'' Rich Bond, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee who knows Mr. Bush well, said, ''They all went through the soul-searing experience of a war, and they got even closer.'' Friends of the former president said that there were parameters to the relationship, given that Mr. Cheney was Mr. Bush's subordinate and so much younger. When the former president, now 76, held a 75th birthday party for his wife, Barbara, in Kennebunkport last month, Mr. Cheney, 59, was not among the nearly 200 people who were invited. But Jean Becker, the president's current chief of staff, nonetheless described them as ''close friends.'' She noted that in the winter, when Mr. Bush lives in Houston, he occasionally goes hunting with Mr. Cheney, who lives in Dallas. They took a hunting trip together this year, Ms. Becker said. Several prominent Republicans in Washington said that it would be easy to make too much of the relationship between Mr. Cheney and President Bush as a factor in the Texas governor's decision. They noted that because President Bush had such a long, varied and prominent political career, many of his son's prospective vice-presidential selections had ties to him. Former Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri, for example, vigorously defended President Bush's nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court. And Elizabeth Dole was President Bush's secretary of labor. Additionally, advisers to the Texas governor said that the younger Bush's path crossed with Mr. Cheney even after the end of the Bush administration in early 1993. The fact that Mr. Cheney had become a prominent businessman in Texas by the time Mr. Bush was elected governor in 1994 guaranteed that they would run into each other, these advisers said, and the two men did, in ways that apparently left an impression on Mr. Bush. ''Bush talked about him over the years,'' one adviser said. ''He'd say, 'Cheney said this. Cheney said that.' It was clear they talked to each other.'' And during the early stages of Mr. Bush's candidacy last year, the adviser said, Mr. Bush sometimes alluded to the fact that Mr. Cheney himself had considered running for president in 1996. ''He would say, 'This is how Cheney approached the issue in 1995,' '' the adviser recalled. Mr. Bush takes pride in what he sees as the charming, persuasive effect he can have on people who spend enough time around him, and Mr. Cheney may be proof of his prowess.
 Voter Opinions on Issues Shape Race, Poll Finds  Most Americans say they perceive pronounced differences in how Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush would handle health care, taxes, the environment and Supreme Court appointments, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found. More than 7 out of 10 said there were genuine differences between the candidates, and more than half think those contrasts are more about issues than personal qualities. Cheney Seen as Bush Choice  Gov. George W. Bush was said to have decided on Richard B. Cheney as his running mate and is expected to announce it today. DNA May Free Inmate  Roy Criner, whose rape conviction attracted national attention in 1998 after the state's highest criminal court disregarded DNA evidence, is now receiving a recommendation from local officials that Gov. George W. Bush pardon him.
 This is the first time that Mr. Clinton's testimony on a wide array of campaign finance issues has been made public. The release came at a time when it was likely to be overshadowed by the impending news of Gov. George W. Bush's vice-presidential selection, but a White House spokesman denied any connection.  The spokesman, Jake Siewert, said the White House was concerned that the transcript would be released by Republicans on the House Government Reform Committee. The Republicans received it, under subpoena, earlier today. At several points in the interview, Mr. Clinton portrays himself as a victim who has been hounded for years about questions of overzealous Democratic fund-raising. The tone of the president's answers, which veered between genial and terse and in which he often failed to recollect fund-raising details, differed significantly from the caustic confrontation between Vice President Al Gore and Mr. Conrad, which occurred on April 18 at the vice-presidential mansion. The president was extensively questioned about White House coffees he held for Democratic supporters. Like Mr. Gore, who was also questioned at length about the coffees by Mr. Conrad, the president denied that the events were fund-raisers or that there was a price to attend them. The president defended the White House coffees, telling Mr. Conrad that he regretted ''that they got a bad rap in the end because I enjoyed them and found them helpful.'' Mr. Clinton was also asked whether Mr. Gore was truthful when he testified that the coffee's were the President's idea. ''I wouldn't disagree with that,'' the President told Mr. Conrad. He said he could not recollect how many coffees the Vice President attended.
 Mr. Miller's acceptance of the offer to succeed Mr. Coverdell, a Republican who died last week, was a huge relief to Mr. Barnes, a Democrat, and to party leaders around the country, including President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore. Several officials close to Mr. Barnes said the governor was convinced that Mr. Miller was the only Georgia Democrat who could hold on to the seat in November, particularly given the scarcity of time to raise money and organize a campaign. While the Republicans remain favored to retain control of the Senate, Mr. Miller's appointment means the Democrats could take over by picking up a net of five seats in the event of a Republican presidential victory, or by picking up four seats if Mr. Gore wins the presidency in November. That is because a four-seat gain would result in a partisan deadlock in the Senate that could be broken by Mr. Gore's Democratic vice president. The Miller appointment also could help Mr. Gore in his quest to win Georgia in the presidential election. The state, which has become a partisan battleground in recent years, is considered to be leaning toward Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican nominee, but not by enough to keep Mr. Gore from contesting it aggressively. Mr. Gore will presumably benefit from get-out-the-vote efforts by Mr. Miller and Mr. Barnes. ''Governor Bush will have to spend more time in Georgia if he expects to carry the state,'' said Merle Black, a political scientist at Emory University. ''Zell Miller is popular in part because independent and Republican-leaning voters have supported him in the past,'' Mr. Ayres said, ''but those same voters are more likely to prefer George Bush than Al Gore. And I don't know that Zell Miller on the ticket generates any substantial increase in turnout.''
 David Frum Op-Ed article on Gov George W Bush's possible selection of former Defense Sec Richard Cheney as Republican Vice Presidential running mate; questions whether Bush is leaving Reaganism behind; says, in selecting Cheney, Bush would demonstrate that he is self-confident, self-possessed and unafraid to campaign alongside candidate of wider and greater experience, but also that he apparently feels he owes little to conservative wing of Republican Party; says Cheney is not someone whom right wing of Republican Party recognizes as one of its own, and that his selection would declare Reagan chapter of Republican Party history not merely completed, but closed (M) As George W. Bush has led America to contemplate Richard B. Cheney as a vice presidential nominee, he has sent two powerful messages to the country and his party -- one reassuring, one disturbing. The reassuring message: Mr. Bush is self-possessed and self-confident -- unafraid to campaign alongside a candidate of wider and greater experience. It's the very opposite of the decision his father made in 1988 when he selected Dan Quayle, whom no one considered his equal, as his running mate. As George W. Bush has led America to contemplate Richard B. Cheney as a vice presidential nominee, he has sent two powerful messages to the country and his party -- one reassuring, one disturbing. The reassuring message: Mr. Bush is self-possessed and self-confident -- unafraid to campaign alongside a candidate of wider and greater experience. It's the very opposite of the decision his father made in 1988 when he selected Dan Quayle, whom no one considered his equal, as his running mate. But there is a disturbing message, too, at least for Republicans. And no, it's not just a warning to county fairs across America that if they invite Mr. Cheney to judge the local beauty contest, he might go home with a tiara on his head. The disturbing message is that Governor Bush apparently feels he owes the conservative wing of the Republican Party little. The choice of Mr. Cheney offers a Bush-Bushie ticket, one that declares the Reagan chapter of the Republican Party's history not merely completed, but closed. This might seem an audacious maneuver in a party whose congressmen occupy their idle hours renaming airports and highways after Mr. Reagan. But it's not as audacious as it seems. In their quieter way, the Reaganites within the party have, since 1996, taken a tumble every bit as painful and embarrassing as that which toppled the last New Deal Democrats in the mid-1980's. The outmaneuvering of Newt Gingrich by Bill Clinton in 1995, Jack Kemp's debate debacle against Al Gore in 1996, the electoral reverses of 1998 -- fairly or not, all have together discredited the wing of the Republican Party that considered itself the inheritor of the Reagan legacy. And so the Reaganite right gathered itself to Mr. Bush. It spurned Steve Forbes, ignored Dan Quayle and recoiled from John McCain. It committed itself early, just as labor signed up early with Bill Clinton in 1992, and without haggling too long or too hard over the specifics of the quo it could expect in return for its quid. But there's an old rule in politics: The people who make up their minds last count the most. That's why politicians worry more about female voters than they do about men, more about young voters than they do about the old, more about the middle class than about the poor or the well-to-do. Having pledged themselves to Mr. Bush so hastily and so unreservedly, Reaganite conservatives now find themselves in no position to extract things from him. He may, for reasons of his own, take a Reaganite line on issues like national missile defense. But if, for other reasons of his own, he should take a non-Reaganite line on abortion or federal spending or affirmative action, the old Reaganites will not find it easy to prevent him. There's no point in grumbling about this. The present weakness of the Reagan wing of the party is no dirty trick; it is the price that must be paid for its recent mistakes and defeats. But it is always better to pay such a price knowingly: conservative Republicans would judge Mr. Bush more accurately and probably, in the end, more charitably if they understood from the beginning how little they counted with him and why.
 Surely not the ''moderate'' Al Gore. When Mr. Gore was asked in a primary debate whether the shift in power from Washington to Wall Street was good or bad for America, he called it a ''natural development in a country that's free.'' No one who calls a power shift from a democracy to an unelected plutocracy a sign of freedom can be trusted to protect the average  citizen from the moneyed special  interests.
 Gov George W Bush reportedly will name former Defense Secretary Richard B Cheney as Republican Vice Presidential running mate and will announce selection on July 25 (M) Gov. George W. Bush has decided on former Defense Secretary Richard B. Cheney as his running mate and is expected to announce his selection on  Tuesday, a highly placed Republican official said tonight. Mr. Bush, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, did not tip his hand as he arrived at the Texas governor's mansion this afternoon after a weekend of deliberations. But only formalities appeared to stand in the way of an announcement. Gov. George W. Bush has decided on former Defense Secretary Richard B. Cheney as his running mate and is expected to announce his selection on  Tuesday, a highly placed Republican official said tonight. Mr. Bush, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, did not tip his hand as he arrived at the Texas governor's mansion this afternoon after a weekend of deliberations. But only formalities appeared to stand in the way of an announcement. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's director of communications, said in a statement ''Governor Bush tonight said he has made his decision on a vice presidential nominee but has not notified that individual.'' She said he would notify his choice for the job on Tuesday morning, though she did not say whom he would call. By choosing Mr. Cheney, a respected party elder who had been running Mr. Bush's vice-presidential search, Mr. Bush made a risk-free and respectable choice that was cheered by many party stalwarts. Mr. Cheney has a wealth of government experience and a resume more far-ranging that Mr. Bush's own six years as governor. It includes a Cabinet stint as defense secretary under Mr. Bush's father during the war in the Persian Gulf. Mr. Cheney meets all of Mr. Bush's criteria as someone who could step in as a commander in chief, someone compatible and loyal. Republicans said Mr. Bush's father  had also strongly supported the selection of Mr. Cheney. For months speculation over whom Mr. Bush would select had focused on an array of governors and senators as well as former Senator John Danforth of Missouri. But many had some liability. Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska was not well known. Representative John Kasich of Ohio appeared too boyish. And though some Republicans were pressing for Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Bush's chief primary rival, relations remained raw between the two camps. In retrospect, it seems significant that when he named Mr. Cheney to lead his search, Mr. Bush did not rule him out as a possible running mate. But Mr. Cheney himself said he did not want the job. ''I have absolutely no desire to go back to government,'' he said in May. ''I've done that. I am set in my ways at my stage. I'm 59, and I didn't leave anything in Washington. I have no plan, intention, desire, under any circumstances to return to government.'' Republicans said that Mr. Cheney's thinking turned as he worked closely with Mr. Bush and many in the party asked him to reconsider. And on Friday, Mr. Cheney emerged publicly as the front-running candidate after he flew to Wyoming to change his voter registration to avoid a constitutional problem. By then, a senior Republican said, Mr. Bush had already decided Mr. Cheney was his leading choice, but wanted to consider his decision once more over the weekend. Because of a history of three mild heart attacks and bypass surgery, he also took a physical examination and received a clean bill of health. At the request of Mr. Bush and his father, the former president, the heart specialist Denton Cooley reviewed Mr. Cheney's medical records and said he was fit for the job. Even before Mr. Cheney's announcement, Democrats and their allies lost no time trying to use him to cast doubt on Mr. Bush and were already looking over his long voting record. Mario M. Cuomo, the former governor of New York, suggested during an appearance on MSNBC that the selection of such a seasoned hand in government was actually an admission ''of a kind of inadequacy.'' On the other hand, Mr. Cheney is not an electrifying candidate, and even today speculation swirled that Mr. Bush had made one last effort to persuade retired Gen. Colin L. Powell to be his running-mate. The talk was firmly denied by Mr. Powell's spokeswoman, Peggy Cifrino, and by some of Mr. Powell's closest party allies and advisers. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE RUNNING MATE  Correction:  July 26, 2000, Wednesday  An article yesterday about George W. Bush's decision to name Richard B. Cheney as his running mate misidentified the agency formerly headed by Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne. It is the National Endowment for the Humanities, not the National Endowment for the Arts. An article yesterday about George W. Bush's decision to name Richard B. Cheney as his running mate misidentified the agency formerly headed by Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne. It is the National Endowment for the Humanities, not the National Endowment for the Arts.
 Richard B. Cheney's personal cardiologist said last night that the man Gov. George W. Bush has apparently chosen to be his running mate was in good health and had no symptoms of heart disease. But in an interview, the physician, Dr. Jonathan Reiner of Washington, took issue with part of a statement released yesterday by a cardiac surgeon in Houston and friend of the Bush family. Richard B. Cheney's personal cardiologist said last night that the man Gov. George W. Bush has apparently chosen to be his running mate was in good health and had no symptoms of heart disease. But in an interview, the physician, Dr. Jonathan Reiner of Washington, took issue with part of a statement released yesterday by a cardiac surgeon in Houston and friend of the Bush family. Dr. Cooley said, ''I conveyed to Governor Bush that in my opinion Mr. Cheney's health problems in the past should not interfere with a strenuous political campaign.'' Dr. Reiner said last night that Mr. Cheney could withstand a strenuous campaign, but he declined to provide details about Mr. Cheney's medical condition until he received permission. He said he expected such permission would be forthcoming if Mr. Bush named Mr. Cheney as his running mate. Dr. Cooley said he agreed to review Mr. Cheney's heart records after a call from former President George Bush ''and presumed approval of Gov. George W. Bush.'' Dr. Cooley did not say whether Mr. Cheney had given his permission.
 Republican National Convention in Philadelphia will reinvent or in some cases abandon party gatherings of past; will amount to lavish multimedia spectacle that pushes controversy to sidelines in favor of unabashed celebration of goals and vision of party standard-bearer, Gov George W Bush; photo (M) Reinventing or in some cases abandoning the rituals of party gatherings past, the Republican National Convention that begins on Monday will more than ever amount to a lavish multimedia spectacle that pushes controversy to the sidelines in favor of an unabashed celebration of the goals and vision of the party standard-bearer, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Reinventing or in some cases abandoning the rituals of party gatherings past, the Republican National Convention that begins on Monday will more than ever amount to a lavish multimedia spectacle that pushes controversy to the sidelines in favor of an unabashed celebration of the goals and vision of the party standard-bearer, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. But most other speeches will be five minutes or less and mere embroidery for each evening's elaborate ''story line'' modeled on Mr. Bush's proposals for education, defense and Social Security and featuring ordinary Americans talking about their lives. Officials even say the Republican whipping boy, President Clinton, may rarely be invoked. ''This convention really is about George Bush,'' said Andy Card, general co-chairman and chief conceptualizer of the $63 million event. ''Other conventions were more about the party and less about the candidate. This on every single night is about Governor Bush. It's about what he stands for. It's about people who symbolize what he stands for.'' If political conventions long ago stopped picking nominees and started selling them, the Republicans are intent this summer on refining the tone of the sales pitch and imposing an unparalleled degree of message discipline on the proceedings. They are able to try this thanks to an extraordinary level of solidarity this year. The Republican base is so firmly in Mr. Bush's corner, organizers say, that they have fewer worries than the Democrats about reassuring party regulars. ''I think there was a sense that one thing was to make this not about the party, but about the issues the party stands for,'' said Russell Schriefer, a Bush media consultant who produced the videos. ''To make it broader, and more inclusive.'' The unanswered question in this serving up of politics on a satin pillow is whether anyone besides the delegates, the news media and Mr. Bush's extended family will pay much attention. Lacking any ''story line'' with inherent conflict, the Republican proceedings are in danger of being dismissed as irrelevant by much of the public. In a recent poll by Harvard's Vanishing Voter project, 43 percent of respondents said they would not tune in to the political extravaganza here, while 38 percent said they would not watch the one staged by Democrats in Los Angeles next month. In unorthodox ways, the organizers, aware of the public's waning enthusiasm, are trying to turn the convention into better television. It is a strategy that Mr. Card, an ebullient Massachusetts Republican who served as transportation secretary under Mr. Bush's father, himself calls ''high risk.'' How else to describe the discussions by Republican convention planners over whether to ask such unlikely participants as the rock groups Smash Mouth and Goo Goo Dolls to perform during the four-day event? Thus the evening will include a remote transmission from the deck of the U.S.S. New Jersey, anchored on the New Jersey side of the Delaware River, where former Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf will talk by satellite to the conventioneers. The episode has an added potential advantage of reminding voters of the high-water mark of the senior Mr. Bush's term in the White House. The second night will also play off the notion of America's strength in other areas, like trade policy. Mr. Card said the nightly themes were enlargements of signature issues for Mr. Bush, as derived from his stump speeches. Monday's theme is ''Opportunity with a Purpose: Leave No Child Behind''; Wednesday's will be ''Prosperity with a Purpose'' and Thursday, when he delivers his acceptance speech, the theme will be ''President with a Purpose.'' Mr. Bush will be the program's roving eminence, broadcast into the hall each night by satellite from somewhere on the campaign trail. His speech -- alone now on Thursday night, the vice-presidential nominee's having been moved this year to Wednesday night -- will be the de facto keynote address, as Mr. Card and the other organizers opted not to designate one. So far, Mr. McCain is the only one of Mr. Bush's opponents from the primaries who has been invited to give a prominent address.
 The most frequent question now: when will the talks end? They have gone far longer than most expectations. The Republican Convention begins next Monday. Could Mr. Clinton let the summit meeting cut into George W. Bush's crowning? Mr. Lockhart said today that Mr. Bush had been gracious, saying that partisan politics should not interfere with the work toward peace. But it was highly unlikely, Mr. Lockhart suggested, that it would be useful to string out the talks for another week. A rumor swept the elementary school that has served as the press headquarters this afternoon that Mr. Clinton was looking for a Wednesday wrap.
