 Clinton administration to postpone by at least five years politically charged plan that could have led to breaching of four major Snake River dams in Washington State for benefit of wild salmon; outlines menu of smaller steps to protect salmon and other fish from dozen endangered species; dams, which interrupt fishes' migratory path, also generate enormous quantities of electricity; delay could shield Vice Pres Al Gore, who has not taken stand, from criticism from environmentalists; Gov George W Bush opposes any breaching of dams; map (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, has already declared his opposition to any breaching of the dams. By contrast, Vice President Al Gore, the likely Democratic nominee, has refused to comment directly on the issue. An administration move to put off any decision about breaching the dams could insulate Mr. Gore from criticism from environmentalists, who have argued that more needs to be done soon to repair the damage to the habitat of the endangered fish. Asked about the administration's decision this morning, Mr. Gore told reporters that he was ''going to bring all of the parties together to come up with a solution that respects the environment and does not cause an upheaval in the economy.'' Asked whether he agreed with the administration's decision, Mr. Gore sidestepped the issue. ''I'm going to review it carefully. I think that what's needed is to bring all of the stakeholders together.'' Later, the Gore campaign released a statement from the vice president that said, in part, ''I feel it provides a solid foundation for restoring the salmon while strengthening the economy of the Pacific Northwest.'' Still, news of the postponement prompted expressions of concern from Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee who is running well in Washington, Oregon and other  Northwest states where polls have shown the race between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush to be extremely close.
 Most Republicans seem confident that they will get credit from voters for having passed the tax cuts. They say Democrats in Congress and Mr. Clinton, and by extension Vice President Al Gore, will come off as obstructionist, out of sync with the politics of prosperity and on the side of the Internal Revenue Service. ''Americans increasingly see the tax code as unfair or even stupid,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican poll taker.''The context that Republicans are trying to set up is that if George W. Bush is elected president, there will be no marriage penalty, no death tax.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore plans to campaign in Texas to highlight budget woes in home state of presidential rival, Gov George W Bush; his campaign spokesman holds inability of Republican governor to effectively manage state budget in period of tremendous prosperity is politically devastating for Bush; visit plan comes amid growing fights among Texas lawmakers and public officials over budget (M) Seizing what he views as a golden chance to pierce the heart of Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, Vice President Al Gore said today that he would ride into Governor Bush's backyard in Texas on Thursday to highlight the state's budget woes. The Gore entourage had planned to travel from Cedar Rapids, Iowa, back to Washington, but this morning Mr. Gore announced that he would diverting his campaign to San Antonio Thursday afternoon. Seizing what he views as a golden chance to pierce the heart of Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, Vice President Al Gore said today that he would ride into Governor Bush's backyard in Texas on Thursday to highlight the state's budget woes. The Gore entourage had planned to travel from Cedar Rapids, Iowa, back to Washington, but this morning Mr. Gore announced that he would diverting his campaign to San Antonio Thursday afternoon. The Gore campaign can hardly contain its glee over the daily headlines out of Texas describing a budget shortfall and its attendant problems. The Gore campaign can be expected to hit the air with television commercials on the subject soon, and will milk the budget problems for maximum publicity for some time to come, particularly as a competing story line about the Bush campaign in the days leading up to the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia. ''We believe that how the governor runs Texas says important things about how he'd run the country,'' said Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. Mr. Fabiani added that the Gore team perceives the Texas budget shortfall as politically devastating for Mr. Bush as the pollution of Boston Harbor was to Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts when he ran for president in 1988. Mr. Gore told reporters tonight that the Boston Harbor comparison ''never crossed my mind.'' But when asked whether he hoped his attacks on Mr. Bush would be as effective as the attacks on Mr. Dukakis, he did not answer directly. Instead, he criticized the administration of Mr. Bush's father, which he said ''squandered'' money on a tax cut that could have been used on a cleanup. There is a special irony for the Gore campaign in being able to turn the Boston Harbor strategy so forcefully against Governor Bush since his father, in seeking the presidency in 1988, had turned Boston Harbor into a weapon against Mr. Dukakis. The Gore campaign has already been using bits of this strategy by pointing to a variety of problems in Texas, but the vice president's advisers said the budget offered a graphic opportunity to bring various threads of the Texas story together. These threads, as Mr. Gore described them today, run from Mr. Bush's ''unaffordable tax cuts for powerful interests, coupled with vague promises that the numbers will somehow add up in the future.'' One Gore aide exclaimed, ''It's a metaphor for everything!'' The announcement of Mr. Gore's trip to Texas comes amid growing fights among Texas lawmakers and public officials over the state's budget. Earlier this week Comptroller Carole Keeton Rylander announced that the state would see an estimated $1.1 billion surplus -- more than enough, she said, to pay for the estimated $610 million in cost overruns that has pushed the state over budget. The controversy became public last week when state budget officials confirmed that unanticipated cost overruns, particularly in Medicaid and in state prisons, had thrown the state $610 million over budget. Mr. Bush's aides quickly responded that cost overruns were routine during any two-year budget cycle, and that the surplus would more than make up the difference. But several Texas Democrats are pouncing on the issue, blaming the $1.7 billion in tax cuts championed by Mr. Bush for the shortfall, and portraying the governor as having put short-term political interests ahead of the state's fiscal stability. Mr. Bush's spokesman, Dan Bartlett, said that the Rainy Day Fund had only $8 million when Mr. Bush took office in 1995 and that the account has since grown tenfold. Mr. Gore has been mentioning Mr. Bush's budget problems every day since the issue emerged last Friday, although his main focus has been another set topic. At the City Hall here, where he announced a proposal to help local communities hire 10,000 more prosecutors, Mr. Gore began with a minor tutorial on the Texas budget. ''Several days ago, we learned that under Governor Bush's leadership, Texas has suddenly gone from its biggest budget surplus ever to a budget shortfall, the most serious budget problem in almost a decade,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech at the City Council chamber here. ''Now, we learn at a time of national prosperity -- indeed, the longest economic boom in the history of America -- that Texas has saved less for the future than almost every other state in America,'' Mr. Gore continued. ''The state's so-called Rainy Day Fund could barely withstand a drizzle. It's now so small that by this fall there will be only enough money to run the Texas state government for a single day. You know, there'd be a real problem if Texas had a rainy season.''
 Unlike the sprinkling of ultraconservative Republicans elected during the Goldwater boom, Mr. Coverdell was not hostile to black aspirations. Indeed, by the time he left the Georgia Senate in 1989, he had gained enough influence to make his mark as a reliable legislative advocate for Atlanta's black mayors. He was known as a policy wonk and a nice guy, traits that would mark his service as director of the Peace Corps under President George Bush. He worked hard in that position to promote a program that is unpopular with many Republicans because of its identification with President John F. Kennedy. It is, of course, always tricky to define political moderation among Southern Republicans. By any measure, Mr. Coverdell, a big booster of tax cuts and school vouchers, was plenty conservative. Lately he had grown close to Trent Lott, the Senate's tough-guy majority leader. But his primary alliances were with less hard-edged types like President Bush and his son George W. Bush, the Texas governor. He helped plan the coming Republican Convention. In the event of a Republican victory, according to Senator Max Cleland of Georgia, a Democrat, Mr. Coverdell ''would have played a big role in a Bush administration, in the cabinet or as a special adviser.'' But in a region that still tends to celebrate pols who are loud and flashy, Mr. Coverdell will be remembered for his general decency, his serious interest in good government and his unlikely leap from the back benches of the Georgia Capitol.
 People close to Pres Clinton say two of his favorite choices for Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate are George J Mitchell and Sen Bob Graham, both of whom he considered picking in 1992; say he has steered clear of selection process (M) President Clinton has told friends and associates that two of his favorite choices for Vice President Al Gore's running mate are former Senator George J. Mitchell and Senator Bob Graham, both of whom he considered picking eight years ago. Mr. Clinton has gone out of his way to stay clear of the selection process, people close to him said, because he wanted to avoid appearing as though  he was imposing his preferences on Mr. Gore or injecting himself into his vice president's campaign. President Clinton has told friends and associates that two of his favorite choices for Vice President Al Gore's running mate are former Senator George J. Mitchell and Senator Bob Graham, both of whom he considered picking eight years ago. Mr. Clinton has gone out of his way to stay clear of the selection process, people close to him said, because he wanted to avoid appearing as though  he was imposing his preferences on Mr. Gore or injecting himself into his vice president's campaign. Friends of Mr. Clinton said he is also intrigued with Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana because of Mr. Bayh's involvement with the Democratic Leadership Council -- a centrist group that Mr. Clinton once headed -- and because he would evoke a energetic and vibrant image, similar to when Mr. Clinton picked Mr. Gore in 1992. One person close to Mr. Clinton said the president spoke positively early on about William S. Cohen, a former Republican senator who is defense secretary. But Mr. Cohen is not discussed much anymore by people close to Mr. Gore. Some Gore loyalists said they had been disturbed about nice things Mr. Cohen said about Gov. George W. Bush in a television interview in May. Mr. Clinton can be considered an expert on the selection of a running mate. He sometimes says that his choice of Mr. Gore will be an important part of his legacy. The president's musings are very sensitive in Mr. Gore's circles. People who have discussed the No. 2 slot with the president said he has been careful not to push one prospect above another. That official also said he believed that Mr. Gore was so concerned about being viewed as independent from the administration that he might change his mind on a choice if it looked like he was following the president's counsel. Gore Won't Name Names (By The New York Times), CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa, July 19 -- Mr. Gore said tonight that he wanted a vice president who would be much like himself, someone who has helped the president carry the load of a job so heavy that it ages the occupants of the Oval Office. ''I have been able to help my country by strengthening President Clinton's hand and helping him in a thousand ways carry the heavy load that sometimes is pretty crushing for a president of the United States,'' Mr. Gore said here in response to a question at a town meeting. Mr. Gore still refused to discuss any names publicly. ''I'm trying to keep the process as private and dignified as possible,'' he said, ''so that the ones that aren't picked aren't accidentally hurt in the process.''
 The movement was essentially simple, ranging from pensive walks and sits to arms opening out with quiet voluptuousness. But the piece built, quietly and inexorably with the score by Henryk Gorecki so that by its end the work seemed to have said everything that needed to be said about a relationship and a moment. The movement was essentially simple, ranging from pensive walks and sits to arms opening out with quiet voluptuousness. But the piece built, quietly and inexorably with the score by Henryk Gorecki so that by its end the work seemed to have said everything that needed to be said about a relationship and a moment.
 One assumes that publishers believe that this same reader beware was applicable to several other books published recently. Simon & Schuster published ''Gone: The Last Days of The New Yorker,'' by Renata Adler, in which she casually dropped into the book that Judge John J. Sirica, who supervised the Watergate trial and who died in 1992, had ties to organized crime. The book included not a driplet of supporting evidence. Seven months later in Harper's magazine she has presented her argument to support the allegation, but finding proof in it was like searching for Robin Hood's barn, which no one ever found. Last year St. Martin's Press shredded an inaccurate biography of George W. Bush. Its vetting failed to uncover that the author, J. H. Hatfield, was convicted of hiring a hit man in an unsuccessful car bombing of his boss. And Random House agreed that significant changes were warranted in Jeffrey Toobin's ''Vast Conspiracy,'' another Clinton book, to correct factual errors. In 1998, Schocken Books, a Knopf imprint, suffered the ultimate absurdity: it printed 50,000 copies of a prize-winning nonfiction book first published in Germany that was entirely fiction. Called ''Fragments,'' it was said by its author, Binjamin Wilkomirski, to be a memoir of his time in Nazi camps. It was a hoax.
 Larry Rockefeller Op-Ed article warns Republican Congress and Gov George W Bush risk placing Republican Party outside mainstream with tax cuts for rich, other policies; urges mainstream Republicans to act independently in this year's elections (M) It's the wealthiest families in America, a few thousand, who would benefit most from the estate tax repeal for which the Republican Congress just voted -- with the support of Gov. George W. Bush -- as well as from the massive income tax cut that Mr. Bush has proposed. But is it worth it, given the inevitable public backlash over awarding hundreds of billions of dollars to those who need it the least? It's the wealthiest families in America, a few thousand, who would benefit most from the estate tax repeal for which the Republican Congress just voted -- with the support of Gov. George W. Bush -- as well as from the massive income tax cut that Mr. Bush has proposed. But is it worth it, given the inevitable public backlash over awarding hundreds of billions of dollars to those who need it the least? It's out of the mainstream -- and at odds with true Republican principles of fiscal responsibility -- to plunge back into deficit spending, as Governor Bush has in Texas with big tax cuts for the oil industry and others. It's out of the mainstream -- and at odds with traditional Republican standards of liberty -- to put the federal government between a woman and her doctor in matters of reproductive choice, as Governor Bush and the party would try to do by overturning Roe v. Wade. And it's out of the mainstream -- and at odds with Republican preference for government closest to the people -- to override local government efforts to limit sprawl and protect drinking water, as Governor Bush did by veto, or to side with gun makers against local attempts to hold them accountable for harm done. It was far from the American mainstream -- and at odds with talk of ''compassion'' -- to withhold medical insurance from 200,000 children, as Mr. Bush did for three years in a state that ranks rock-bottom last in family health coverage; to try to invade teachers' retirement funds; to oppose a hate crimes law even after a black man was dragged to death; and to allow concealed guns to be carried even into church.
 Christopher N Camponovo letter comments on July 18 article on responses by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush to hypothetical question regarding pregnant woman facing execution (S) You report the exchange between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush regarding the hypothetical case of a pregnant woman facing execution (news article, July 18). Mr. Gore, you say, ''would let the woman decide whether the execution should be delayed, allowing her the option of whether or not to give birth.''  Mr. Bush ''said he would support postponing such an execution 'because there's a second life involved.' '' You report the exchange between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush regarding the hypothetical case of a pregnant woman facing execution (news article, July 18). Mr. Gore, you say, ''would let the woman decide whether the execution should be delayed, allowing her the option of whether or not to give birth.''  Mr. Bush ''said he would support postponing such an execution 'because there's a second life involved.' ''
 Loyalty as Bush's Top Criterion  Gov. George W. Bush and his presidential campaign advisers have made clear that one of the litmus tests of a running mate will be a steadfast faithfulness to the governor. Senator John McCain of Arizona, a political maverick, is seen as an improbable selection. President Clinton has told friends and associates that two of his favorite choices for Vice President Al Gore's running mate are former Senator George J. Mitchell and Senator Bob Graham. Vice President Gore said he would travel to Governor Bush's backyard in Texas to highlight the state's budget woes.
 Among the biggest problems the parties face when organizing conventions is deciding whom to include on the speaking schedule. FreedomChannel.com, a nonpartisan site (www.freedomchannel.com), doesn't face the same time constraints, so it will offer video clips of prominent political figures who are not scheduled to speak at the convention. For example, the group is working to arrange a speech from Jeb Bush, the governor of Florida and a brother of George W. Bush.
 What that means, in more nuts-and-bolts terms, is a book that is interspersed with clearly fictitious, largely awkward monologues (ascribed to Bob Dole, Al Gore, Monica Lewinsky, etc.) but consists mostly of the author's rehashing and embellishing recent, familiar events.
 President Clinton has told friends that his favorite choices for Vice President Al Gore's running mate are former Senator George J. Mitchell and Senator Bob Graham, both of whom he once considered picking. President Clinton has told friends that his favorite choices for Vice President Al Gore's running mate are former Senator George J. Mitchell and Senator Bob Graham, both of whom he once considered picking.
 GETTING PERSONAL WITH BUSH -- For voters who were not feeling up close and personal enough with the candidacy of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the campaign unveiled a redesigned Web site, www.GeorgeWBush.com, with a new feature, ''My George W'' yesterday. It lets users receive e-mail messages from the campaign about issues of specific interest to them. The revised site, which includes sections like ''GWB TV,'' which is devoted to video clips of Mr. Bush, is being promoted in a novel way, too. The campaign says it is running the first political TV commercial intended solely to advertise a candidate's Web site. The unnarrated, 30-second spot scans the campaign's home page and supplies the address of the Web site, where users can also answer a daily trivia question and win Bush campaign souvenirs. GETTING PERSONAL WITH BUSH -- For voters who were not feeling up close and personal enough with the candidacy of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the campaign unveiled a redesigned Web site, www.GeorgeWBush.com, with a new feature, ''My George W'' yesterday. It lets users receive e-mail messages from the campaign about issues of specific interest to them. The revised site, which includes sections like ''GWB TV,'' which is devoted to video clips of Mr. Bush, is being promoted in a novel way, too. The campaign says it is running the first political TV commercial intended solely to advertise a candidate's Web site. The unnarrated, 30-second spot scans the campaign's home page and supplies the address of the Web site, where users can also answer a daily trivia question and win Bush campaign souvenirs. ANTI-ABORTION PLANK -- Supporters of abortion rights said yesterday that they had told Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, the chairman of the Republican platform committee, that they had not ruled out a floor fight to change the platform's strong anti-abortion stance. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed nominee, has said he favors keeping that language. But Susan Cullman, co-chairwoman of the Republican Pro-Choice Coalition, said she and her colleagues told Mr. Thompson that their struggle would not end with the platform committee vote. Ms. Cullman said her group was reviewing its options -- one of which is to try to assemble a majority of six state delegations, necessary to make a motion to try to bring the issue to the floor. GORE AVOIDING GALA -- Al Gore may be the most invited guest to parties during the Democratic National Convention, but there is at least one he will not attend: a gala at the Playboy Mansion. ''We're not attending, participating, supporting, condoning or giving our imprimatur in any shape, way or form,'' Chris Lehane, spokesman for the Gore campaign, said Tuesday. The party is billed as a fund-raiser for the Hispanic Unity Caucus, which promotes voter registration among Latinos and is led by Representative Loretta Sanchez, a California Democrat and a close Gore ally. But the party at Hugh Hefner's playhouse, scheduled to coincide with the convention, has become a target of the Republicans, who have asserted that Representative Sanchez is out of touch with both her party and voters if she believes ''scantily dressed women and alcohol'' can help improve Latino participation in the electoral process. Representative Sanchez contends the party's ''high-profile venue'' will make it a sell-out event. UNEXPECTED GUESTS IN PHILADELPHIA -- Seeking to improve relations with the Republican Party and learn how to build a political party, emissaries from Russian's new president, Vladimir Putin, plan to attend the Republican Party's nominating convention in Philadelphia later this month. Representative Curt Weldon of Pennsylvania, who is arranging the trip, says the group is following his advice to not ''put all your eggs in either party's basket.'' He is helping with the visit, he says, out of concern that Mr. Putin is becoming so closely identified with President Clinton and Democrats that Russia could become ''a whipping boy'' in this year's presidential election. Actually, the visit is just the latest overture by Putin allies to reach out to the Republican Party. The Russian foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, met in April with Governor George W. Bush (much as Boris Yeltsin met with Democratic candidate Bill Clinton early in the 1992 campaign). Democratic officials say they know of no plans for Russians to visit their convention in Los Angeles.
 Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign retains virtually same lineup of senior advisers he had year ago, with uppermost echelon composed of inner circle of trusted friends that is wholly intact since his 1994 race for Texas governor; all of advisers offer self-effacing odes to Bush's talents and credit him with campaign's successes; Bush, known to prize loyalty above all else, has made it clear that he will require loyalty of running mate, making Sen John McCain unlikely choice; photo (M Walk through Gov. George W. Bush's campaign headquarters here and you encounter a remarkable sight: virtually the same lineup of senior advisers that he had a year ago and, at the uppermost echelon of the operation, an inner circle of trusted friends that is wholly intact from the days when Mr. Bush won his first race for Texas governor in 1994. Listen to these advisers and you hear something equally arresting: unvarying, self-effacing odes to the governor's talents that attribute all credit for the campaign's successes to Mr. Bush. Walk through Gov. George W. Bush's campaign headquarters here and you encounter a remarkable sight: virtually the same lineup of senior advisers that he had a year ago and, at the uppermost echelon of the operation, an inner circle of trusted friends that is wholly intact from the days when Mr. Bush won his first race for Texas governor in 1994. Listen to these advisers and you hear something equally arresting: unvarying, self-effacing odes to the governor's talents that attribute all credit for the campaign's successes to Mr. Bush. Publicly acknowledged disagreements? Leaks? These are almost nonexistent in Bush world, because most of the people who are allowed to enter it have declared or demonstrated their loyalty, an ethos as precious to Mr. Bush as any other, the coin of his political realm. ''Loyalty is the No. 1 criterion for him,'' said one Republican official who has known Mr. Bush for more than a decade. ''He would have loyalty over any other skill or characteristic in the people around him.'' As Mr. Bush, the de facto Republican presidential nominee, nears the announcement of his running mate, unanswered questions swirl around what type of political and professional pedigree that person will have. But Mr. Bush and his advisers have made clear that one of the litmus tests the person will have passed is that he or she can be utterly faithful to the governor. Conversely, Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma has maintained his position as one of the most-talked-about contenders largely because his mild manner and long friendship with Mr. Bush suggest that he would never try to contradict, usurp or eclipse the Texas governor, Republican officials said. Even by the standards of politics, where discretion is always desired, Mr. Bush places an extremely high premium on loyalty, and it drives his important decisions -- helping to determine who gets his ear, who gets the top jobs around him and the terms of their relationships with him. Many of the senior people affiliated with his campaign had proven their commitment to him by forswearing other political allegiances or taking low salaries. Others had long histories with the Bush family. At Mr. Bush's request, his chief strategist, Karl Rove, sold his consulting business so that his attention to the candidate would be undivided. Maverick Media, the advertising firm that produces Mr. Bush's television commercials, was brought into existence solely for the purpose of the Bush campaign and has no clients other than Mr. Bush, an unusual arrangement in presidential politics. In an interview aboard his campaign plane on Tuesday, Mr. Bush said that what he had tried to do was build an efficient team, and that loyalty was its glue, binding people together so that they could focus on common goals without fear that colleagues would work against their interests. ''A disloyal person in the wrong position can undermine an administration,'' said Mr. Bush, seemingly alluding to the lessons that his friends and advisers said he learned from watching his father, former President George Bush, prevail when the lieutenants around him were true and struggle when they were not. But several political analysts said that there was a potential downside to Mr. Bush's penchant for loyalists. One Republican strategist questioned whether Mr. Bush received advice that was tough and critical enough and whether he exposed himself to a wide enough range of opinions. Another Republican official, describing Mr. Bush's closest advisers, observed: ''I've never seen a campaign where people don't sit around and psychoanalyze the guy. They never do that, even if you're having a drink with them. They never call him anything other than governor, and they never say anything even remotely close to disparaging.'' Mr. Bush's advisers say that their united public front should never be mistaken for a private acquiescence to his wants and whims. ''I feel absolutely free to disagree with him,'' said Karen P. Hughes, the campaign's director of communications. Other advisers said that they, too, spoke their minds around Mr. Bush, but that the vigorous debates behind closed doors stayed there. Ms. Hughes and other advisers said that Mr. Bush had earned their loyalty, supporting them as strongly as they support him. Speaking to reporters aboard his campaign plane recently, Mr. Bush said, ''There was never any question in my mind'' about changing his team. ''These are friends,'' he said. ''I know they're there for the right reason.'' After Mr. Bush struggled in the primaries to turn back the insurgency of Mr. McCain, some analysts speculated that he would turn to a conventionally seasoned political operative to supplement the so-called iron triangle -- Mr. Rove, Ms. Hughes and Joe Allbaugh, the campaign manager -- who had also guided Mr. Bush's career in Texas. Instead, Mr. Bush asked one of his best and oldest friends, Donald L. Evans, an oil and gas company executive, to be the campaign chairman. The tightness and endurance of Mr. Bush's advisers stand in contrast to the gyrations in Vice President Al Gore's operation, which Mr. Bush has monitored with a disapproving eye. During a taping of the television news program ''Hardball with Chris Matthews'' a month and a half ago, Mr. Bush predicted that Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, Tony Coelho, would not survive Mr. Gore's persistent disadvantage in most polls. ''They're going to dump him,'' Mr. Bush told Mr. Matthews during a commercial break. ''Mark my words. Oh, they'll dump him. There's no loyalty in those guys.'' (Mr. Coelho later stepped down after being hospitalized with an inflamed colon.) The unity of the Bush team differs as well from the revolving door that afflicted Bob Dole's presidential campaign four years ago, and it has enabled Mr. Bush to keep the news coverage of his campaign focused on the policies he is unveiling or the voters he is courting. It also reflects Mr. Bush's lingering ire over the behavior of some aides and allies during  former President Bush's failed re-election effort. Mr. Bush said that when the going got tough, ''I saw them jumping out the windows in 1992, looking for the next campaign. And that influenced me. Yeah, that influenced me.'' Friends said that Mr. Bush also learned to value loyalty from the example of his father, who swallowed ideological differences with Ronald Reagan to serve as his vice president from 1981 to 1989. After his father was elected to the presidency in 1988, George W. Bush was asked to head a committee with the task of making sure that people who had helped his father win were not overlooked for jobs. And friends are not being forgotten -- or forgetting the Bushes. Condoleezza Rice, a Russia specialist on the National Security Council under President Bush, is his son's chief foreign policy adviser. Richard B. Cheney, the defense secretary during the Bush administration, is supervising the process by which the Texas governor selects a vice president. During a recent interview about his wife, Laura, Mr. Bush said: ''The other thing about Laura is that she's fiercely loyal. She's loyal to me. She's loyal to my dad. She's loyal to her children.'' It was clear, in the tone of his voice, that there was no praise any higher.
