 Mr. Cheney then said, ''This notion that somehow I was opposed to freeing Nelson Mandela is a typical Al Gore distortion of a record, a point he's trying to make because he doesn't want to talk about real issues.'' ''George W. Bush has now said to the African-American community, 'I give you my person, my candidate for vice president, and my person said no to Nelson Mandela when he was in prison,' '' said Mayor Dennis Archer of Detroit, co-chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
 Gov George W Bush's decision to choose Dick Cheney as running mate was apparently secretly made weeks before Bush formally announced decision amid frenzied speculation; Cheney's unconventional journey to candidacy has stirred alarm among some Republicans, who note Democrats' quickly mustered attacks on Cheney's conservative voting record and question whether the man in charge of screening other candidates for vice-presidency could possibly have received as thorough a screening himself; additionally, Cheney's ties to former Pres George Bush have provoked renewed speculation about elder Bush's influence on his son's presidential campaign; Gov Bush and his aides decline to provide any more than rudimentary details about vetting of vice-presidential prospects, including Cheney, but say that all of them were carefully scrutinized; photo (M) Little more than two weeks ago, Dick Cheney visited Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee in his office on Capitol Hill and Mr. Frist made his pitch, explaining why his experience as a heart surgeon managing life-and-death situations made him the right man to accompany Gov. George W. Bush along the inevitably rocky road to Election Day and, perhaps, the White House. Little more than two weeks ago, Dick Cheney visited Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee in his office on Capitol Hill and Mr. Frist made his pitch, explaining why his experience as a heart surgeon managing life-and-death situations made him the right man to accompany Gov. George W. Bush along the inevitably rocky road to Election Day and, perhaps, the White House. Several days after that, Mr. Bush flew to the Northeast and met twice with Gov. George E. Pataki of New York, discussing a possible place for Mr. Pataki on the Republican ticket. For all this tantalizing activity, however, it now appears that Mr. Cheney had at the time already emerged as a leading candidate  -- and perhaps the leading candidate -- for the slot he had been assigned to help fill. Mr. Cheney and Mr. Bush had discussed the possibility on July 3 at Mr. Bush's ranch near Crawford, about 90 miles north of here. Yet Mr. Cheney's own candidacy was moving along a track so secret that some of the other politicians on the list of seemingly serious prospects had no idea that Mr. Bush was settling on him  until they learned it from newspaper and television reports about  72 hours before Mr. Bush formally announced his decision. Prominent Republicans who discussed the vice-presidential selection with Mr. Bush over the past two weeks, among them Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, said that the Texas governor had not let on that he was considering the head of his search committee for the post. He also did not inquire about how such a selection might play, even as he reviewed with them the qualifications of other potential candidates on his list. In fact, the choice of Mr. Cheney was all but assured in the final days of frenzied speculation among news organizations, days that yielded some entirely unfounded reports: that Senator John McCain of Arizona might be a last-minute addition to Mr. Bush's short list; that Mr. Bush was making a final, hopeful approach to Gen. Colin L. Powell. Mr. Bush was really just running Mr. Cheney through his mind one last time. Mr. Cheney is an immensely respected political veteran, and his selection elicited praise from many Republicans. But the unusual way in which the former defense secretary ended up at Mr. Bush's side at a news conference here on Tuesday  to announce the vice-presidential selection has stirred concern among some Republicans. Additionally, Mr. Cheney's ties to former President George Bush have provoked renewed speculation about the influence of the governor's father on his son's presidential campaign. In a telephone interview today that represented his first public comments on the search process, President Bush said:  ''What I see emerging is that the old guy drove the choice. That is absolutely inaccurate.'' And when he was asked if he had spoken directly to Mr. Cheney and urged him to think about taking the job, Mr. Bush said: ''I cannot reveal whether I did or didn't. Not wanting to obfuscate, but put this down to obfuscation.'' ''I'm not going to get into what I talked to Dick Cheney or anybody else about,'' President Bush said. ''You've got to put it in the context of what Dick Cheney was doing.'' According to Mr. Bush's advisers, the review of Mr. Cheney's credentials and background materials was conducted somewhat outside of the process that Mr. Cheney had established for the rest of the field, and it went forward at a much speedier pace. Within minutes after Mr. Cheney's selection was announced on Tuesday, Democrats produced a trove of extremely conservative votes from Mr. Cheney's decade in Congress, and the barrage of questions about his record that hit Mr. Cheney and the Bush campaign seemed to take them at least partly by surprise. ''Of course I knew his votes,'' Mr. Bush said during a brief news conference today at the governor's mansion here today. ''But I also know his record. What do you expect? I'm running against people who all they do is spend time tearing people down. And they're going to give it their level best trying to tear Dick Cheney down, but they're not going to be able to do so.'' Mr. Bush also suggested that most Americans already knew and respected Mr. Cheney as a result of his role as defense secretary during the Persian Gulf war. ''Secretary Cheney brought people together and helped to win a war,'' he said, ''which stands in stark contrast with Vice President Al Gore, who tends to divide people to create war.'' Through his aides, Mr. Bush declined to be interviewed for this article. Mr. Cheney did not respond to several requests for an interview about the search process that were made through Mr. Bush's aides. But interviews with Republicans who spoke with Mr. Cheney and Mr. Bush these past few weeks, including a number of men who were told they were on the short list of potential vice-presidential candidates, suggest that they underwent a process that was different from Mr. Cheney's. While Mr. Cheney took charge of reviewing financial histories and interviewing candidates, Mr. Bush himself attended to that chore in Mr. Cheney's case. While Mr. Cheney researched the voting records of the other vice-presidential prospects, the task of assessing Mr. Cheney's political past fell to Joe Allbaugh, the campaign manager. (Mr. Allbaugh also did not return a call for comment.) While other candidates began submitting their voluminous paperwork around the beginning of June, in some cases shipping boxes of documents to Mr. Cheney, the examination of Mr. Cheney apparently began little more than a week before Mr. Bush called him and offered him the job. And while at least 11 Republicans filled out an extraordinarily detailed, 83-question form -- including inquiries about subjects ranging from plagiarism to recreational drug use -- Mr. Bush's senior advisers were unable to say if Mr. Cheney had taken the same step. They did note, however, that Mr. Cheney's background had been reviewed when he was named secretary of defense by President Bush. Asked about Ms. Cheney's possible role in helping to screen candidates, including her father, Ms. Hughes said that except for Mr. Cheney, Mr. Bush and Mr. Allbaugh, ''I am not able to discuss others who were involved in the vetting process.'' Mr. Cheney said on ''Good Morning America'' that there was no cause for concern about the unusual way in which he came to be selected. Referring to Mr. Bush, he said:  ''The fact of the matter is that we spent a lot of time -- and again, remember my original advice to him was, you know, we're going to find you a great candidate, but I'd rather not be a candidate myself. Mr. Gore's campaign has seemed genuinely invigorated by the news of Mr. Cheney's selection. Aides to the vice president were churning out reams of documents  about Mr. Cheney's legislative background literally from the moment Mr. Bush concluded the formal announcement of Mr. Cheney's selections. Many details of what is arguably the most important political decision Mr. Bush has made in his presidential campaign to date may never be known. The lack of information has prompted questions among some some Republicans about whether many of the politicians whose names were publicly floated as possible running mates for Mr. Bush were ever in serious contention. Governor Ridge of Pennsylvania said in an interview that he had told aides on July 5 that he did not want to be considered for the race. Nevertheless, Mr. Bush himself continued to encourage speculation that he was considering Mr. Ridge when he campaigned with the Pennsylvania governor in Pittsburgh a week later. Similarly, by the time Mr. Bush met with Mr. Pataki on July 14 -- an encounter that his aides readily confirmed -- Mr. Cheney, who has a history of heart attacks, had completed a medical examination in Washington and reported to Mr. Bush that he had been given a clean bill of health. Both Mr. Ridge and Mr. Pataki are supporters of abortion rights, unlike Mr. Bush. Mr. Cheney, who is a staunch opponent of abortion, had been pitching in with the governor's presidential campaign from the beginning. Last year, he helped Mr. Bush assemble a team of foreign policy advisers. So perhaps it was natural that in mid-March, after Mr. Bush effectively secured the Republican presidential nomination, he asked Mr. Cheney if he wanted to be considered as a possible running mate. Mr. Cheney said no, but, weeks later, agreed to supervise the search process. The candidate who had been mentioned as potentially the strongest running mate Mr. Bush could chose, Mr. Powell, explicitly told Mr. Bush that he did not want the job. He did so during a private moment with the governor on May 25, when Mr. Bush held a  ceremony here pledging support for Mr. Powell's national youth-mentoring program, an aide to Mr. Powell said this week. Mr. Bush and his senior advisers never raised the subject with Mr. Powell again, the aide said. Still there was no hint yet that Mr. Cheney's professed reluctance to consider the job was softening, Mr. Bush's advisers said. But on June 27 -- just six days before Mr. Cheney visited Mr. Bush's ranch and indicated a possible willingness to run for the post -- his name popped up at a gathering of former members of his father's presidential administration at the Bush family compound in Kennebunkport, Me. Those present included President Bush; his former national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft; and his former director of presidential personnel, Chase Untermeyer. Mr. Untermeyer recalled that as these men and others sat around a table on the back porch, President Bush asked in a lighthearted manner who they thought should be his son's vice-presidential pick. ''My impression was that President Bush was very interested to hear that, and took it aboard as if it was an important fact to know,'' Mr. Untermeyer said. But Mr. Scowcroft and President Bush both made telephone calls to a reporter today to dispute the accuracy of that account. Mr. Scowcroft said that before the Kennebunkport meeting, he had run into Mr. Cheney and teased him about being the perfect vice-presidential prospect. Mr. Scowcroft said that he merely shared that story with President Bush. President Bush said that he did not press the idea of Mr. Cheney on his son. On July 11, Ms. Hughes said, he got his medical examination. On July 15 he and Mr. Bush informed Mr. Bush's senior advisers that he was in the running, and his vetting began, according to Ms. Hughes.
 Now, Mr. Daley has left the administration to head Al Gore's presidential campaign, and the China trade bill, having cleared the House in May with seemingly unstoppable momentum, has become tied up in the Senate's arcane maneuvering on the budget, efforts to punish China for weapons proliferation, and general procedural gridlock. Yet the fears Mr. Daley expressed last spring over the fate of the China bill have come true: It became a political hostage while the White House and Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader, clashed over annual appropriations bills and while Democrats focused on unrelated legislative goals. Meanwhile, the political needs of the Gore campaign sidelined Mr. Daley from the White House lobbying campaign to pass the trade bill, leaving Steven Richetti, a less prominent political hand, in charge of the effort. Administration officials said that China remained one of Mr. Clinton's foremost priorities. But since the bill passed the House, the president and many of his top aides have been focused on other issues that will shape his legacy, including brokering a Middle East peace accord, rejecting Republican tax-cut initiatives and, perhaps most of all, helping Mr. Gore become president. The president allowed Mr. Daley, who headed the aggressive lobbying effort on behalf of the China bill from January to June, to resign to take over Mr. Gore's lagging campaign. Mr. Richetti, the deputy White House chief of staff who was Mr. Daley's partner in shepherding the China bill through the House, was left to see it through the Senate.
 James A. Baker III (Op-Ed, July 27)  fails to comprehend the basic intransigence of the Palestinians to accept Israel as a reality. To Yasir Arafat, a peace agreement is only a means to achieving the removal of Israel from the Middle East map. Of equal concern, do Mr. Baker's thoughts represent the views of a future Republican administration given his role in the Bush administration? James A. Baker III (Op-Ed, July 27)  fails to comprehend the basic intransigence of the Palestinians to accept Israel as a reality. To Yasir Arafat, a peace agreement is only a means to achieving the removal of Israel from the Middle East map. Of equal concern, do Mr. Baker's thoughts represent the views of a future Republican administration given his role in the Bush administration?
 July 15 article on potential running mates for Vice Pres Al Gore misstated middle initial of Warren Christopher, who is leading the search; it is M, not G An article on July 15 about potential running mates for Vice President Al Gore misstated the middle initial of Warren Christopher, who is leading the search. It is M., not G. An article on July 15 about potential running mates for Vice President Al Gore misstated the middle initial of Warren Christopher, who is leading the search. It is M., not G.
 Proposed Republican platform would drop several of the more hard-edged conservative positions adopted four years ago and transform tone to reflect 'compassionate conservatism' of Gov George W Bush; but document also reflects continuing power of party's conservative base, most notably in its word-by-word reaffirmation of abortion plank, calling for ban on abortion with no exceptions and appointment of judges who respect 'families values' and 'sanctity of innocent human life'; photo of platform committee chairman Gov Tommy G Thompson of Wisconsin (M) The proposed Republican platform would drop several of the more hard-edged conservative positions adopted four years ago -- like calling for the abolition of the Department of Education  -- and transform much of the document's tone to reflect the ''compassionate conservatism'' of Gov. George W. Bush. The proposed Republican platform would drop several of the more hard-edged conservative positions adopted four years ago -- like calling for the abolition of the Department of Education  -- and transform much of the document's tone to reflect the ''compassionate conservatism'' of Gov. George W. Bush. Governor Thompson said tonight that he hoped the draft reflected ''a more uplifting view of the Republican Party, one that's more inclusive, that attempts to build a winning team, that people can rally around.''  He said it was also intended to reflect the Bush philosophy, adding that he took the chairman's job ''because my friend the governor asked me to do it.'' As written, the document is in large part a road map of the Bush campaign's political strategy in the general election. The section on immigration, for example, no longer demands a constitutional amendment to deny automatic citizenship to the children born of illegal immigrants, as it did four years ago. Rather than calling for ''the official recognition of English as the nation's common language,'' it declares, ''Another sign of our unity is the role of English as our common language.''  The tone, in general, is far more welcoming, reflecting Republicans' efforts to reach out to Hispanics and other immigrant groups. Similarly, the document includes a careful appeal to women, pledging the party's commitment to women's health issues, and to the elderly, considered a critical swing vote this year. It promises to give Medicare ''a new lease on life,'' by giving each of its 39 million beneficiaries a choice of health plans, an allusion to efforts to get more private insurance plans involved in Medicare. And it accuses the Clinton administration of treating ''Social Security as a slogan rather than a priority,'' while heralding Mr. Bush's proposal to allow people to invest part of their payroll taxes. The platform attacks the Supreme Court's recent decision overturning state laws that barred what opponents call ''partial-birth'' abortion, asserting that the decision ''shocks the conscience of the nation.'' And while Mr. Bush says he would allow abortions in the case of rape, incest and to save the life of the woman, the platform remains unswervingly opposed. Mr. Bush and other Republican leaders had promised the anti-abortion movement early on that the abortion plank would not change. Republican aides said the document was intended to sound a far less combative tone than the 1996 platform, which is in keeping with the Bush campaign's effort to present its candidate as ''a uniter, not a divider.'' At times, the references are opaque: In a section titled, ''Government for the People,'' the draft is apparently referring to the impeachment of Mr. Clinton when it declares: ''At a time when the nation felt betrayed by misconduct in high office, the Republican Congress responded with gravity and high purpose. We applaud those members who did their duty to conscience and the Constitution.'' The platform goes to great lengths, though, to try to build a case against giving the Democrats any credit for the current economic boom. It argues that the economy was a ''shambles'' under President Jimmy Carter, was saved by the Reagan and Bush administrations, and was jeopardized anew by the election of the Clinton administration in 1992, although that election occurred in a recession. Only the ''honesty and guts'' of a Republican Congress managed to erase the budget deficit and steady the economy for this  boom, the platform draft declares. Mr. Thompson said the draft was written by the staff of the Republican National Committee, the Bush campaign and his own operation, under the guidance of him and his two co-chairs, Representative Sue Myrick of North Carolina and Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee. ''Reacting belatedly to inevitable crises, the administration constantly enlarges the reach of its rhetoric --  most recently in Vice President Al Gore's 'new security agenda' that adds disease, climate and all the world's ethnic or religious conflicts to an undiminished set of existing American responsibilities. If there is some limit to candidate Gore's new agenda for America as global social worker, he has yet to define it,'' the draft declares. Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, responded, ''Sounds like the Republicans are turning back the clock to the days of isolationism and a head-in-the-sand view of the world. It's only common sense to address these problems before they develop into conflicts.'' The platform draft also takes aim at Mr. Gore's environmental initiatives, arguing that a Republican president will reduce harmful emissions without ''forcing Americans to walk to work.''
 Dawn Lewis letter scores Vice Pres Al Gore for his not-so-pretty depiction of Texas (S) Re ''With Gore Jabbing at Bush, Texas Takes It on the Chin'' (front page, July 21), about five Texans who are appalled by Al Gore's not-so-pretty depiction of our state and who feel compelled to defend its honor: Since four of those people were contributors to George W. Bush, I feel fairly certain that they aren't the parents of some of the many children without health insurance in Texas.  No amount of bluff and bravado can cover up this shameful fact. Re ''With Gore Jabbing at Bush, Texas Takes It on the Chin'' (front page, July 21), about five Texans who are appalled by Al Gore's not-so-pretty depiction of our state and who feel compelled to defend its honor: Since four of those people were contributors to George W. Bush, I feel fairly certain that they aren't the parents of some of the many children without health insurance in Texas.  No amount of bluff and bravado can cover up this shameful fact.
 Paul Feiner letter discusses George W Bush selecting Dick Cheney as running mate; says office of Vice Presidency should be abolished Re your July 26 front-page article  about Gov. George W. Bush's selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate: If Mr. Bush were the fiscal conservative he claims to be, he should have suggested that the office of vice president be abolished. Re your July 26 front-page article  about Gov. George W. Bush's selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate: If Mr. Bush were the fiscal conservative he claims to be, he should have suggested that the office of vice president be abolished. Although our country has been fortunate to have had a highly qualified vice president in Al Gore serving us in recent years, the reality is this: the office has no legal responsibilities other than to preside over the Senate. And those duties could easily be assumed by the Senate majority leader.
 Tom Gallucci letter agrees with George W Bush selection of Dick Cheney as running mate I agree that George W. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as his running mate is revealing of Mr. Bush's approach to politics and to governing (''A Safe Pick Is Revealing,'' news analysis, front page, July 26). Governor Bush is indeed more concerned with governing than with politics, a quality of a true leader. He chose ability over flash. He is looking to develop a strong team to successfully lead the country rather than simply creating a political machine to garner votes. I agree that George W. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as his running mate is revealing of Mr. Bush's approach to politics and to governing (''A Safe Pick Is Revealing,'' news analysis, front page, July 26). Governor Bush is indeed more concerned with governing than with politics, a quality of a true leader. He chose ability over flash. He is looking to develop a strong team to successfully lead the country rather than simply creating a political machine to garner votes. I believe that the American people recognize substance over sizzle, and that a capable partner like Mr. Cheney will result in a political advantage and enhance Mr. Bush's chance for victory.
 G.O.P. Easing Stands, But Not on Abortion  The proposed Republican platform would drop several of the more hard-edged conservative positions adopted four years ago -- like calling for the abolition of the Department of Education -- and transform much of the document's tone to reflect the ''compassionate conservatism'' of Gov. George W. Bush. But it also retains the call for a ban on abortion with no exceptions and the appointment of judges who ''respect traditional family values and the sanctity of innocent human life.'' Dick Cheney continued to respond to questions about his conservative voting record, and Gov. George W. Bush defended his running mate. Soft-Money Inquiry Sought  Common Cause and Democracy 21 urged the Justice Department to investigate whether the two major parties were violating federal election laws by using large unregulated political donations to pay for television commercials promoting the Gore and Bush campaigns.
 Non-partisan advocacy groups Common Cause and Democracy 21 ask Justice Department to investigate whether Democratic and Republican Parties are violating federal election laws by using large unregulated political donations known as soft money to pay for TV commercials promoting campaigns of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; also ask Federal Election Commission to review issue (M) Two advocacy groups called on the Justice Department today to investigate whether the Democratic and Republican Parties were violating federal election laws by using large unregulated political donations to pay for TV commercials promoting the campaigns of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Two advocacy groups called on the Justice Department today to investigate whether the Democratic and Republican Parties were violating federal election laws by using large unregulated political donations to pay for TV commercials promoting the campaigns of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''The Gore and Bush soft money ads are clearly campaign ads designed and intended to promote the presidential candidates, are created by members of the presidential campaigns, are targeted to run in key presidential battleground states, are indistinguishable from other presidential campaign ads and are without question 'for the purpose of influencing' the presidential campaigns,'' the letter stated. The advertisements cited by Mr. Harshbarger and Mr. Wertheimer are, in fact, paid for both with hard and soft money, spokesmen for each party said. The Democratic National Committee and the Republican National Committee defended the advertisements, noting that none explicitly called for the viewer to vote for Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush.
 Although it would only affect relatively well off beneficiaries, the issue has considerable political sensitivity. Vice President Al Gore cast the tie-breaking vote in the Senate to pass the 1993 measure, and Republicans linked him to it throughout the day of debate on the House floor today.
 As the state capital, Nashville remains a cockpit of political drama. Closely divided between the two parties, Tennessee has produced prominent Democrats like Cordell Hull, Franklin D. Roosevelt's secretary of state; Estes Kefauver, the 1956 vice presidential nominee; and Albert Gore Sr. It has produced powerful Republicans like Howard H. Baker Jr. and Lamar Alexander. They play the game for keeps here, and they don't forget; in casual conversation six years after he lost his seat, former Senator Jim Sasser bitterly condemned the Republican politicians who had denied him a fourth term as ''reactionary know-nothings.'' At the moment, politics sometimes looks like Nashville's growth industry. Mr. Gore, soon to be the Democratic nominee for President, is a native son, sort of; born in Washington, he spent summers in Carthage, Tenn., one of many nearby towns  with names drawn from antiquity, then graduated from Harvard and studied for a year at Vanderbilt's divinity school. He moved his headquarters here when his primary campaign was floundering, and Yankee staff members have learned more than they wanted to know about biscuits with cream gravy. But the two groups have a few things in common. The whole town assuages its sweet tooth with a locally produced candy called Goo-Goo Clusters, a highly caloric confection of peanuts, chocolate, caramel and marshmallow. Ronald Reagan took jelly beans to the White House; if Al Gore wins the presidency this year, look for him to stock the Oval Office with Goo-Goo Clusters.
 Among the aircraft to be displayed is the V-22 Osprey, which has crashed three times in the past decade. It is a hybrid with rotors that swivel so it can take off like a helicopter but cruise like a turboprop commuter plane. The Osprey has been beset by controversy over cost and mission as well as safety, and Mr. Cheney waged a long and unsuccessful battle against it when he was in the Bush administration.
 Republican National Committee votes to make presidential nominating season last until May by requiring big states to hold their primaries last; plan faces stiff fight in national convention's rules committee and perhaps on convention floor; Gov George W Bush campaign says Bush has 'no position' on issue (M) That could be forestalled by the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, which has been structuring the convention to make it free of controversy. But the spectacle of politicians' arguing about political calendars, rather than something so emotional as abortion, might not seem harmful, especially if it took place on Monday morning, when only a couple of cable networks were covering the convention. Governor Bush has had nothing to say about the proposal, although recently his aides have said he has some ''concerns'' about it. Ari Fleischer, a Bush campaign spokesman, said in Austin today that ''he has no position on it.'' But the plan was killed on a 95-to-51 vote. Mr. Norcross said it had been suggested to him by Susan Weddington, chairwoman of the Texas Republican Party, who said she had never discussed it with Mr. Bush.
 TUNING OUT THE NEWS  Journalists' coverage of the characters of the presidential contenders has had little effect on voters' perception of the characters of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, according to a study released yesterday. The study's authors at the Project for Excellence in Journalism, in Washington, said that journalists' statements about a candidate's character -- that Mr. Bush was inexperienced, for example, or that Mr. Gore was prone to stretch the truth -- were usually accompanied with supporting evidence but that denials of such assertions were given short shrift. The study examined a sampling of five months of election coverage in 17 news outlets, including network news broadcasts, Sunday morning talk shows, cable news talk shows, national and regional newspapers and online publications. The study compared the themes the journalists emphasized with voters' perceptions of the candidates, as measured in a separate survey of 1,204 potential voters conducted by the Pew Research Center. The comparison indicated that voters gave issues like Mr. Bush's family connections or Mr. Gore's fund-raising tactics substantially different weight than journalists did. The journalists' ''lens on what's being said by one candidate or others doesn't affect the public,'' said Amy Mitchell, one of the study's authors. But, the study noted, journalists offered no evidence for their statements or cited the work of other journalists about one-quarter of the time that they made assertions about the candidates' characters. The researchers found that coverage of Mr. Bush tended to rely on his conduct of this campaign for evidence about his character, while coverage of Mr. Gore tended to rely on his record in Congress, the Senate and the Clinton administration. TUNING OUT THE NEWS  Journalists' coverage of the characters of the presidential contenders has had little effect on voters' perception of the characters of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, according to a study released yesterday. The study's authors at the Project for Excellence in Journalism, in Washington, said that journalists' statements about a candidate's character -- that Mr. Bush was inexperienced, for example, or that Mr. Gore was prone to stretch the truth -- were usually accompanied with supporting evidence but that denials of such assertions were given short shrift. The study examined a sampling of five months of election coverage in 17 news outlets, including network news broadcasts, Sunday morning talk shows, cable news talk shows, national and regional newspapers and online publications. The study compared the themes the journalists emphasized with voters' perceptions of the candidates, as measured in a separate survey of 1,204 potential voters conducted by the Pew Research Center. The comparison indicated that voters gave issues like Mr. Bush's family connections or Mr. Gore's fund-raising tactics substantially different weight than journalists did. The journalists' ''lens on what's being said by one candidate or others doesn't affect the public,'' said Amy Mitchell, one of the study's authors. But, the study noted, journalists offered no evidence for their statements or cited the work of other journalists about one-quarter of the time that they made assertions about the candidates' characters. The researchers found that coverage of Mr. Bush tended to rely on his conduct of this campaign for evidence about his character, while coverage of Mr. Gore tended to rely on his record in Congress, the Senate and the Clinton administration. GORE 'MULLING' OVER NO. 2  Speculation may be swirling around Vice President Al Gore's decision on a running mate, but Mr. Gore was the picture of tranquillity yesterday as he sought to begin a vacation with his family on a private island off North Carolina. Mr. Gore told reporters that he had pretty much finished his interview process for a running mate and was entering the ''mulling'' phase of his decision, but he gave no clue as to where that  might take him and would not offer up any names. ''I've got the luxury of time to kind of sit and let things settle for a while,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I have not even preliminarily picked someone.'' He said there were fewer than 10 people on his list of candidates. And he said that none of them would visit him while he was on vacation. He did say he would probably talk with Warren Christopher, who is heading his search for a running mate.
 The industry's politically potent ally, the National Rifle Association, which represents 3.8 million gun owners, plans to spend a record $15 million on state and federal elections this fall. The group is expected to endorse Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. And a loose coalition of gun-control groups has pledged to spend several million dollars helping to elect their friends, most of them Democrats. Handgun Control Inc., one of the coalition's leaders, plans to run commercials during the Republican convention that portray Mr. Bush as a pawn of the rifle association. Last year, Mr. Bush signed legislation that prohibits Texas municipalities from suing gun makers without approval of the State Legislature. Enacting such bills in all 50 states is a top priority of the gun industry and the rifle association. Mr. Bush has suggested that he would sign similar federal legislation. Mr. Bush's presumptive Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, has been a vocal supporter of the litigation, as have Mr. Clinton and Housing Secretary Andrew M. Cuomo, who has threatened to bring lawsuits against the industry on behalf of the public housing authorities. Although the Shooting Sports Foundation does not plan to endorse a candidate, its members are voicing support for Mr. Bush. ''Governor Bush appears more willing to respect private citizen's rights of self-defense,'' said Jeff Reh, general counsel for Beretta U.S.A. ''To us, the choice between the candidates is clear.''
 Over the last few months Al Gore has been campaigning like crazy, unfazed by your inattention. His current message is that George W. Bush would turn the country into another Texas, a place Mr. Gore has been depicting as a sort of Burkina Faso with oil rigs. This pitch might work slightly better if Mr. Gore himself had not spent so many years as Number Two to the former governor of Arkansas. But the Democratic National Committee lent a hand the other day, somberly issuing a traveler's warning that urged visitors to the Lone Star State to update their immunization shots. Meanwhile, Mr. Bush has been proceeding at a more leisurely pace -- being inclusive, bonding with Dick Cheney and building his dream ranch house. This is going to be the only presidential candidate in history who spends the campaign working on his retirement home. Over the last few months Al Gore has been campaigning like crazy, unfazed by your inattention. His current message is that George W. Bush would turn the country into another Texas, a place Mr. Gore has been depicting as a sort of Burkina Faso with oil rigs. This pitch might work slightly better if Mr. Gore himself had not spent so many years as Number Two to the former governor of Arkansas. But the Democratic National Committee lent a hand the other day, somberly issuing a traveler's warning that urged visitors to the Lone Star State to update their immunization shots. Meanwhile, Mr. Bush has been proceeding at a more leisurely pace -- being inclusive, bonding with Dick Cheney and building his dream ranch house. This is going to be the only presidential candidate in history who spends the campaign working on his retirement home. May 15 -- Reacting to criticism that Al Gore's campaign is adrift, Tony Coelho tells The Times: ''When people say 'Maybe you've lost some traction,' they have no idea what we're doing. . . . Just watch us. Watch us go forward.'' May 31 -- George W. Bush irritably tells a TV interviewer he has read ''a lot more books than you give me credit for.'' June 6 -- Boosting his friend George W. Bush to reporters, Gov. Gary Johnson of New Mexico recalls a conversation they had at a conference on state government. ''George turns to me and says, 'What are they talking about?' I said, 'I don't know.' He said, 'You don't know a thing, do you?' And I said, 'Not one thing.' He said, 'Neither do I.' And we kind of high-fived.'' June 14 -- Not to be outdone in humanizing the presidential candidate of his choice, Gov. Gary Locke of Washington, a Democrat, tells reporters that Al Gore is ''not only a great person, but he's very funny. . . . he is always picking up the phone to check on his mom.'' June 28 -- Asked if the scandals in his administration are hurting Mr. Gore's campaign, President Clinton says, ''a whole bunch of this stuff was just garbage,'' and reminds reporters that the only thing the vice president was ''implicated in is this campaign-finance thing.'' July 20 -- Al Gore accepts an invitation to debate George W. Bush on the David Letterman show. ''We think this will pretty much decide the election,'' says the show's executive producer.
 Dick Cheney tries to beat back questions about his conservative voting record, appearing on morning news programs of all three major networkers as Gov George W Bush campaign fights to keep from being defined by second man on ticket (M) Dick Cheney tried today to beat back questions about his conservative voting record, appearing on the morning news programs of all three major networks as the Bush campaign fought to keep from being defined by the second man on the ticket. Gov. George W. Bush jumped into the debate, accusing the Democrats of using a ''constant line -- vote for me, I'm going to tear down the other person'' -- in attacking the record of his running mate, whose service as defense secretary to Mr. Bush's father followed 10 years in the House. Dick Cheney tried today to beat back questions about his conservative voting record, appearing on the morning news programs of all three major networks as the Bush campaign fought to keep from being defined by the second man on the ticket. Gov. George W. Bush jumped into the debate, accusing the Democrats of using a ''constant line -- vote for me, I'm going to tear down the other person'' -- in attacking the record of his running mate, whose service as defense secretary to Mr. Bush's father followed 10 years in the House. ''Secretary Cheney brought people together and helped win a war,'' Mr. Bush said, ''which stands in stark contrast to Vice President Al Gore, who tends to divide people to create war.'' Mr. Bush spoke as Mr. Cheney, for a second straight day, was called on to explain positions he took as a congressman from Wyoming, including votes against the equal rights amendment, gun control and sanctions on South Africa's apartheid government. Democrats have highlighted those stands to undercut Mr. Bush's efforts to define himself as a ''different kind of Republican.'' At times today, Mr. Cheney shot back by pointing to inconsistencies in Mr. Gore's own Congressional voting record. At other times, he defended his conservative views. And occasionally, he turned to talk of legislative process. Several hours later Mr. Bush made a brief appearance before reporters, taking time out from practicing his acceptance speech for his nomination next week, and maintained that he had not been blindsided by Mr. Cheney's record. ''Of course I knew his votes,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But I also know his record. What do you expect? I'm running against people who all they do is spend time tearing people down.'' The Democrats kept up their efforts to use Mr. Cheney's record as a way of tying Mr. Bush to a Republican establishment of the past. ''What Cheney's selection has done is given us a rather vivid picture of old guard Republicanism,'' said Mark Fabiani, a deputy Gore campaign manager. And, Mr. Fabiani said, ''some of his past votes are hard to explain away in any era.'' The difficulty for Mr. Bush is that some of the stands of his running mate cut right to the heart of the way he has been seeking to define himself as a ''compassionate conservative.'' Mr. Bush has put a heavy premium on education, for example, and Mr. Cheney voted against the Head Start program. Mr. Bush regularly surrounds himself with members of minorities and recently spoke at the convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Mr. Cheney voted against imposing economic sanctions on the apartheid government of South Africa and against a House resolution calling for Nelson Mandela to be freed after 23 years in prison. This morning Mr. Cheney said on the NBC News television program ''Today'' that ''this notion that somehow I was opposed to freeing Nelson Mandela is a typical distortion by Al Gore.'' And on ABC's ''Good Morning America,'' he tried to turn the scrutiny to Mr. Gore, whose position on gun issues has changed since his first years in Congress. ''At the same time that I was doing that, casting those votes, Al Gore was receiving an A rating from the National Rifle Association,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''He was pro-gun and anti-gun-control.''
 Howell Raines Editorial Observer says both Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush suffer from being viewed as sons in political dynasties, but that Bush faces the tougher threat of being miniaturized by a living former president father (M) ''We don't need Dad in this race,'' George W. Bush told The Midland Reporter-Telegram back in 1978, when he was making an unsuccessful run for Congress and being questioned about the views of his already famous father. But in the world of oedipal politics, keeping dad out of the campaign can be a difficult task, as Governor Bush and countless other famous sons have discovered over the years. ''We don't need Dad in this race,'' George W. Bush told The Midland Reporter-Telegram back in 1978, when he was making an unsuccessful run for Congress and being questioned about the views of his already famous father. But in the world of oedipal politics, keeping dad out of the campaign can be a difficult task, as Governor Bush and countless other famous sons have discovered over the years. Indeed, one of the few traits that Governor Bush and Vice President Al Gore seem to have in common is the dilemma of being the son of a famous politician. Mr. Bush probably has the harder task in containing the offstage presence of a very lively 76-year-old  former president. But Mr. Gore's candidacy is haunted, in a way, by the golden-throated ghost of Senator Albert Gore Sr., who died in 1998. In the South, political scions from Herman (son of Ol' Gene) Talmadge to George Wallace Jr. have labored to avoid the appearance of having been foisted on the public. In that respect, it was probably less than helpful when the elder Mr. Gore, asked in 1992 about his son's presence on the Democratic national ticket, said, ''We raised him for it.'' Even today, the father's reputation competes with the son's reality. Albert Gore Sr. was a famous orator. The son turns to stone at the teleprompter. Vice President Gore is accused of pandering. Senior lost his Senate seat rather than alter his opposition to the Vietnam War. The father had the advantage of an impoverished Tennessee boyhood. Albert Gore Jr. used their Tennessee farm as a summer camp. For all that, Governor Bush faces the tougher, day-to-day threat of being miniaturized by a living ex-president. The elder Mr. Bush inflicted unintended collateral damage at a rally before the New Hampshire primary by referring to his son as ''this boy.'' In a subsequent interview with The New York Times, President Bush and his wife, Barbara, took what appeared to be a pledge of non-interference. But family discipline seemed to break down during the process of putting Dick Cheney on the ticket. Governor Bush acknowledged ''kibitzing'' by his father, apparently code for days of lobbying by the former president for his secretary of defense. A fatherly call to the elderly Texas heart surgeon Denton Cooley about Mr. Cheney's health was also made public. President Bush, in damage-control mode, said yesterday that it was ''absolutely inaccurate'' to say he had driven the choice of Mr. Cheney. But in fact the whole process took on a very retro, Texas-elite, Bush-senior look. The psychological signal was even more damaging, as if by pushing Mr. Cheney President Bush was saying, Don't worry: when my son makes decisions, adults will be in the room. Neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Gore is quite there yet. True, Mr. Gore now outranks his father, but he is not yet perceived as having made the step from scion to paterfamilias. That could argue for picking a junior figure for a running mate. Mr. Bush has gone in the other direction, putting a de facto father on the ticket at the urging of his real father in Houston. Governor Bush cites this as proof of his inner security, and it may be. But he still has to worry that voters will read it as a sign of a son not yet risen to full autonomy.
 SANDY HOOK: CRITICISM OF GORE -- Three days after Vice President Al Gore was endorsed for president by the Sierra Club, a New Jersey environmental group criticized him on ocean dumping. The group, Clean Ocean Action, sent Mr. Gore a letter on Wednesday, the fourth anniversary of an agreement he brokered in 1996 to limit dumping at the mud dump six miles off Sandy Hook. Clean Ocean Action signed onto the agreement, but now says the United States Environmental Protection Agency's standards undermine the agreement by allowing some dumping to continue. Mr. Gore supports the federal agency.
 ''Bush doesn't have the strengths in foreign and national politics that his father did,'' said Mr. Gauthier, 59, who also runs an organization to help lower-income people obtain homes,  ''and there's been good and bad state governors as presidents, so he comes into it having to answer why he should be executive of the United States.'' ''With Gore, my fear is that his programs would be too big, too expensive,'' said Mr. Gauthier, who voted for Republicans in the last four presidential elections, Democrats in the previous three and knows only that he will not vote for a third-party candidate this year. ''I'd like to see a leader who's not a captive of special interests, but it may be impossible,'' said Edith Eisner, a 75-year-old retired English teacher who said she would vote for Al Gore. ''I think both the candidates now can be pushed around.'' Al Butkus, the president of an engineering firm who said he would vote for George W. Bush, said: ''My big concern about presidential politics is once you get to be able to run for president you've had to make so many promises and compromises that you've compromised yourself coming through the system.'' Strikingly, among people who said they would support Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush, there was frequently little passion about the candidate. Still, she said: ''I think Gore is questionable. I don't think he tells the truth all the time.'' Ms. Wilson, with two children and a husband who is also a lawyer, said she was fairly certain that Mr. Gore agreed with her on education, the environment, affirmative action and other issues, but she had reservations about ''him as a person.'' She said she believed, for example, that he was ''pandering'' when he said that Elian Gonzalez and his father should be given permanent residency status, and she called his ethics on campaign financing ''a little loose.'' Mr. Butkus, 48, who typically backs Republicans for president, said of Governor Bush: ''He doesn't have a lot of political experience. There's just not a big book on him to let you now how he'd act in situations.'' He said he was ''not happy'' with Mr. Bush's vague response about whether he had used cocaine, but added, ''There's abuses on the other side.'' ''The one thing I'm impressed with Bush about is that he has been picking good people and they're sticking by him,'' Mr. Butkus said. ''I want someone who's going to have a balance in being generally businesslike in the management of government,'' said Don Colleton, a 58-year-old lawyer leaning toward Mr. Bush. ''But I'm not one to play around with some of these social issues. I want folks to behave in a way that is just resolute in acknowledging the intrinsic equal dignity of members of the human race, whatever color or size they come in.'' Several people expressed concern that Mr. Bush might be influenced by radical right-wing voices in the Republican Party, but none seemed concerned that Mr. Gore would be similarly pulled from the center. ''I think Bush's heart is one place and his head is another,'' said the Rev. Larry Bullock, an African Methodist Episcopal minister who also owns construction businesses. ''I think he is a compassionate conservative, but I think he's too beholden to certain wings of his party.'' Mr. Bullock said he would probably vote for Mr. Gore, but wanted the Democratic candidate to ''show a freshness and a newness.'' ''He's really got to rattle those bones,'' Mr. Bullock said. ''Clinton gave us the bridge to the 21st century. Gore needs to tell us what's on the other side of the bridge.'' Most of those interviewed said their view of President Clinton would not affect their vote. Supporters and critics said Mr. Gore was appropriately loyal in defending the president in the Monica Lewinsky matter. And most said that he deserved neither credit nor criticism for Clinton administration policies. One exception was Lorraine Morton, the Democratic mayor of Evanston, who said she did not have ''great enthusiasm'' for Mr. Gore, but ''Clinton did a fantastic job,'' and if elected, ''Gore can pick up the telephone and say, 'Bill. what do you think about so and so.' '' Although most people said Mr. Bush made a good choice in Dick Cheney as his running mate, those interviewed said it would not affect their views. With Mr. Bush, he said, he is unsure ''how much has been attained because he's daddy's boy.'' ''I don't think there's any question that Gore brings more experience, having been vice president for eight years,'' he said. Still, Mr. Slotnick said he believed that Mr. Bush ''could probably get a good cabinet together.'' And while ''Bush seems to me like a grown-up frat boy,'' Mr. Slotnick said, he also ''seems like a more approachable, more normal guy.'' ''He seems less political,'' Mr. Slotnick said. ''Gore, everything he does seems a little rehearsed.'' Mr. Slotnick said he thinks ''both Gore and Bush can keep the momentum in the economy going,'' adding:  ''So this year I'm really looking more at the person. At the end of the day you look for someone who really you can look up to and trust. Are they a good representation of the country?''
