 Then Representative Howard Coble, chairman of House Judiciary's subcommittee on the courts, sent the Court of Appeals here evidence of four more cases in which Chief Judge Johnson bypassed the system to steer cases embarrassing to Democrats (including that of Clinton-Gore fund-raiser Maria Hsia) to judges notoriously soft on Clintonites. The implicit message: if the Judicial Branch didn't clean up its act internally, the Legislative Branch would step up to its constitutional responsibility.
 Ever since the war in the Persian Gulf, Colin L. Powell has been the most eagerly courted yet most reluctant member of the Republican Party. Four years ago, he was mentioned as a presidential candidate, and even as recently as last week, rumors were flying about the possibility of him being the running mate of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Powell, 63, was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1989 to 1993 and served under the man who was chosen as Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, the former secretary of defense. Ever since the war in the Persian Gulf, Colin L. Powell has been the most eagerly courted yet most reluctant member of the Republican Party. Four years ago, he was mentioned as a presidential candidate, and even as recently as last week, rumors were flying about the possibility of him being the running mate of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Powell, 63, was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1989 to 1993 and served under the man who was chosen as Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, the former secretary of defense. Elaine L. Chao, who was born in Taipei, Taiwan, and came to the United States at age 8, has taken part in several forums on race. Ms. Chao, who will speak about immigration, has emphasized the importance of looking at dialogues about race not as a debate between blacks and whites but as a discussion that should include a cross section of races. She was a deputy transportation secretary in the Bush administration and the head of the Federal Maritime Administration in the Reagan administration. She served as director of the Peace Corps from September 1991 to August 1992. In August 1992 she replaced William V. Aramony, who was convicted in 1995 of fraud, tax evasion and conspiracy, as president of the United Way of America. She resigned the position in May 1996. She is married to Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican who is the head of his party's campaign committee in the Senate. Sharon Darling of Louisville, Ky., founded the National Center for Family Literacy in 1989 as a private, nonprofit corporation to teach 3- and 4-year-olds ''preliteracy skills'' like getting along with others and communicating orally. A former director of adult education for the Kentucky Department of Education, Ms. Darling will speak on community-based literacy programs. In 1988 she was honored for a program she helped start that focused on teaching scholastic and family skills to parents who had not graduated from high school. In 1989, Ms. Darling was chosen by Barbara Bush, then the first lady, to serve on the advisory committee to the Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy, a nonprofit group.
 The Democratic message is that Mr. Cheney's votes as a member of Congress from Wyoming in the 1980's are inconsistent with Gov. George W. Bush's promise of ''compassionate conservatism.'' The commercial is scheduled to be broadcast beginning Monday in 17 battleground states. The Democratic message is that Mr. Cheney's votes as a member of Congress from Wyoming in the 1980's are inconsistent with Gov. George W. Bush's promise of ''compassionate conservatism.'' The commercial is scheduled to be broadcast beginning Monday in 17 battleground states. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Governor Bush, said the advertisement continued the Democratic strategy of ''selectively distorting a good man's record.'' He said the commercial would hurt Vice President Al Gore because the American people disliked negative campaigning. ON THE SCREEN -- The 30-second spot opens with a tight shot of Mr. Bush then widens to show Mr. Cheney standing by his side. The rest of the commercial simply shows a still picture of Mr. Cheney with text about his votes on education, the environment and health care legislation. THE SCRIPT -- A narrator reads: ''George W. Bush chose Dick Cheney to help lead the Republican Party. What does Cheney's record say about their plans? Cheney was one of only eight members of Congress to oppose the Clean Water Act. One of the few to vote against Head Start. He even voted against the school lunch program; against health insurance for people who lost their jobs. Cheney, an oil company C.E.O., said it was good for OPEC to cut production so oil and gasoline prices could rise. What are their plans for working families?'' SCORECARD -- Democrats believe that Mr. Cheney's voting record and his background as an oil industry executive offer rich targets for attack. This hastily produced spot is an effort to define Mr. Cheney as a rock-hard Republican conservative before Republican image-makers at the convention that opens tonight can soften the edges. It intensifies a week of attacks on Mr. Cheney's record, which began the day Mr. Bush announced that Mr. Cheney would be his running mate. But polls taken since the announcement have shown Mr. Bush increasing his lead over Mr. Gore.
 Edward G Rendell, former Democratic Mayor of Philadelphia who successfully lobbied Republicans to hold National Convention in city, is part of festivities as tour guide and host; delegation from New Hampshire, where Gov George Bush lost critical primary to Sen John McCain, is given out-of-the-way seats on convention floor; Arianna Huffington launches Shadow Convention at University of Pennsylvania; photo (M) (M) Could New Hampshire's faraway seats -- apparently, one security guard said, not even near the good bathrooms, but the ones with low pressure flushing mechanisms -- be all because George W. Bush lost the critical New Hampshire primary to Senator John McCain? It was the first day of Ms. Huffington's five-day pep rally billed as the Shadow Convention, which opened its doors yesterday at the University of Pennsylvania's Annenberg Center. First on the agenda was Mr. McCain, Ms. Huffington's buddy with the biggest marquee draw -- that is, if you do not include Chuck D of the rap group Public Enemy, who is scheduled to speak later in the week. (Representative Christopher Shays of Connecticut and Jack Kemp both bowed out over a week ago.) But the senator did not stay to make small talk with the talk-show guest; he rushed grumpily through the stage door after the audience booed him for endorsing George W. Bush. Ethan A. Nadelmann, the director of The Lindesmith Center, a New York drug policy center financed by the billionaire George Soros, hobnobbed backstage with Ms. Huffington's daughters, ages 9 and 13. Ms. Huffington is passionate about the drug issue; her convention even placed a two-page ad in last week's edition of The Philadelphia Weekly, an alternative newspaper, that implied that Mr. Bush used drugs in his younger days. ''It's about Bush getting away with doing drugs all those years, if he did,'' she said. ''The message is that if you're white and do drugs you can become president, and if you're black and do drugs you go to prison.'' But that's not all that bothers Ms. Huffington about Mr. Bush. She said, for example, he has appropriated her theory of ''compassionate conservatism'' -- it's a theme he has pounded on the campaign trail -- and that positively rankles her. But enough of weighty matters. It was time for Ms. Huffington and Al Franken, the political comedian, to run lines for their upcoming speech on political satire. Mr. Kozol listened to a few and did not laugh. Mr. Franken tried out a joke about attending a Democratic fund-raising event in 1996. ''Fifty-thousand dollars got you a slow waltz with Hillary Clinton,'' he said. ''Twenty-five thousand got you a tango with Tipper Gore.'' Then he reached the punch line, which was about Janet Reno. Ms. Huffington groaned.
 In 1996 Mrs. Whitman was on Bob Dole's short list of potential running mates. This year, as Mrs. Whitman has had to acknowledge in one interview after another, she wasn't even asked to submit personal background material to the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush. In 1996 she was thought of as an eventual presidential candidate in her own right. Now, if Mr. Bush wins, Mrs. Whitman's prospects are widely seen as limited to a cabinet post, at best, or maybe an ambassadorship -- the political equivalent of being put out to pasture. At the Republican National Convention in San Diego four years ago, Mrs. Whitman, who shared leadership duties with Governor Bush, was on stage every night. She delivered a prime-time speech, and she was mobbed by autograph seekers wherever she went. Now, the only people following Mrs. Whitman around are her state police bodyguards. ''She'd become the bete noire of the pro-life movement,'' said former Representative Dick Zimmer, a Republican running to recapture the 12th District seat from Representative Rush Holt. ''So that even if Governor Bush were inclined to choose a pro-choice running mate, it probably wouldn't have been her.'' At least there were no ''I'm frisky for Christie'' buttons for sale among the hundreds with Mr. Bush's smiling face. But the image seemed to hover like a too-obvious punch line upon any mention of Camden.
 ''Are we going to deliver the District of Columbia for George W. Bush?'' she asks. ''No. But I would just love to bring the Republican vote up by a few percentage points.'' ''I really do feel that the Democratic Party has failed many of the people they tried to help in this city,'' she said. ''And Bush is different. He is inclusive. Sure, he's got some very conservative positions, but he is inclusive.'' An early backer of Mr. Bush, she says that she disagrees with him on a central issue. While the party platform seeks a ban on abortions, she favors abortion rights. ''I think that politically and legally you've got to have choice,'' she said. ''But there's not going to be any candidate that anyone can support on 100 percent of the issues.''
 Op-Ed article by former Pres Gerald Ford and former Sen Bob Dole praising Gov George W Bush's selection of Dick Cheney as vice presidential runing mate; says Cheney is principled man who practices statecraft, not political stagecraft, and can help implement Bush's 'inclusive vision' (M) We form a pretty balanced Republican ticket ourselves. We don't agree on every issue, but then, what two people do? We belong to a political party, not a cult. At the same time, neither of us regards pragmatism as a synonym for surrender. Throughout the campaign we have been encouraged by Gov. George W. Bush's vigorous outreach to audiences not always courted by Republicans in the past. We form a pretty balanced Republican ticket ourselves. We don't agree on every issue, but then, what two people do? We belong to a political party, not a cult. At the same time, neither of us regards pragmatism as a synonym for surrender. Throughout the campaign we have been encouraged by Gov. George W. Bush's vigorous outreach to audiences not always courted by Republicans in the past. In this spirit, we are delighted by the selection of Dick Cheney to help implement Mr. Bush's inclusive vision. Ironically, the shrill reaction of some Democrats to the Cheney nomination only confirms the timeliness of Governor Bush's pledge to restore civility to Washington. It was praise well deserved. As secretary of defense, Mr. Cheney successfully grappled with immensely difficult issues surrounding the post-cold war military, and waged a textbook campaign to evict Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. One might logically ask of these born-again critics whether a similar standard should be applied to Vice President Al Gore, whose House voting record on abortion and gun control was virtually identical to Mr. Cheney's. So, while some media and political operatives might see the Gore campaign's rapid response to Mr. Cheney's nomination as cause for self-congratulation, it is just as likely that the dealers in ''Operation Research'' have outsmarted themselves. If experience counts for anything -- and it ought to -- the Bush-Cheney slate is one of the most abundantly qualified in memory. As the youngest ever White House chief of staff, Mr. Cheney displayed the qualities instinctively recognized by Governor Bush and most fair-minded voters: a towering intelligence and probity, razor-sharp judgment, and a seriousness of purpose that is the antithesis of modern political spin. Yet there is much more to Dick Cheney than his resume. We know him as a man of conviction, whose principles include respecting others with whom he differs. He has adversaries but no enemies. Mr. Cheney also represents an unconventional choice, if only because of the transparent merit which motivated his selection. This alone makes him a refreshing alternative to the usual electoral calculations. He was selected less because he could help Governor Bush get elected than because he could help a president Bush govern. And to do so in a way that will help restore popular respect for tarnished institutions. In another sense, largely unnoticed by the media to date, Mr. Bush's choice deserved high marks for boldness. Implicit in the Bush-Cheney pairing is an appeal not frequently heard at some recent G.O.P. conventions. Quite simply, the governor and the secretary are presenting themselves as leaders who are best equipped by outlook, training and temperament to govern America in a time of exhilarating change and daunting challenges. Republicans in 2000 want to be America's governing party. In our view, the Bush-Cheney team represents a giant stride in that direction.
 Editorial comments on upcoming Republican National Convention says it represents gear-shifting time for Gov George W Bush, who knows he will not be elected president unless he gets votes from many people who do not agree with him or with Republican Party platform (M) Gov. George W. Bush knows that he cannot be elected president unless he gets votes from many people who do not agree with him or the Republican Party platform on issues such as abortion, gun control, capital punishment and the privatization of Social Security. That is why today is gear-shifting day in Philadelphia. The selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate and the deliberations of the platform committee all emphasized the conservative part of Mr. Bush's background and core vote. Once the first session of the Republican National Convention opens this evening, the nation will see four nights devoted to what Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster, calls the politics of pleasantry. Somewhat paradoxically, Governor Bush has imposed what he calls an ''iron-fist rule'' to make sure that ideology does not trump his preferred themes of tolerance and inclusion. That means most of the party's hard-line orators will be kept away from the microphones inside First Union Center, site of a convention that is, in essence, a $65 million exercise in recruiting the moderate swing voter. Governor Bush's plan for this convention reflects the lessons of 1992, when his father's lax campaign team gave Pat Buchanan and other polarizing speakers prime-time roles. By way of contrast, Bill Clinton used his party's 1992 convention to play down the Democrats' liberal tradition and to emulate the Republicans' emphasis on fiscal responsibility and welfare reform. In Philadelphia, Mr. Bush will attempt to borrow the positive imagery long associated with such Democratic issues as education and the saving of Social Security and Medicare. Gov. George W. Bush knows that he cannot be elected president unless he gets votes from many people who do not agree with him or the Republican Party platform on issues such as abortion, gun control, capital punishment and the privatization of Social Security. That is why today is gear-shifting day in Philadelphia. The selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate and the deliberations of the platform committee all emphasized the conservative part of Mr. Bush's background and core vote. Once the first session of the Republican National Convention opens this evening, the nation will see four nights devoted to what Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster, calls the politics of pleasantry. Somewhat paradoxically, Governor Bush has imposed what he calls an ''iron-fist rule'' to make sure that ideology does not trump his preferred themes of tolerance and inclusion. That means most of the party's hard-line orators will be kept away from the microphones inside First Union Center, site of a convention that is, in essence, a $65 million exercise in recruiting the moderate swing voter. Governor Bush's plan for this convention reflects the lessons of 1992, when his father's lax campaign team gave Pat Buchanan and other polarizing speakers prime-time roles. By way of contrast, Bill Clinton used his party's 1992 convention to play down the Democrats' liberal tradition and to emulate the Republicans' emphasis on fiscal responsibility and welfare reform. In Philadelphia, Mr. Bush will attempt to borrow the positive imagery long associated with such Democratic issues as education and the saving of Social Security and Medicare. Given the blunt, contrary language of much of the Republican platform, this will require some serious spinning and deft television imagery. The effort began yesterday with such figures as Governors Tommy Thompson and George Pataki giving the platform a decent burial by declaring it basically irrelevant to the Bush campaign. Never mind the restrictive language on abortion. According to Mr. Pataki, what matters more is Mr. Bush's vision. In fact, whereas former President George Bush stumbled over the vision thing, his son is determined to make it a central theme. His emphasis will be on positive evocative language about character, principles, leadership, faith, hope, love, rather than on the Republican policy positions that could make him appear authoritarian, elitist or hostile to the interests of women and minorities. To offset the sparse minority representation, convention planners have given starring roles to Mr. Bush's most prominent black advisers, Gen. Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice, and included a large number of Hispanic Republicans. The prominence of entertainment figures and musical numbers also bespeaks an effort to steer this convention away from wedge issues. President Clinton, in his role of the Democrats' uber-strategist, tried to blow the whistle Friday on what he sees as Mr. Bush's desire to make this a campaign about good feelings rather than hard issues. ''That's the message, isn't it? Blur, blur, blur,'' the president complained. Such critiques are not likely to dent the faith that Mr. Bush and his advisers have in polls showing that voters prefer lofty, positive generalities to bitter partisan wrangling. Another ''iron-fist rule'' imposed by Mr. Bush is that there should be no prolonged attacks on Mr. Clinton, Vice President Al Gore or Hillary Rodham Clinton. The campaign will try to be more deft in invoking Clinton fatigue. Mr. Cheney has taken to depicting the president as a tragic figure. In a television commercial, Mr. Bush speaks of the Clinton years as bringing a budget surplus, but a deficit in values. Not all Republicans agree with these soft tactics and the gauzy approach summed up in Mr. Bush's slogan of compassionate conservatism. But suppose he succeeds this week in having undecided voters focus on his soothing, positive statements about education, health care, Social Security and taxes, rather than on the harsh and often unfair policy positions espoused by the platform and the Republican Congressional majority. Then Mr. Bush will be able to count this convention a success, and Mr. Gore can count on having his hands full this fall.
 Sen John McCain is derided by audience at Shadow Convention in Philadelphia after endorsing Gov George W Bush, whom he once scorned as phony reformer unprepared for Oval Office; he meets with senior officials of Bush campaign to formally release delegates to governor; praises Bush for running centrist, inclusive campaign; photo (M) Reporters repeatedly tested his appetite for his own words, asking, item by item, if he still believed all those nasty things he had said about his former opponent for the Republican presidential nomination, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Over and over, he endorsed the man he had once derided as a phony reformer unprepared for the Oval Office. Reporters repeatedly tested his appetite for his own words, asking, item by item, if he still believed all those nasty things he had said about his former opponent for the Republican presidential nomination, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Over and over, he endorsed the man he had once derided as a phony reformer unprepared for the Oval Office. Today, one youthful audience here responded with boos, derisive laughter and cries of ''Drag him off!'' to what he insisted was his ''sincere conviction'' that ''all Americans'' should support Governor Bush. On the eve of Mr. Bush's national convention, Mr. McCain was beginning to seem downright conventional, a quality he despises in politics. This afternoon, as the senator gathered at a reception with senior officials of the Bush campaign to formally release his delegates to the governor, the moment and the message proved too much. Mr. McCain praised Mr. Bush for running a ''centrist, inclusive campaign.'' He urged his supporters to give the Bush campaign ''the same kind of enthusiasm and participation'' they had given him, that had made him believe, for a time, he might be president. Then he tried to say thanks. When he regained control of himself and the room and at last expressed his gratitude, Mr. McCain declared ''This is a time for celebration.'' Then, to groans and cries, he released his remaining delegates -- roughly 150 -- to Mr. Bush. Coming before the four days of processed emotion that is a modern political convention, Mr. McCain's raw moment left some delegates shaken, even as rock music blared and confetti cannons blasted the room. ''People really believed in him,'' said Ric Barros, a lawyer from Massachusetts. ''It's like a death in the family.'' Asked if he would support Mr. Bush, Mr. Barros said: ''In time. Today, I just want to think about John McCain.'' Appearing before Mr. McCain, Don Evans, the chairman of Mr. Bush's campaign, praised the senator as ''my American hero'' -- though at least one McCain aide rolled his eyes. Joe Allbaugh, the Bush campaign manager, was also present, though he did not address the crowd. The Bush camp can afford to be gracious. Trailing Senator McCain around the margins of the convention here is like watching an episode of ''Survivor'' while knowing who has been voted off the island. The only sense of suspense surrounding his appearances hangs over the question of how far he will go in endorsing Mr. Bush -- and the only surprise registered by his audiences has been over how far he has gone. It seemed more like a rolling test of his humility. Asked on his bus if he still believed Mr. Bush was a ''Pat Robertson Republican,'' Mr. McCain said quietly, ''No, no, I don't believe that.'' To another oft-repeated question, he insisted that his relationship with Mr. Bush was ''cordial'' or even ''very good.'' Repeatedly, he said that he expected to be supporting Mr. Bush's re-election in 2004 and not running himself. But the Arizona senator's self-sacrifice had its limits. He bristled when asked, for perhaps the hundredth time, whether he had checked with the Bush campaign before putting his bus back on the road. ''No,'' he shot back, ''because the last time I checked, I'm a United States senator.'' He repeatedly reminded questioners that he always promised to support his party's nominee -- a caveat that made his endorsement sound more dutiful than heartfelt. But his sense of humor stayed intact. When asked if he would accept a position in a Bush cabinet, he said, as he contended with an enormous soft-serve vanilla waffle cone, that the only job he wanted was emperor. Mr. McCain still admits to differences with Mr. Bush, including over campaign finance reform. But he no longer declares that Mr. Bush should adopt his position, instead noting, as he did at the shadow convention, that ''we agree on many more issues than we disagree on.'' Mr. McCain has repeatedly acknowledged that he is walking a tightrope, trying to retain an insurgent appeal while playing by the rules of party politics. He remains extremely popular, which is why Mr. Bush and scores of congressmen are clamoring for public shows of his support.
 I would vote today to leave the Department of Education in place. I opposed it originally when we first got into that. I think my general view on education is that it's primarily a local and state concern -- that's where the bulk of the funding lies -- but, as Governor Bush has made clear, we've got a fair amount of money we are spending at the federal level today, Title I funds, and that there ought to be accountability with those funds. There hasn't been in the past. I'm a strong believer in the Second Amendment and support it. I think the key question, again if we come back to the trivial aspect of the debates that rage in Washington now, it's what we're going to do in the future. And the fact of the matter is I'm perfectly happy to support Governor Bush's proposals with respect to trigger locks for handguns, for example, with respect to prosecuting people guilty of gun crimes. This administration's allowed prosecutions to fall 46 percent. Those are important kinds of questions. . . .
 In complaining about the refusal of the Senate Judiciary Committee to schedule a hearing on a Hispanic judge from Texas, Mr. Clinton also managed to criticize Gov. George W. Bush for not supporting the nominee to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans. ''The trial lawyers are somewhat critical to Gore,'' Ms. Krumholz said. Mr. Bush has made attacks on trial lawyers a centerpiece of his campaign and has vowed that if elected, he would push a program similar to the one he helped enact in Texas. He has pointed with pride to his record in Texas of curbing civil litigation, capping legal fees and limiting jury awards. Mary Alexander, a San Francisco trial lawyer who is the vice-president-designate of the trial lawyers' association, said today that Vice President Al Gore, on the other hand, had been a reliable supporter of the effort by trial lawyers to maintain the right to sue corporations as a counterweight to corporate power. ''Mr. Gore is someone who believes in consumers, someone who believes they should have their day in court,'' Ms. Alexander said in an interview. Nonetheless, Mr. Gore did not address the convention and has seemingly resisted emphasizing the issue. Mr. Harshbarger said that corporations have been successful in their effort to ''paint lawyers as the bad guys.'' He said it was not surprising that Mr. Gore had tried to keep some distance between himself and the lawyers. Mr. Clinton's appearance at the convention is, in a sense, as a surrogate for Mr. Gore and, to a lesser extent, for other Democrats, notably Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is running for the United States Senate from New York. Ralph Nader, the longtime consumer advocate who has been closely allied with trial lawyers on the issue of civil litigation rules, said Mr. Gore was allowing the president to take the heat of associating with the lawyers while he was reaping the benefits. He cited as an example, that Mr. Gore did not respond to a speech in  February in which Mr. Bush told a South Carolina audience of business people that Mr. Bush would immediately seek changes in litigation rules if elected.
 Overview of 2000 Republican National Convention in Philadelphia; vice presidential candidate Dick Cheney arrives in city; appears in morning television talk shows to smooth more conservative and controversial edges of his voting record in Congress; Bush campaign's plans for conflict-free convention proceed without serious difficulty; diagram of convention hall shows seating of delegations (M) The advertisement asked, about him and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, ''What are their plans for working families?'' For his part, Mr. Bush continued his slow march toward Philadelphia, campaigning at the replica of the historic Crosley Field in the suburbs of Cincinnati. Several thousand people withstood a driving rain to see him as he drove up in a campaign bus emblazoned with the slogan ''Renewing America's Purpose,'' the theme of his five-day tour through battleground states. He told the Republican members of Congress sharing the stage with him: ''Be patient. Help is on the way.'' Mr. Cheney, who has made only a few campaign stops since being selected as Mr. Bush's running mate, made a brief appearance here this afternoon, promising ''most of all to make America proud again by giving them a president they can respect.'' He spoke for four minutes at the hotel where he will be joined by Mr. Bush on Wednesday, and he seemed overwhelmed by his reception from a crowd organized by the campaign. As Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney also sought to generate support, Mr. Bush's primary-season nemesis, Senator John McCain of Arizona, also made a pitch for the ticket. Appearing before the ''shadow convention,'' an event ranging from reformist to radical, he gamely asked the audience to vote for Mr. Bush and was soundly booed for his troubles. Then he went before his own delegates and formally released them from commitments to vote for him. Many groaned. Meanwhile, the Bush camp's plans for a conflict-free convention chugged along without serious difficulty. Abortion-rights advocates insisted they were working to find the required six states to support new language in the platform acknowledging diverse views on the subject, but they had yet to find them. One minor rules squabble was shaping up -- over an effort to make all 165 members of the Republican National Committee automatic delegates at the next national convention. There was no formal convention business beyond the arrival of 2,066 delegates -- mostly middle-aged white men and generally more conservative than the voters who gave Mr. Bush the nomination -- assembled in the city where Republicans have nominated five previous candidates, from John C. Fremont in 1856 through Thomas E. Dewey in 1948. But it became increasingly clear that despite the shadow convention and occasional minor demonstrations like today's peaceful march of 7,000 for a variety of causes, the four-day show beginning Monday is all about Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney. Mr. Davis said: ''This convention is about electing George W. Bush. It's not about the House and Senate.'' He said Republican hopes of retaining the House, where they now hold only a 13-seat majority, would be aided by Mr. Bush's ''creating an updraft that our candidates can take advantage of.'' On CBS's ''Face the Nation,'' he said: ''The campaign that Governor Bush and I will run is very much oriented towards the future. It's focused on trying to restore a degree of civility in Washington, to end the kind of partisan backbiting that has been so much a part of the tone and tenor in this city for all too many years.''
 Special report, Quiet Strength, profiles Laura Bush, wife of presidential candidate Gov George W Bush who will deliver first major address at Republican National Convention, playing political role she never aspired to and never planned on; friends and acquaintances say she could easily trade political role for long afternoons of reading or mornings of gardening and be perfectly happy, but that she has adapted to role in limelight and part as political spouse with relative ease and remarkable vigor; say she has drawn on serious, albeit quiet, intellect to become active first lady in Texas and to develop public voice and style more mellifluous than husband's, and maybe even more assured; photos (L) Of the various stories about their relationship that Laura and George W. Bush like to tell, not one gets a more frequent and thorough workout than this: she married him only after they had reached an agreement that she would never, ever have to make a political speech on his behalf. She must have been skeptical. It was the end of 1977, and Mr. Bush was gearing up for what would turn out to be an ill-fated campaign for a Congressional seat from West Texas, and his father was laying the groundwork for his own ill-fated presidential bid in 1980. These were the Bushes -- politics was in their plasma. Her vow of silence was doomed from the start. Of the various stories about their relationship that Laura and George W. Bush like to tell, not one gets a more frequent and thorough workout than this: she married him only after they had reached an agreement that she would never, ever have to make a political speech on his behalf. She must have been skeptical. It was the end of 1977, and Mr. Bush was gearing up for what would turn out to be an ill-fated campaign for a Congressional seat from West Texas, and his father was laying the groundwork for his own ill-fated presidential bid in 1980. These were the Bushes -- politics was in their plasma. Her vow of silence was doomed from the start. Laura Bush's appearance at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia on Monday night will be the latest -- and by far the most nerve-frazzling -- illustration of that. She is scheduled to deliver the first major address of the event, with thousands of people spread out before her, the invisible eyes of a national television audience on her and the responsibility for properly jump-starting a four-day jubilee in her hands. The couple's remarks point to one of the most intriguing aspects of Laura Welch Bush, a trait that sets her apart from many of her predecessors on this path: she never aspired to it, never planned on it, never looked out across the broad expanse of the future and saw herself in a wash of light, with a microphone under her chin. Even now, several of her friends and acquaintances say, she could trade it all for long afternoons of reading or mornings of gardening and be utterly happy -- perhaps even happier. And yet, friends and relatives say, she has adapted to her role in the limelight and her part as a political spouse with relative ease and remarkable vigor, drawing on a serious (albeit quiet) intellect to become an active first lady in Texas and to develop a public voice and style more mellifluous than her husband's, and maybe even more assured. Many of the voters who take note of Mrs. Bush for the first time on Monday night will undoubtedly be surprised and impressed by that, and will get little sense of the reluctance she openly expressed before Gov. George W. Bush began his campaign for the White House last year. Barbara Bush, the former first lady, said in a recent interview that her daughter-in-law adhered to ''a great philosophy in life -- you can either like it or not, so you might as well like it.'' Laura Bush said that her convention speech was, in fact, a harbinger of more activity and a higher profile for her. With the couple's twin 18-year-old daughters, Jenna and Barbara, heading off to college around Labor Day and leaving the Bushes with an empty nest, Mrs. Bush plans to hit the campaign trail full time, at her husband's side and on her own. And Mrs. Bush made it clear that her interest was in helping him, not promoting herself, and that she was not offering voters two for the price of one. ''I'm not running for office,'' said Mrs. Bush, 53. ''George is running for office. I don't really even want to talk about issues that much. I'm not that knowledgeable about most issues.'' But their counterparts this time around, Tipper Gore and Laura Bush, seem to be more ambivalent recruits, as content in the background as in the foreground, yanked by their husbands' desires into races and places they might never have chosen for themselves. Mrs. Bush, an intensely private woman, shares none of her husband's showmanship or garrulousness; toward the end of an interview with her aboard his campaign plane, when the governor exuberantly jumped in to compete for the attention of the reporter seated beside her, she promptly turned away, pulled out several pieces of stationery and began writing thank-you notes to acquaintances. Mrs. Bush says that contrast is one reason that their union, both personally and politically, works well. But both she and her husband's advisers seem unsure at times of how exactly to cast Mrs. Bush's degree of reserve. On one hand, they clearly see her detachment from the messier, more vainglorious dimensions of politics as an advantage: evidence to support her husband's assertion that he, too, is a grounded, down-to-earth person not driven by an insatiable ego or a partisan blood lust. The way Mr. Bush praised her in a recent interview was telling. ''She cuts right through, through the posturing and positioning,'' Mr. Bush said proudly. ''America's starved for something. I'm telling you: they're starved for something real. And that's what she brings. She's a real person.'' On the other hand, the Bush campaign also does not want to present her as a bashful throwback or blandly dutiful helpmate -- an inaccurate portrait that might not play well with female swing voters and that decidedly sells Mrs. Bush short. In interviews with other journalists in the past, Mrs. Bush readily called herself shy, but she now emphatically rejects that label. Some of her friends go out of their way to do likewise. It is as if they all received the same memo. And an expression of distaste swept over her face recently when a New York Times reporter brought up a story, which had appeared elsewhere in print, that she had once answered a question from Mr. Bush's paternal grandmother about what she did with her life by saying, ''I read, I smoke and I admire.'' ''That's totally made up,'' Laura Bush said. ''I'm sure I said 'I read.' But I certainly didn't say 'I admire.' '' (As for smoking, Mrs. Bush eventually quit.) But Barbara Bush said in a recent interview that she remembered both her daughter-in-law's three-part answer and her mother-in-law's reaction. ''Mrs. Bush darn near collapsed,'' Barbara Bush said, recalling the response of the former president's mother. In truth, Laura Bush had a busy professional life as an elementary school teacher and librarian for a decade before she began dating George W. Bush, and she remained single, without pangs of worry, longer than any of her close female friends. She was 31 when she and Mr. Bush married in November 1977, three months after they met. Her avidity for reading is really an abiding love of literature, and when she and Mr. Bush were living in Dallas in the 1980's and raising their two daughters, Mrs. Bush, who had given up her career around the time of her wedding, used her spare hours to take classes on William Faulkner, Greek tragedy and other literary topics. During the Republican primaries earlier this year, she was on a Truman Capote binge, but had to interrupt it because she found herself in the middle of ''In Cold Blood'' just as Mr. Bush lost the New Hampshire contest to Senator John McCain of Arizona. ''It's so foreboding,'' Mrs. Bush said of Mr. Capote's masterwork, ''and I was reading it during the most anxiety-provoking time and I had to quit.'' Mrs. Bush also has a sassy streak that gets scant attention. Years ago, Mr. Bush occasionally joked in public speeches that his wife had a librarian's narrow concept of oratory, and it amounted to a single syllable: ''Shhhh!'' Mrs. Bush was not amused. And she has an adventurous impulse: for both her 40th and 50th birthdays, she went river rafting with four or her closest female friends, including a Democratic state senator in Kansas and a midwife in San Francisco who recently visited Indonesia to teach classes on childbirth. Around Austin, Mrs. Bush maintains a similarly eclectic mix of social acquaintances. Relatives and friends say that Mr. Bush often solicits her advice, asking for her gut read on people and situations, and she serves as his filter for much of what is written about him in newspapers and magazines, which she seems to monitor more closely than he does. He often tells reporters not what he thought of their articles, but what she did. ''I would never say to George, for something that he really wanted to do, that he couldn't do that,'' Mrs. Bush said, adding that he, too, would never deny her something that she deemed important. People who know the couple well have said that his decision to quit drinking 14 years ago was partly a response to her entreaties and to a growing worry that he was endangering his marriage and family life, which he cherished. Mrs. Bush said that her own family life had been a stable and deeply loving one. She grew up as an only child in Midland, where her father, Harold B. Welch, was a successful home builder and her mother, Jenna Welch, kept his books. Although neither of her parents had finished college, they let Laura know early on that they expected her to go, and she was a conscientious, excellent student who never got into trouble. She and Mr. Bush, who also grew up in Midland, went to different elementary schools but were in the seventh grade together at the same middle school, although neither of them remembers knowing the other very well. She stayed in Midland while he went to Philips Academy in Andover, Mass., and she and her friends described her high school years as happy and generally uneventful. But one day in 1963, when she was 17, she drove through a stop sign and hit another car. Its occupant, a boy who happened to be a close friend, was killed in the collision, which was deemed an accident; no charges were filed against her. Mrs. Bush said that she was steeled for the incident to come up during her husband's presidential campaign, as it did earlier this year, but she nonetheless tensed at the mention of it. After getting a master's degree in library science from the University of Texas in 1973, she settled in Austin, where she worked as an elementary school librarian. She said that she never wanted for dates but had not found the right man until, in the summer of 1977, she paid a fateful visit to Midland, where Mr. Bush was making his way in the oil business. A couple who knew them both invited them over for a backyard barbecue. Mr. Bush talked and talked. Laura Welch listened and listened. The next night, he took her out for a game of miniature golf. And soon after that they said ''I do.'' Adjustments were necessary. She was persuaded to make her first political speech the next year, when he waged his unsuccessful campaign for Congress. He learned to conform to her standards for tidiness and order, which were so high that one of her friends, Jan O'Neill, recalled that Mrs. Bush organized the books in the couple's bedroom in accordance with the Dewey decimal system. At Bush family gatherings, she made an unusual addition to the sometimes rambunctious clan. Her husband recalled his parents and siblings sitting around the table in Kennebunkport, Me., their plates clean, while they watched and waited patiently for his wife to pick her way through her meal. The couple wanted a large family of their own, tried for several years without success, and had already begun the adoption process when Mrs. Bush learned that she was finally pregnant with fraternal twins. Even then, the outlook was uncertain; she developed toxemia, and her doctor told her that she would be lucky to deliver one healthy child. Mrs. Bush said that whenever she went to the grocery store, she avoided the aisle with diapers and baby-related items, because she did not want to stoke her hopes. ''Rein it in, Bubba,'' she told him one day on his campaign plane, as he held forth at length in front of reporters. Privately, when she catches him ribbing people mercilessly or strutting shamelessly, she simply murmurs, ''Bushieee,'' her voice rising at the end. He knows what that means. She says she has not given extensive thought to what kind of first lady she might make, but her mother-in-law has some ideas. Barbara Bush said her daughter-in-law would be different from Hillary Clinton because she would ''not get into foreign affairs or controversial subjects.'' ''I think she would rather make a positive impact on the country,'' Barbara Bush said. ''And I'm not criticizing Mrs. Clinton. But it's like oil and water. We're talking about two different subjects. They're two different people. I think Laura thinks of others.'' She also said her daughter-in-law would be ''better, much better'' in the role than she was. ''She won't be a fat, white-haired old lady,'' Barbara Bush said. She would also be less voluble, and in many ways less accessible, because there are tight boundaries around what Laura Bush is willing to offer for public consumption. The gesture was easy to miss, as she clearly intended it to be. Campaign or no campaign, Laura Bush was not about to share her tears.
 New York Times/CBS News Poll finds majority of delegates assembling for Republican National Convention in Philadelphia are notably conservative in thought and spirit, despite efforts of Gov George W Bush to portray Republican Party as increasingly moderate; finds that on most important issues delegates stand significantly to right of much of nation and even to right of rank-and-file Republican voters; most delegates delegates consider Bush conservative, if not necessarily as conservative as they consider themselves, and are overwhelmingly enthusiastic about his qualifications, political skills and chances against Vice Pres Al Gore in November; findings of poll detailed; chart; photo (M) The majority of delegates assembling here today to nominate Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for president are notably conservative in thought and spirit, even at a time when Mr. Bush has sought to portray the Republican Party as increasingly moderate, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll of delegates. The majority of delegates assembling here today to nominate Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for president are notably conservative in thought and spirit, even at a time when Mr. Bush has sought to portray the Republican Party as increasingly moderate, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll of delegates. While Mr. Bush has sought for much of this year to distinguish himself from his party's conservative wing and history, most delegates interviewed today considered him conservative, if not necessarily as conservative as they considered themselves. They are also, overwhelmingly, enthusiastic about the qualifications and political skills of the man they will nominate for president on Thursday night, and confident about his chances against Vice President Al Gore in November. ''The party has a conservative wing and a moderate wing and both sides are comfortable with him,'' Eric Melgren, a delegate from Kansas, said of Mr. Bush. ''Republicans are hungry enough that there is, to at least some degree, things that are all willing to overlook.'' The finding in The Times/CBS poll, as well as in follow-up interviews conducted today with delegates, suggested one of the tasks Mr. Bush faces this week: Convincing independents and moderate Democrats, in particular, that his is the face of the Republican Party, rather than of the delegates who will be celebrating his nomination. For much of this campaign, Mr. Bush has sought to draw some distance between himself and conservatives in the party -- and, it seems, he has paid little price for that among the Republicans here. In contrast to surveys of rank-and-file Republican voters, the poll of the delegates found that they were more apt to describe Mr. Bush as conservative. In a tribute to his political skills, delegates who described themselves as moderates viewed him as one, too, while self-described conservatives called him conservative. Georgia Buxton, a delegate from Maine who described herself as moderate, offered this description of Mr. Bush: ''I see him as a moderate with some conservative areas.'' Still, this year's poll suggested a wide disparity between voters and delegates at a time when Mr. Bush has been trying to pull the party to the center as Republicans seek to win the White House for the first time since 1988. Although the delegates were overwhelmingly opposed to abortion rights, only 2 in 10 said that Mr. Bush would consider the issue when choosing judges for nomination to the Supreme Court. Jan Howard, 48, a delegate from California, said that Mr. Bush's views of government closely hewed to her own. ''Bush sees a lot of potential and wants to keep government out of the way,'' she said. Finally, reflecting the spirit of the occasion, the delegates viewed Mr.  Bush's candidacy with enthusiasm -- indeed, with more enthusiasm than had been voiced by registered Republicans. Forty-two percent of Mr. Bush's supporters across the nation said they supported him with reservations. Only four percent of the delegates said they felt the same way.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush, who is increasingly animated in public as he nears nomination, is more introspective behind the scenes, talking of his family, his history and his legacy (Political Memo); photo (M) As he rides toward his moment of triumph, George W. Bush speaks with extra punch. He belts out his speeches now, his face flushing, arms waving. Yet once off the stage, he is unusually introspective, talking of family. History. Legacy. As he rides toward his moment of triumph, George W. Bush speaks with extra punch. He belts out his speeches now, his face flushing, arms waving. Yet once off the stage, he is unusually introspective, talking of family. History. Legacy. So confident is he that he jokes fondly about his new running mate's flat campaign style, calling it with notable understatement ''a little more laid-back than mine.'' And though usually allergic to pyschobabble, Mr. Bush does not brush off questions about his relationship with his father, former President George H. W. Bush. ''It wasn't all that long ago that he himself was the president of the United States, which will make the story unique and different,'' Mr. Bush mused. There is poignancy to this conversation on the plane. At his rallies, Mr. Bush speaks of his popular mother. He revels in telling the tale of his courtship of his wife, Laura. But the only acknowledgment of his father is oblique. Now the Bush clan is gathering once again, just as it did to watch the father's triumphant nomination by two Republican National Conventions. This time it is the eldest son who will take his moment on the stage, capping a remarkable 17-month transformation from a governor with less than two full terms in office to his party's great hope to reclaim the White House. ''They'll be there, sure, I think all of my brothers and sister,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I can't think of any boycotters.'' Day after day as Mr. Bush gets closer to Philadelphia, the pyrotechnics become more elaborate. Today he stole a technique from his primary rival John McCain and showed up on a campaign bus for a rally here at the replica of the historic Crosley Field. Fireworks shot into the sky to dazzle the crowd of 2,000, who had waited for hours on the open field despite several pelting rainstorms. In a blue shirt and no jacket, dancing on his heels, Mr. Bush spoke of himself in the third person. ''You got to understand about George W.,'' he said. ''I don't take polls to tell me what to think. I do what I think is right.'' Mr. Bush seems serene, though at times emotional too. At the governor's mansion in Austin late last week, he almost choked up when he said he would recognize his wife, his daughters and his parents in his convention speech. Mrs. Bush is at his side at rally after rally, beaming, as he weaves her into his stump speech by promoting her own convention speech, planned for Monday night. ''The first speaker will be the first lady of the state of Texas,'' he tells his audiences. So the Republican convention will be about Mr. Bush and the Bush family and the Bush platform, beginning in prime time on Monday with Laura and ending Thursday night with Mr. Bush's acceptance speech. ''That puts the Bush family arms around the convention,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. Not that the edge is gone completely. Revving up the drenched crowd before Mr. Bush's arrival today, Bill Cunningham, the host of a local radio talk show, asked, ''Are we going to permit an eighth of an inch of rain to keep us from scouring out the White House from the filth and degradation of Clinton-Gore?'' Mr. Bush's speeches by contrast have few hard edges, except for his promise to restore ''honor and dignity'' to the presidency and the dig at President Clinton that is implicit when he says Dick Cheney ''understands what the definition of 'is' is.'' Sometimes he sounds more like a revivalist preacher than a politician. Before 5,000 people in Joplin, Mo., on Friday night, Mr. Bush thundered: ''My administration will rally what I call the armies of compassion, the decent, kindhearted souls that act not because of government, that act because they hear our call to people all across America.'' And under the confetti and the balloons, and on outdoor stages, Mr. Bush throws out his arms maniacally to give oomph to the old familiar stump speech. He gets help in looking animated by way of the contrast with his new running mate. On his one day of campaigning with Mr. Bush last Friday, Mr. Cheney shook hands fast along the receiving line waiting to greet the Bush plane. Then he stood all alone at the waiting car. Mr. Bush was still working the line, grabbing a hand here, a shoulder there. ''We have a different campaigning style,'' Mr. Bush said the next day. ''That's the way it is. He's going to be a great partner. He's warming up.'' And if these are glory days, well, Mr. Bush says he learned something else from his father, who watched his sky-high approval ratings after the gulf war collapse, leaving him unable to stave off defeat in 1992 by a young, untested governor.
 Gov. George W. Bush's vice-presidential choice, Mr. Cheney, was on  ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, ''Face the Nation'' on CBS, ''This Week'' on ABC, ''Fox News Sunday'' and ''Late Edition With Wolf Blitzer'' on CNN (which bills itself as ''the last word in Sunday talk,'' would that it were true). Displaying none of the puppy-dog enthusiasm that former Vice President Dan Quayle exhibited when chosen by Governor Bush's father in 1988, Mr. Cheney was an ostentatiously subdued presence in his marathon of interviews. ''This is exactly the sort of thing we've seen in the Gore campaign,'' Mr. Cheney told the host of ''Meet the Press,'' Tim Russert. ''Attack, attack.'' ''Meet the Press'' had the Democratic strategist James Carville and the Republican strategist William J. Bennett to kick things around. Mr. Bennett said that the soon-to-be Democratic nominee, Vice President Al Gore, had been exhibiting ''several personalities'' in recent months, including ''affable Al'' and ''Uncle Al the Kiddies' Pal,'' none of which were catching on with voters. Unfair, Mr. Carville said, ''the vice president has not yet had a chance to emerge.'' ''Face the Nation'' had what it called an ''exclusive'' talk with Senator John McCain, Governor Bush's chief opponent in the primaries (although Mr. McCain had already been heard from on Sunday morning's edition of ''Today''). Some had wondered, somewhat optimistically, whether Mr. McCain would enliven the otherwise cut-and-dried convention by saying something intemperate, but he made it clear he would be a good boy. ''Governor Bush has been running exactly the sort of campaign I would be running,'' he said.
 Laura Bush will discuss the importance of literacy issues.
 ''You want people to come away with the feeling that Governor Bush is going to do things a little bit differently,'' said Russell Schriefer, a Bush media consultant who has been working on the convention videos and programs for months. The convention's program is another reflection of the lock-step approach to message management. On Monday night, for instance, when the focus on the stage turns to education issues, so will the satellite feed to three jumbo Liquid Crystal Display screens. The image of Gov. George W. Bush, speaking live at a school event in Ohio, will be beamed into the First Union Center. On Tuesday,  when the program calls for talk of defense policy -- and a speech by a war hero, Senator John McCain of Arizona -- Mr. Bush is again to appear by satellite, from a site brimming with military symbolism: Gettysburg, Pa. The thrust is not universally appreciated. Among others, Richard Lowry, the editor of the National Review, a conservative journal, appeared on CNN the other night to express disappointment that the issues of the day are being shoved out of the television picture. And Democrats are clearly trying to cloud the upbeat focus on Mr. Bush with a 17-state advertising campaign criticizing the Congressional voting record of his running mate, Dick Cheney. But Republicans who have been pushing for a mainstream appeal seem buoyant. ''An inclusive message is a winning message,'' said Mark Miller, executive director of the Republican Leadership Council, a centrist group based in Washington. Even a former adversary, Greg Stevens, who was Mr. McCain's media consultant during the primaries, said that he was impressed by how faithfully the Bush camp had tried to marry Mr. Bush's personal style to the convention's themes.
 Conservative Delegates Test Bush's Moderation  The majority of Republican delegates assembling in Philadelphia to nominate Gov. George W. Bush for president are notably conservative in thought and spirit, even at a time when Mr. Bush has sought to portray his party as increasingly moderate, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll of delegates. On issues from affirmative action to environmental concerns to abortion, the poll found that delegates stand significantly to the right of much of the nation, and even to the right of rank-and-file Republican voters. Senator John McCain was booed in Philadelphia by the sort of audience he usually enraptures, an uneasy assortment of the disgruntled -- critics of the campaign finance system, politics-as-usual and much else -- gathered for a ''shadow convention.'' The booing came after the senator endorsed Mr. Bush, the man he had once derided as a phony reformer unprepared for the Oval Office.
 HITCHMAN-Grace C. Of Pine Bush, NY. Retired executive secretary for James Felt and Co., NYC, died Friday, July 28, 2000, at home. She was 95. Devoted daughter of Robert F. and Mary E. Wallace Hitchman. She was born October 9, 1904, in NYC. Survivors include her loving sister Rose F. Leonard, four nieces, one nephew, three grandnieces and four grandnephews. Visitation Tuesday, August 1, at the William M. Gagan Funeral Home, Pine Bush. Funeral Wednesday, August 2, at 10 AM, at the Church of the Infant Savior, Pine Bush. Interment New Prospect Cemetery, Pine Bush, NY. Memorial contributions to the Pine Bush Ambulance Corps, Box 407, Pine Bush, NY 12566. HITCHMAN-Grace C. Of Pine Bush, NY. Retired executive secretary for James Felt and Co., NYC, died Friday, July 28, 2000, at home. She was 95. Devoted daughter of Robert F. and Mary E. Wallace Hitchman. She was born October 9, 1904, in NYC. Survivors include her loving sister Rose F. Leonard, four nieces, one nephew, three grandnieces and four grandnephews. Visitation Tuesday, August 1, at the William M. Gagan Funeral Home, Pine Bush. Funeral Wednesday, August 2, at 10 AM, at the Church of the Infant Savior, Pine Bush. Interment New Prospect Cemetery, Pine Bush, NY. Memorial contributions to the Pine Bush Ambulance Corps, Box 407, Pine Bush, NY 12566.
