 The ticket of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney is generating even greater enthusiasm in the business world and corporate donors have helped put the Republican Party in the best financial shape it has ever enjoyed going into a general election. To capitalize on the popularity of Mr. Bush, the second-term Texas governor, the party has created a new level of top givers -- the Regents, individuals and companies who have given the party at least $250,000 since January 1999. As of July 1, the Republican Party had more than 100 such donors, who will be rewarded at the convention with skybox seats, private dinners with party leaders, Champagne receptions and deluxe hotel accommodations (most of the Regents are staying at the Four Seasons). A few will be going on a fishing trip with Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois. During the four-day convention, television cameras will focus on the stage where Mr. Bush will accept his party's presidential nomination and other party figures will speak. But much of the convention's real business will take place off-camera in hotel suites, hospitality tents, restaurants and country clubs where donors will be rewarded for past generosity and asked to give again. For the party's top underwriters, there will be an array of gold-plated events in Philadelphia, including  cocktails with Gen. Colin L. Powell and an evening cruise on the Delaware River aboard the ''Enterprise,'' the yacht owned by Richard M. DeVos, the Amway founder, who is a Bush supporter. Mr. Bush has excited the corporate world more than any recent Republican presidential nominee,  party leaders say. His running mate, Mr. Cheney, the former defense secretary who until his selection was the chairman and chief executive officer of the Halliburton Company, the world's largest oil field services company, also generates enthusiasm in corporate boardrooms. Already, Mr. Bush's campaign has collected a record $90 million in federally restricted, individual donations of $1,000 or less; nearly one-quarter of that amount was raised by a national network of 212 business executives and wealthy individuals who call themselves the Pioneers. Mr. Bush's proposal for a deep tax cut and his record of passing legislation to limit civil lawsuits in Texas are extremely appealing to the Republican Party's major underwriters. Meanwhile, Vice President Al Gore's environmental views, among other issues, make some donors in the business community nervous. The Democrats, of course, will be giving royal treatment to their largest donors at their convention in Los Angeles, too, with labor unions, trial lawyers and Hollywood executives among the biggest underwriters of the Democratic ticket. But the Democratic Party is struggling to compete with Mr. Bush and the Republican Party in America's corporate suites. ''Our fund-raising success is a measure of the broad and deep support that our party, its principles and our nominee -- Gov. George W. Bush -- have across this great land,'' Mr. Pascoe said. The companies and the individuals who make up the list of top contributors to the Republican National Committee say they are delighted by Mr.  Bush's rhetoric and his record. Perhaps most important, Mr. Bush supports limits on damages in product liability lawsuits and on fees for trial lawyers and opposes federal anti-tobacco litigation. In Texas, he was also responsible for a $1.7 billion property tax break and environmental waivers for the oil and energy industries and has opposed most gun control legislation and government lawsuits against gun manufacturers. ''I am not sympathetic to lawsuits,'' Mr. Bush said at a campaign stop in Washington State in February. ''Write that down. I worry about lawsuits on job creation. If you are looking for the kind of president I will be, I will be slow to litigate.'' A spokesman for Philip Morris, the Republican committee's largest single donor at $619,000 as of June 30, said that the company supports Republicans because they are ''people who share similar views on issues that are important,'' including the regulation of tobacco. Another industry official said he expected that Mr. Bush would treat cigarette companies fairly, while President Clinton has used the industry as a whipping boy. Few companies have as much at stake in November's election as Enron, the giant Houston energy and trading concern that, over the years, has been Governor Bush's largest corporate sponsor as well as a generous soft-money donor to the Republican Party. Enron and its chairman and chief executive, Kenneth L. Lay,  have been the top patrons of Mr. Bush's political career since his first campaign for Congress in 1978. Since January 1999, Enron and its executives have donated $615,550 to the Republican National Committee, the second-highest amount of any individual or corporation in that period. Mr. Bush's tenure in Texas has been beneficial to Enron: he backed several of the company's most important legislative initiatives, including electric utility deregulation and  limits on civil lawsuits. Enron is even more explicit about why it wants to see Mr. Bush and other Republicans elected in November. A June 15 internal memorandum to executives soliciting contributions to the company's political action committee lays out the reasons: Enron faces numerous legal and regulatory challenges, the memorandum says, including taxation of electronic commerce, restructuring of the electric industry, international trade legislation, regulation of power plants and oil pipelines and a variety of environmental and tax issues. A Democratic Enron employee who received the letter said some employees found the solicitation objectionable. The employee also said that some employees have begun to complain that too many corporate resources are being spent to support Mr. Bush's campaign. ''The wholehearted endorsement of Governor Bush, and the brazen use of the corporate machinery to ensure his election, seems distasteful,'' said the employee, who insisted on anonymity. Mr. Bush opposed state and federal lawsuits against gun makers  and supported the N.R.A.'s version of a bill to require background checks at gun shows. In the House, Mr. Cheney was a staunch ally of gun owners. Sam Wyly and his brother, Charles J. Wyly Jr., longtime friends of Mr.  Bush, are among the most generous individual underwriters of the Republican Party. They have supported Mr. Bush not only with $500,000 in donations to the party but also with a $2.5 million television advertising campaign against his rival in the Republican primaries Senator John McCain of Arizona last winter. Sam Wyly's businesses have fared well during Mr. Bush's tenure as Texas governor. Two years ago, one of the Wyly firms, Maverick Capital, won a state contract to manage $96 million of the University of Texas endowment fund.
 The Republican platform reflects a shift on education, embracing Gov. George W. Bush's agenda, but stands firm on other issues. Page 24. The Republican platform reflects a shift on education, embracing Gov. George W. Bush's agenda, but stands firm on other issues. Page 24.
 Few government-supported lending institutions have had the kind of high-profile start that the Los Angeles Community Development Bank received from the Clinton Administration five years ago. Vice President Al Gore traveled to Los Angeles himself and, with top city officials at his side, heaped praise on the $435 million bank and its plan to create inner-city jobs by lending to local companies that commercial banks had overlooked. Few government-supported lending institutions have had the kind of high-profile start that the Los Angeles Community Development Bank received from the Clinton Administration five years ago. Vice President Al Gore traveled to Los Angeles himself and, with top city officials at his side, heaped praise on the $435 million bank and its plan to create inner-city jobs by lending to local companies that commercial banks had overlooked.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns across Kentucky, attracting large crowds; his running mate, Dick Cheney, scores Pres Clinton, television interview; Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign scores attack as reversion to old-style Republican politics (M) Gov. George W. Bush swung through another battleground state today, proclaiming that the days of Republican losses were over. ''We haven't won Kentucky lately,'' he thundered, ''but that's going to change come November.'' Mr. Bush promised to bring a new tone to Washington as he crisscrossed Kentucky on the second day of his march to the Republican National Convention. He drew large crowds, despite downpours and drizzle, with people lined up under umbrellas to shake his hand. Gov. George W. Bush swung through another battleground state today, proclaiming that the days of Republican losses were over. ''We haven't won Kentucky lately,'' he thundered, ''but that's going to change come November.'' Mr. Bush promised to bring a new tone to Washington as he crisscrossed Kentucky on the second day of his march to the Republican National Convention. He drew large crowds, despite downpours and drizzle, with people lined up under umbrellas to shake his hand. ''If you're sick of the politics of personal destruction, there's a place for you in this campaign,'' Mr. Bush shouted to an audience that crammed into an airport hangar in Owensboro and spilled out into the rain-drenched tarmac. ''If you want somebody to unite the nation, there's a place for you in this campaign.'' Vice President Al Gore's campaign promptly struck back. ''They have been saying for weeks that they would not engage in the politics of personal destruction,'' said Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. ''But right out of the box they've resorted to old-style Republican politics.'' As Mr. Bush made his way to the convention, gone were his usual small-panel discussions. All across Kentucky, he revved up the kinds of rally crowds not seen since the height of the Republican primaries. Balloons fell. American flags unfurled. Confetti dropped. Rock music blared. And streamers were shot to the rafters. The only thing that went wrong was the breakdown of a backup press plane. ''I'm pleased by the energy level,'' Mr. Bush told reporters on his campaign plane. He said the audiences were ''like the crowd you'd expect on the last days of the campaign.'' When the Republican convention opens on Monday, Congressional leaders will be relegated to less desirable time spots, and some of the focus will be on nonpoliticians described by Mr. Bush as ''people who are reinforcing our message.'' The perils of that approach were on display today when Chris Payne, an employee of a grain company, dressed in his work clothes, kept forgetting his lines as he was introducing Mr. Bush. Several times he stopped midsentence and had to pull a written speech from his pocket. ''I'm sorry. I'm not a public speaker,'' Mr. Payne said. He then said of Mr. Bush, ''He trusts you and me to make the best decisions,'' which was supposed to be an endorsement for Mr. Bush's plan to divert some of the Social Security payroll tax to individual investment accounts. Mr. Bush took pains to assure older people that his Social Security plan would not affect them but only affect younger workers. ''I want the elderly here in this audience to hear me loud and clear,'' he said. ''Don't be fooled by that kind of politics where they're going to get on your TV screen and try to scare you.'' ''George W. Bush,'' he said, ''will keep the promise to the elderly in America.'' Mr. Bush also fired up audiences with talk of tax cuts, though he did not explicitly mention his plan to cut taxes by $1.3 trillion over a decade. ''You see, I happen to think the surplus means government has more money than it needs,'' he said to cheers. ''I happen to know that one of the reasons we have a surplus is that the taxes on the people that are working hard are the highest they've been since World War II. A small crowd of protesters opposed to the death penalty read aloud the names of people executed in Texas and chanted, ''Killed by Bush.'' But they were far outnumbered by Bush supporters. Mr. Bush shouted louder into the microphones, and the sound system mostly drowned out the demonstrators. By the time he arrives at the convention on Wednesday morning, Mr. Bush will have passed through three other states that voted for President Clinton in the last two elections -- Ohio, West Virginia and Pennsylvania. And Mr. Bush pledged today that both he and Mr. Cheney would appear in swing states during the fall campaign. Mr. Bush said that in previous campaigns, the strategy was often to tell the vice-presidential candidate, ''Head out to solidify the base.
 The Democrats also say they expect to use the issue to underscore sharp ideological differences between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, supports an array of tougher gun laws, while Mr. Bush, the likely Republican candidate, opposes most new gun restrictions and has been a strong ally of the N.R.A.
 I actually heard Mr. Gorelick for the first time the same night Pat Metheny did. As a 20-year-old music student, I was shocked to hear so many out of time, out of tune and harmonically suspect pentatonic licks. Most of the crowd responded on a very base level, cheering him on. During Mr. Metheny's performance, the crowd sat enthralled, having been reached on a truly deep level. That evening was memorable for two reasons: Kenny G showed the potential commercial appeal of instrumental music, and Pat Metheny's performance was the first of more than 100 times I've seen him live. And five years ago, I was lucky enough to sign him to Warner Brothers Records.
 The Chicago entertainer and acrobat calls himself the ''Rope Warrior'' and travels the world demonstrating his skill to audiences of both children and adults, including a performance for President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Fisher is accompanied by seven expert rope jumpers and a dog, Olive Oyl, who has made the Guinness Book of World Records for jumping rope. The Chicago entertainer and acrobat calls himself the ''Rope Warrior'' and travels the world demonstrating his skill to audiences of both children and adults, including a performance for President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Fisher is accompanied by seven expert rope jumpers and a dog, Olive Oyl, who has made the Guinness Book of World Records for jumping rope.
 Consider this summer's national party conventions, starting tomorrow when the Republicans meet in Philadelphia. The only woman presidential hopeful crashed long ago (Elizabeth Dole), and no woman has been on either George W. Bush's or Al Gore's short list of likely running mates for months. It's revealing that 16 years after Geraldine A. Ferraro became the first woman to run for vice president on a major party ticket, she has had no successor. Her troubled race hardly inspired imitation. But there are more fundamental reasons for the paucity of female heavy hitters in politics. It's because of who we are. Women are forced to prove themselves in ways men are not. ''Everybody assumes that George Bush is going to be tough on criminals. I have to prove that I'm going to be tough,'' Ann Richards, the former governor of Texas, observes. ''You see the difference? And being tough doesn't ring any bell with women voters.'' A no-win. Same for politics and families. It's quite the irony that the average male politician parades his wife and children, while ''women always campaign alone,'' Senator Dianne Feinstein of California notes; most political husbands have independent careers and avoid the campaign trail. The book shows how rough women are on one another -- the first to complain (usually to a man) when another woman falters, and rarely willing to put sisterhood ahead of politics.
 You have to wonder too whether all the anxiety about lost skills and summer slumps -- Learning Takes No Vacation: How Parents Can Help Kids Overcome What Educators Call the Summer Slide'' warns a headline in a recent parenting magazine -- isn't a little overwrought, and when it comes to middle-class families, a little misplaced. (A 1996 study showed the loss of reading skills over the summer months varied with socioeconomic status; children of poor families lost the most while those of middle-class families held steady or improved.) Perhaps affluent older parents imagine their children's brains are like theirs, finite spaces out of which 70's song lyrics must be moved to make room for new Web browsing skills, say, or George W. Bush's campaign promises. I hear my husband and me telling our 4-year-old what a good memory he has, and hear not just our positive reinforcement, but slightly jealous admiration. If we took the summer off, sure, we would forget a lot. But we are not 4, or 8, or 14.
 Beginning here, the text is verbatim from past platforms, reflecting Gov. George W. Bush's promise that he would leave the anti-abortion language intact. Abortion rights supporters consider this a judicial litmus test -- a promise to appoint judges who oppose abortion. Mr. Bush says he does not support a litmus test, but he did agree to preserving this platform plank. Mr. Bush is trying hard to reach out to Hispanics and other immigrants, recognizing that the Republican Party has an anti-immigrant image among many voters. Over all, the passages on immigration are more welcoming and inclusive than in the platform from four years ago. There is no longer a provision that would have denied automatic citizenship to the children born to illegal immigrants. On Education  This section is Mr. Bush's attempt to claim the education issue, of growing importance to voters, particularly suburban mothers who are expected to be critical this fall. He is running hard on his education record in Texas. Four years ago, Republicans advocated the abolition of the Department of Education. That provision was dropped this year, reflecting the influence of Mr. Bush, but conservatives are still adamant about limiting the role of the federal government in education.
 Lazio's air of perpetual youth is not only a matter of looks. He is one of those people who goes through life with the brightness knob turned all the way up; he has George W. Bush's high spirits, but without his sardonic smirk or ironic wit. Lazio has a way of booming ''Good morning!'' -- even to a pack of reporters waiting to jump down his throat -- that puts you in mind of a visitor to an elementary school class. During a farm breakfast he attended late last month, he was given some milk from one of those little cartons that kids get at school. ''Where's Pat?'' he cried, looking around for his wife. ''This is great! She should try some of this.'' Still, the bill that finally emerged from this agonizing and dilatory process was widely welcomed. The administration took credit for the bill, and so did Lazio. Indeed, Lazio held a news conference that revealed how very high the stakes had been for the Republican leadership. Standing with Tom DeLay and Dick Armey, Lazio declared, ''Who says the Republicans don't have an urban policy?''Rick Lazio's distinguishing feature may well be audacity. He's not audacious in the way of, say, Peter King, who openly criticizes his own party and ensures himself thereby an almost unlimited supply of press attention. Lazio is not, God knows, gadfly material. He is, rather, audacious in a way that is perfectly in keeping with his genial, unobtrusive nature, his modest gifts and his single-minded focus on the goal before him. Though his temperament in many ways resembles that of George W. Bush, it is well to keep in mind that Lazio's father supplied him with far fewer advantages in life than did Bush's. Lazio has had to succeed on his own, and because his native talents are scarcely outsize, it is his ambition that has seen him through. Lazio has always been something of an upstart; it took an upstart's moxie to run against Tom Downey, to slug it out with Speaker Foley, to hold up the legislative process while he quarreled with the upper house. And if Lazio weren't audacious, he wouldn't be running right now. Indeed, Lazio may succeed in parrying Hillary Clinton's ideological thrusts and still be left with questions about his character. This seems odd, since character would appear to be precisely what has taken Lazio so far. But that's not quite right; Lazio's great gift -- and George W.'s, too -- is not character but personality. Lazio, like Bush, is an ingratiating fellow, modest and friendly, universally welcoming. He seems genuinely to live inside his sugary aphorisms. But voters tend to reserve the word ''character'' to describe how a candidate behaves at moments of difficulty. It's not enough, and perhaps not even necessary, for the people we elect to be good children to their parents and good parents to their children. They have to make hard choices; and Lazio, the man who admires Dick Armey and Robert Wagner, may still have something to prove in that regard.
 Article by Richard V Allen, former policy adviser to Ronald Reagan, recalls how George Bush came to be vice-presidential nominee in 1980; says Bush was chosen by Reagan at very last moment, on third night of convention, by a combination of chance and some behind-the-scenes maneuvering to avoid nominating Gerald Ford; hour-by-hour description of decision process; photos (L) This summer, as we approach the Republican and Democratic conventions, both major presidential candidates have conducted highly structured searches for their running mates. Richard Cheney, the former secretary of defense, has spent months vetting candidates for George W. Bush. Former Secretary of State Warren Christopher has been doing the same for Al Gore. Though it was only 20 years ago, the process in 1980 could not have been more different from the one today. It is hard to imagine an unexpected vice-presidential pick at the last minute, like John Kennedy's selection of Lyndon Johnson in 1960, Richard Nixon's choice of Spiro Agnew in 1968 or even George Bush Sr.'s elevation of Dan Quayle in 1988 -- all of which caught the candidates' advisers by surprise. But it was Ronald Reagan's nomination of Governor Bush's father that bears special telling. Reagan's selection of Bush in Detroit represented a turnabout within six hours; it came only when the negotiations with Ford, having taken on a life of their own, appeared to have reached an impasse. Had the talks succeeded and had Ford been selected, the Reagan campaign, crippled by infighting, might well have lost to the Carter-Mondale ticket in the fall. Had Reagan and Ford managed to win the election, it's very likely that their administration would have been hobbled by an unworkable power-sharing arrangement. It's also possible that the Republicans might have a different candidate today. There are many plausible versions of how and why Reagan chose George Bush as his running mate, but most are wide of the mark. One conventional view is that Reagan, about to be nominated, recognized that he ''needed a moderate'' like Bush to balance the ticket; another version has it that Reagan, supposedly unschooled in foreign affairs, saw the wisdom of naming someone with extensive experience in the field to offset his own shortcomings. Yet another explanation holds that Reagan, a Californian, needed ''geographic balance'' and got that in Bush, with his Connecticut and Texas lineage. These explanations are wrong. George Bush was picked at the very last moment and largely by a combination of chance and some behind-the-scenes maneuvering. Many Reagan advisers have claimed a deal was never close. The post-convention media commentary has largely reflected this view. In fact, Meese and Deaver have gone so far as to declare that Bush was their first choice all along. I take exception to their account. I saw a very different story unfold, and saw it from a privileged vantage point. From the moment I walked into that suite until the moment Bush was finally selected, I was the only person to remain in Reagan's presence throughout the adventure. With detailed notes to back up my memory, this is what I saw at the dawn of the Reagan Revolution on that long night in Detroit. Ronald Reagan's search for a vice president started as soon as he clinched the nomination with a string of primary victories in the spring of 1980. Before long, a short list of prospective running mates had been put together, including Howard Baker, William Simon, Jack Kemp, Richard Lugar, Paul Laxalt and George Bush. This was serious. And so I did something rash: I decided to try to contact George Bush. Until that moment, the campaign inner circle had treated important issues in a collegial manner; there had been no secrets among us. But on this issue, Casey, Meese, Wirthlin and Deaver were keeping the lid on. If my colleagues could play it close to the vest on such a crucial issue, it was a game that could be played by others as well. Although nominally still on a list of frequently mentioned running mates, George Bush was not really on Reagan's radar screen. Since the primaries, the two men had barely spoken, and they certainly hadn't discussed the vice presidency. Apart from serious policy differences, Bush had refused to admit defeat in the primary battles despite being vanquished by Reagan in 29 of 33 primaries and did not withdraw from the race until just before the California primary in June. Reagan considered the belated departure willful and unnecessary and was offended by it. Still, I thought Bush a viable alternative to Ford; he had the best credentials of the possible running mates mentioned. If not for the unsettled relations between the two, Bush could bring more to the ticket to help Reagan than anyone on the list of choices. There was no question that a Bush candidacy would be a hard sell. Among Reagan's advisers, Nofziger and Casey viewed Bush as a liberal, and others were almost unanimously against him, some even contemptuous. I considered Bush a capable man whose positions were actually much closer to Reagan's than were Ford's, especially on foreign policy and defense matters. In 1978, Bush had requested my assistance on his campaign, but my commitment to Reagan was firm. Of the Reagan inner circle, I had the clearest channel to Bush and knew him the best. Shortly before 7:30, I reached Stefan Halper, a Bush aide. Talking to him from the nearly empty suite, I asked him, in as circumspect a manner as possible, to seek Bush's assurance that he could support the platform ''with no exceptions.'' Halper knew what I meant: Was Bush interested in the job? Would he implicitly abandon his support for abortion and his opposition to supply-side economics by embracing the platform? I then called an old friend, Richard Fairbanks, to ask him to approach Bush with the same question. I wanted two sources of independent confirmation and knew Fairbanks was close to Bush. ''There's Bush,'' I suggested, half expecting him to close off the discussion. Instead, he paused and then said, ''I can't take him; that 'voodoo economic policy' charge and his stand on abortion are wrong.'' Sensing an opportunity, I reached for a copy of the platform lying on the coffee table, passed it to him and said, ''Governor, this is your platform, every word of it.'' I added that Martin Anderson, Reagan's chief domestic policy adviser, Peter Hannaford and I had scrutinized it carefully. ''If you could be assured that George Bush would support this platform in every detail,'' I asked, ''would you reconsider Bush?'' At 7:50 Fairbanks called to say that Bush could indeed embrace the platform; soon thereafter, Halper phoned with the same message. Meanwhile, negotiations with Ford continued upstairs on the 70th floor, with Casey, Meese, Deaver and Wirthlin representing Reagan, and Greenspan, Kissinger and the Ford advisers John O. Marsh, Robert Barrett representing the former president. Seeing another opening, I then informed Reagan that Bush had given unequivocal assurances that he could embrace and defend the entire platform, emphasizing ''with no exceptions.'' He listened carefully, but did not respond. I simply could not read his reaction, and the thought crossed my mind that he was angry that I had opened a channel to Bush. Just before 11, Nancy Reagan and the Reagan children came in to watch the convention roll call. At 11:13, Montana put Reagan over the top, and there was jubilation. At the moment of triumph, though, the negotiators were not present; they remained upstairs, locked in discussions. Meanwhile, the convention was drawing to a close -- if the Ford talks went on much longer, and failed, there would be no way to heal the disappointment. Over the course of the preceding hour, I had told Hannaford, Anderson and Nofziger that a channel had been opened to Bush and that Bush was on board with the platform. Hannaford then began to argue that the logjam had to be broken. He collected Deaver and Nofziger at the entrance to the suite and mounted the stairs to tell the negotiators that a decision was needed. Reagan glanced around and asked those assembled -- a group that included Casey, Meese, Wirthlin, Hannaford, Deaver and me -- Well, what do we do now?'' There was no immediate response. No one offered an alternate plan. No one tossed out a name. Expecting instant opposition, I ventured, ''We call Bush.'' Once more, silence. Reagan again looked at each of us; hearing no objection, he said, ''Well, let's get Bush on the phone.'' At precisely 11:38, the phone was in Reagan's hand; though they barely knew each other, Reagan dove right in. ''George,'' he said warmly, ''I would like to go over there and tell them that I am recommending you for vice president. Could I ask you one thing -- do I have your permission to make an announcement that you support the platform across the board?'' We could hear Bush agreeing at the other end. Reagan then left for the convention center where, shortly after midnight, he took the podium to praise Ford and then to announce his running mate, George Bush.
 William Dornburgh letter on Richard L Berke's July 9 article suggests Al Gore choose Hillary Rodham Clinton as running mate If Al Gore really wants a vice-presidential candidate who has national recognition and a strong following and who is a Democrat in the Clinton-Gore tradition, the logical choice would be Hillary Rodham Clinton. If Al Gore really wants a vice-presidential candidate who has national recognition and a strong following and who is a Democrat in the Clinton-Gore tradition, the logical choice would be Hillary Rodham Clinton.
 As a teenager, he listened to heavy metal, drank in local bars and got into fistfights. He went to a high school where being Irish, Italian or African-American was what defined the students, and dreamed of being a cop. He worked as a construction worker, a milkman, a portable toilet delivery man. At 23 he joined the Marines and worked at a recruiting station in Bushwick, Brooklyn. As a teenager, he listened to heavy metal, drank in local bars and got into fistfights. He went to a high school where being Irish, Italian or African-American was what defined the students, and dreamed of being a cop. He worked as a construction worker, a milkman, a portable toilet delivery man. At 23 he joined the Marines and worked at a recruiting station in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
 From out of the conflict between utopia and anarchy has emerged moral ambiguity and complexity. In 1970, when he wrote ''Ohio'' following the murder of four students by National Guardsmen at Kent State University, his rage was more instinctive than political: ''My lyrics get personal about it,'' he acknowledges. ''I'm singing: 'What if you knew her and saw her dead on the ground? How could you run when you know? '''But that anger was also answered a few years later by ''Campaigner,'' when alone among major spokesmen for the counterculture he expressed compassion for a disgraced president who lost everything (''Even Richard Nixon has got soul''); and conspicuously over the years he has refused to adopt any ideological line. At one time or another he has supported Ronald Reagan and Jesse Jackson. His ideal ticket in 2000 is Gore-McCain.
 Addie: A Memoir, by Mary Lee Settle. (Berkley, $13.) By casting her autobiography as a memoir about her grandmother, whose out-of-wedlock pregnancy scandalized turn-of-the-century West Virginia, the novelist explores the way one understands truth by indirection. ''Settle has preserved for us a moment in the South's history palpable as the trumpet vines and rocking chairs of a long-departed front-porch afternoon,'' Angeline Goreau wrote here in 1998.
 Steven S Berizzi letter on Richard L Berke's July 9 article holds Al Gore cannot hope to be elected president if he ignores woman and minorities as potential running mates0 Ten photographs in Richard L. Berke's article (July 9) were worth one million words. They're all white men! Al Gore cannot hope to be the first president elected in the 21st century if he's still practicing the politics of the 18th. It is preposterous to suggest that not one woman or person of color merits consideration to be the nominee for vice president. If his campaign continues to demonstrate this lack of imagination, Gore is guaranteed a trip home in January. Ten photographs in Richard L. Berke's article (July 9) were worth one million words. They're all white men! Al Gore cannot hope to be the first president elected in the 21st century if he's still practicing the politics of the 18th. It is preposterous to suggest that not one woman or person of color merits consideration to be the nominee for vice president. If his campaign continues to demonstrate this lack of imagination, Gore is guaranteed a trip home in January.
 About the same time, Mr. Goode  bought shares of McKesson HBOC, the drug distributor. ''We think the drug distribution business will be very attractive going forward,'' he said. ''If you listen to Al Gore, more of the population will be covered, and drug distribution is one way to play that trend.''
 Mr. Kean recalled that John Sununu, President George Bush's one-time chief of staff and a former governor of New Hampshire, called him ''Ayatollah Kean,'' and he quoted a line from the conservative columnist George Will that a New Jersey governor is ''an American Caesar.'' And in crediting his  advisers with talking back to him, Mr. Kean said, ''It's easy for people to be afraid of the governor.'' This state is nothing like New York, for example, with a lieutenant governor, attorney general, comptroller and at least one big-city mayor who are willing and often able to sabotage the governor. And in Texas, Gov. George W. Bush does not have a formal cabinet but a collection of sometimes wayward officials, like the agriculture commissioner, who are elected and have power of their own. Now the conventional speculation places her in a cabinet post or ambassadorship if George W. Bush is elected president. But she maintained that ''I really haven't spent a lot of time focusing on what's next,'' adding that the governor's office is ''not a good place to look for your next job.''
 Campaign aides say Vice Pres Al Gore will name running mate Aug 8, kicking off three-week road show during which he hopes to dominate news and establish momentum for fall campaign; seek to establish sharp contrast with what they see as haphazard atmosphere in which Gov George W Bush chose Dick Cheney; Bush campaign derides stress on political calculation; Gore and family begin vacation, North Carolina; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore plans to announce his choice of a running mate on Tuesday, Aug. 8, campaign aides said today. The date, five days after the Republican convention in Philadelphia and a week before the Democratic convention in Los Angeles on Aug. 14, will kick off a three-week road show during which Mr. Gore hopes to dominate the news and establish momentum for the fall campaign. Vice President Al Gore plans to announce his choice of a running mate on Tuesday, Aug. 8, campaign aides said today. The date, five days after the Republican convention in Philadelphia and a week before the Democratic convention in Los Angeles on Aug. 14, will kick off a three-week road show during which Mr. Gore hopes to dominate the news and establish momentum for the fall campaign. It is somewhat unusual for a presidential candidate to announce in advance when he is going to announce his choice of a running mate. But the Gore campaign hopes to set up a stark contrast with what it perceives as the haphazard atmosphere of Gov. George W. Bush's selection of Dick Cheney. Mr. Gore's campaign spokesman, Chris Lehane, described that atmosphere as ''carnival-like.'' By setting a date for the announcement, Gore aides said they hoped that voters would perceive Mr. Gore as making this  decision in a mature, methodical manner -- and, by extension, that they would perceive Mr. Bush as not ready to occupy the Oval Office. Karen P. Hughes, chief spokeswoman for the Bush campaign, criticized the announcement. ''Once again, everything is a political calculation,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''They are more concerned about the political timing of the announcement instead of who the person will be.'' The announcement is scheduled for Nashville, where Mr. Gore's headquarters are. The new ticket will then almost certainly head to the running mate's home state. From there the two will travel through the battleground states, separating at some point. Mr. Gore is not scheduled to arrive in Los Angeles until Wednesday, Aug. 16, two days after the convention opens. Just before then, he will conduct a ''passing of the torch'' ceremony with President Clinton so that Mr. Gore can enter Los Angeles as his own man. For his part, Mr. Gore said today during a walk on the beach with his family that he had still not settled on a running mate, although he has given strong indications that he is close to a decision. He told reporters earlier that there were fewer than 10 people on his list; the list is believed to be much smaller than that. Asked if he had made his choice, Mr. Gore said today, ''Not yet, we're just having a good time.'' Aides said he had been swimming and working on a jigsaw puzzle as he and his family began a weeklong vacation at the five-bedroom seaside home of Parker and Becky Overton, the Greenville couple who own a sporting goods business and have been longtime friends of the Gores. Mr. Gore told reporters as he flew here  that he was actively ''mulling'' his choice but would probably not reach a final decision until after he returned to Washington on Thursday. The ''mulling'' process itself is meant to contrast with what Gore aides characterize as a frantic scramble for Mr. Bush and an incomplete vetting of Mr. Cheney that left him unprepared for an immediate assault from Democrats on his voting record. The Gore team says that for the first time in the long preconvention positioning, the Cheney selection has given it an important assist in illustrating Mr. Bush's weaknesses and Mr. Gore's strengths. Mr. Gore's advisers, while conceding they are generally in the dark as to whom he might pick, have given a couple of clues as to what may be guiding his thinking over the next several days. As they critique the Cheney choice, they focus on two things. They say that Mr. Cheney is a ''retro'' candidate from the past and that ''the visuals'' -- of an older white man with a history of heart trouble -- hurt Mr. Bush. The suggestion is that Mr. Gore will pick someone young and fresh and that the pictures of the two together will immediately convey a positive sense of vigor and energy. Mr. Gore is almost certainly guided by the instant lift his own selection gave Bill Clinton in 1992. ''You want the first thing people say to be positive and be something you can build on,'' one Gore strategist said. ''That's the problem Bush has been having -- they've been on the defensive the whole week. You want the kickoff to be something powerful that carries you for the first 48 to 72 hours. This issue stuff is hurting Cheney. What's left is the picture.'' Rather than go for a niche candidate who would help with a specific state or a specific group, Mr. Gore is believed to be seeking someone who would reinforce his own strengths in much the way that he reinforced Mr. Clinton's. Both came from the South, the ideological center of the party and the same age group, and they proved that reinforcement rather than balance could be a winning formula.
 Republicans complete work on platform that embraces much of presidential candidate George W Bush's educational agenda, over objections of some conservatives; photo; document drops call for abolishing Education Department; conservatives do prevail on array of social issues, from gays in the military to contraceptive counseling in school-based clinics and opposition to choice on abortion (M) Republicans finished work today on a platform that embraces much of Gov. George W. Bush's educational agenda, over the objections of some conservatives who warned that the party was breaking with the get-the-government-off-our-backs philosophy of the Reagan revolution. Republicans finished work today on a platform that embraces much of Gov. George W. Bush's educational agenda, over the objections of some conservatives who warned that the party was breaking with the get-the-government-off-our-backs philosophy of the Reagan revolution. The 107-member platform committee voted against a call to abolish the Department of Education, and in favor of Mr. Bush's education principles, which conservatives had resisted in early subcommittee action. Bush allies termed both votes a major victory, emblematic of their candidate's efforts to create a new Republican Party with more appeal to the voters in the center. The platform will be considered by the full convention on Monday. Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, chairman of the committee, declared the document ''very visionary, very exciting,'' and a platform that Mr. Bush and other Republican candidates can run on comfortably. Still, the tension between Mr. Bush's reach for the center on education, and the ideological pull of his party's base was apparent throughout debate during the morning. ''When you say the abolishment of the Department of Education,'' said Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, a Bush ally, what many people hear is ''that we don't care about education -- and if there's one thing Republicans care about, it's kids.'' After the votes, a Bush spokesman, Ari Fleischer, declared it a ''marked departure from the '96 platform,'' adding, ''We did make it clear to delegates that this was a crucial issue to Governor Bush.'' With only brief debate, the platform committee reasserted that ''homosexuality is incompatible with military service,'' overwhelmingly rejecting efforts to remove that plank. Mr. Fleischer noted that this was not Mr. Bush's position, adding, ''The governor believes 'don't ask, don't tell' is the appropriate policy and he supports that.'' The power of conservatives was perhaps most clear on the issue of abortion. Long before the committee met, Mr. Bush and Republican leaders had announced that they wanted the abortion plank, which calls for a ban on abortion, left alone. Abortion rights supporters tried on several occasions to remove the plank or add a provision recognizing and expressing respect for Republicans who hold different views on the issue, but they were decisively beaten each time. They were struggling tonight to build support for a minority report on abortion, or to get a majority of six state delegations, the first step to bringing the issue to the floor. The committee's final action was the approval of a preamble that sounds the themes for the Bush campaign -- ''bold reforms in education,'' ''saving and strengthening Social Security,'' ''tax reforms that will sustain our nation's prosperity and reflect its decency.'' It also talks about a vision of ''a welcoming society,'' and then tries to strike the balance between reaching out and reaffirming core principles.
 Bushwick, Brooklyn, is showing signs of gentrification as young professionals begin to follow artist pioneers who moved eastward to colonize neighborhood's old industrial buildings; photo (Bushwick Journal) (M) Just 100 yards from the corner of Bushwick Avenue and McKibbin Street, inside a brightly lighted basement garment factory, the buzzing of sewing machines rises and ebbs like dentists' drills as a dozen women hunch over tables stitching elastic waistbands into blue polyester pajamas. Just 100 yards from the corner of Bushwick Avenue and McKibbin Street, inside a brightly lighted basement garment factory, the buzzing of sewing machines rises and ebbs like dentists' drills as a dozen women hunch over tables stitching elastic waistbands into blue polyester pajamas. The building at 255-265 McKibbin Street, home to Ms. Bick and Quality Knits, is in the midst of a transformation. For decades artists have been moving eastward along the L train, out of the East Village and into Williamsburg, in search of bigger spaces, lower rents and hipper neighborhoods. Now the artists have reached farther still, renting former manufacturing spaces around the fifth, sixth and seventh stops from Manhattan on the L train. Most of the new arrivals call the area East Williamsburg, but to longtime residents it is Bushwick. The artists colonizing the old industrial buildings on the western end of Bushwick say they believe that they are playing the role of pioneers. Crime is down in the area, as it is citywide, but many new residents have stories of break-ins and car thefts and have held meetings recently to discuss a series of muggings. ''My relatives who live in Staten Island are like: 'Bushwick? Why would you want to live out there?' '' Ms. Castagna said. Unlike Williamsburg or the East Village, the fifth subway stop has  no cafes in which residents can gather, but the new arrivals have organized a summer film festival and studio tours. And the bodega at the corner of McKibbin Street and Bushwick Avenue has become the place to pick up food, meet friends and practice Spanish with the clerks. Deeper into Bushwick, however, the prospects for peace between the new arrivals and longtime residents may not be so good.
 Bushido Fencing Center, 118 Broadway, Hillsdale; (201) 666-3550. Group lessons, age 9 and older; also offers yoga exercises for fencers.
 Lyn Nofziger Op-Ed article comments on Republican presidential candidate George W Bush's choice of conservative Richard Cheney as vice-presidential running mate (M) As Democrats pick apart the voting record of Richard Cheney, many pundits have wondered why George W. Bush picked a real conservative as his running mate. After all, they say, doesn't this selection belie his carefully honed image as the son and heir of the ''kinder, gentler'' president? First, let it be said that the senior Bush was not elected president because he offered the nation a ''kinder, gentler'' version of Reagan conservatism. He was elected because voters were, in effect, electing Ronald Reagan to a third term through his surrogate and because Mr. Bush wasn't Michael Dukakis. As Democrats pick apart the voting record of Richard Cheney, many pundits have wondered why George W. Bush picked a real conservative as his running mate. After all, they say, doesn't this selection belie his carefully honed image as the son and heir of the ''kinder, gentler'' president? First, let it be said that the senior Bush was not elected president because he offered the nation a ''kinder, gentler'' version of Reagan conservatism. He was elected because voters were, in effect, electing Ronald Reagan to a third term through his surrogate and because Mr. Bush wasn't Michael Dukakis. Mr. Bush was defeated in 1992 for several reasons, but one, most assuredly, was that he had spent close to four years proving that he was not Ronald Reagan and didn't want to be Ronald Reagan. The second George Bush has a serious opportunity to be elected president only eight years after his father left office. But can he be swept into the White House on the wings of ''compassionate conservatism''? The slogan's meaning seems like a euphemism for moderate Republicanism. Certainly, for the mostly unhyphenated conservatives who make up the large Reagan wing of the party, the slogan has a vaguely negative connotation. Just as President Bush's ''kinder, gentler'' conservatism was a slap, intended or not, at Mr. Reagan and his policies, so is ''compassionate conservatism'' a slap, intended or not, at those Reagan conservatives who have kept the G.O.P. alive for the last 20 years. Governor Bush seemed to think the slogan would resonate among voters in much the same way the ''New Deal'' and ''Great Society'' did. Instead, its appeal appears to be limited to moderate Republicans already firmly in his camp and to a select group of disaffected Democrats fed up with the Clinton-Gore years and not willing to waste a vote on either Pat Buchanan or Ralph Nader. Mr. Bush may sense this. A man who has twice won the Texas statehouse can be expected to have good political instincts. At any rate, Mr. Bush may have selected Mr. Cheney as his vice presidential running mate precisely because Mr. Cheney is not a compassionate conservative. He is a conservative plain and simple. His congressional record wins a 91 percent approval rating from the conservative American Constitutional Union, and the group says the rating  would be higher if Mr. Cheney had not voted for a few Reagan initiatives that it deemed too liberal. His tenure as defense secretary shows no hint of the social liberalism and experimentation that has dominated the Pentagon in the last eight years, nor is there any sign of moderation since he entered the business world. And even though he worked for both President Gerald Ford and President George Bush, he is viewed by Reaganites as one of theirs. Governor Bush and his allies are  playing down Mr. Cheney's conservative credentials and emphasizing his broad experience as an executive in government and in business. That doesn't quite wash. After all, other equally qualified, if moderate, candidates were available, and they might have brought more to the ticket. (One thinks of the oft-mentioned Tom Ridge, governor of Pennsylvania.) But selecting one of them would have validated the conservatives' fear that Mr. Bush's ''compassionate conservatism'' reveals, in truth, a moderate heart. So, it is with good reason that Mr. Bush picked a conservative as his running mate. Why in the world won't he admit that?
 Bush Plans Wide Appeal In His Convention Speech  Gov. George W. Bush said that in his speech to the Republican National Convention he would go out of his way to direct his appeal to the widest possible audience, including Democrats and independents. After two days of marathon sessions, the Republican platform reflects Gov. George W. Bush's stance on education, but stands firm on other issues. Vice President Al Gore plans to announce his choice of a running mate on Aug. 8, a week before the Democratic convention in Los Angeles.
 Before signing on to the Republican Party ticket with Gov. George W. Bush, Dick Cheney should have read the small print -- it's his own name. On the new campaign placard unveiled at the candidates' first appearance in Wyoming, Mr. Cheney's name was two-thirds the size of Mr. Bush's -- on a second, lower line. Before signing on to the Republican Party ticket with Gov. George W. Bush, Dick Cheney should have read the small print -- it's his own name. On the new campaign placard unveiled at the candidates' first appearance in Wyoming, Mr. Cheney's name was two-thirds the size of Mr. Bush's -- on a second, lower line. What's true for Harrison and Michelle in this summer's ''What Lies Beneath'' -- co-stars, pica for pica -- was also true for Ike-Dick, McKinley-Roosevelt, Clinton-Gore, Lincoln-Johnson and Reagan-Bush. The exception to the graphic democracy of the last two centuries --  President Bush in 1992. Dan Quayle's name was downsized from 30 to 50 percent. Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said there was no intention in the official campaign image beyond the solution of a design problem, and no nervousness about unintended interpretations. ''Number one -- because of the large block font used to spell out 'Bush' and 'Cheney,' our graphic artist suggested making 'Bush' larger to make the sign easier to read,'' Mr. Sullivan said. ''Number two -- Governor Bush is the nominee for president.''
 Gov George W Bush says he will try to appeal directly to Democrats and independents in his speech to Republican National Convention, interview; says message that he is inclusive will be low key but unmistakable; cites his insistence on harmonious convention; defends decision to keep some hard-edged conservatives off stage; photo of Bush campaigning in Kentucky (M)/ Gov. George W. Bush said today that in his speech to the Republican National Convention he would go out of his way to break through party lines and appeal directly to Democrats and independents. In an interview, Mr. Bush said he was determined for the country to see that he is inclusive. Mindful, perhaps, that this pitch beyond his party could be unsettling to conservatives, Mr. Bush said his remarks would be low key -- but unmistakable. Gov. George W. Bush said today that in his speech to the Republican National Convention he would go out of his way to break through party lines and appeal directly to Democrats and independents. In an interview, Mr. Bush said he was determined for the country to see that he is inclusive. Mindful, perhaps, that this pitch beyond his party could be unsettling to conservatives, Mr. Bush said his remarks would be low key -- but unmistakable. ''There's not a sentence in the speech that looks in the camera and says, 'I want you!' '' said Mr. Bush, speaking from Joplin, Mo., before crisscrossing Kentucky as he made his way through states that voted for President Clinton four years ago. [Page 23.] ''But the speech itself should do that. The speech, if it's done right, and I think it will be, will send a broadened message.'' As Republicans in red, white and blue boaters and embroidered ''Bush for President'' shirts jammed into this city today for the convention's opening on Monday, Mr. Bush said he realized that the usual suspense may be gone because he has already announced his running mate, Dick Cheney. He also said the American people should not expect political fisticuffs because he has followed an ''iron-fist rule'' to make sure there is a harmonious show. As part of that effort, Mr. Bush defended his decision to keep some hard-edged conservatives off stage, saying there were ''no slights intended.'' He was determined, he explained, to avert a repetition of the scene at the Houston convention in 1992, which is remembered not for his father's re-election drive but for scathing speeches. ''A lot of people said the '92 convention set a negative tone, and that it set a divisive message for the country,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I didn't see it that way at the time. People felt it was part of a dismal political year. This is a different time, a different approach, in the sense that we are trying to limit the amount of time that elected officials are speaking relative to the amount of time that we spell out policy.'' He added: ''This is not a divisive moment. This is a uniting moment.'' Yet Mr. Bush acknowledged that all the happy talk could limit the drama, as well as the public's interest in the convention. Asked whether he was worried about the possible lack of excitement, he laughed and said: ''That's a pretty legitimate question. I hope, I think, if there is any suspense it will be in the roll-out of ideas. Hopefully, people will be interested in what I have to say. I hope we can get enough people to pay attention to it.'' But Mr. Bush made clear that he intended to go further than Republicans have in the past, especially in appealing to Democrats. To drive that message home, Mr. Bush will be introduced at the convention by Mr. Bullock's widow, Jan. And all week long, the stage will showcase women and people from minority groups, faces that are not usually highlighted at Republican conventions. Mr. Bush's effort is reminiscent of what Bill Clinton did in his acceptance speech in 1992. ''The choice we offer is not conservative or liberal,'' Mr. Clinton said then. ''In many ways it's not even Republican or Democratic. It is different. It is new. And it will work.'' In the interview today, Mr. Bush said he would emphasize how he had worked with Democrats. ''One of the things that people don't really know about me is that I've been good about bringing people together to get things accomplished in Texas,'' he said. Mr. Bush would not speak directly about how crucial it was in his address on Thursday night, which he said he was ''still massaging,'' to allay concerns that he might not be ready to be president. Mr. Bush scoffed at criticism from some moderates that his choice of Mr. Cheney underscores that he is more concerned with burnishing his credentials on the right. ''To the extent that there's people out there carping,'' he said, ''that's just normal.'' Refusing to say how serious he had been about turning to a running mate who backed abortion rights, like Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania or Gov. George E. Pataki of New York, Mr. Bush would only say, ''I considered a lot of people.'' Mr. Bush said he was not worried about advisers who have warned that the campaign is squandering a prime opportunity by not sharply repudiating Democrats on stage. ''I will needle my opponent, but we don't have a let's-tear-down night or a slash-and-burn night, or a night that subjects the other side to public ridicule,'' he said. ''And I'm not going to talk about Mrs. Clinton. She is running for the United States Senate and has her hands full in the great state of New York.'' Still, even as he himself intends to stay above the partisan fray, Mr. Bush acknowledged that not every speaker will give the Democrats a pass. ''I'm sure people are going to get up there and say some things about the pitfalls of our opponent's record.'' Aware, no doubt, that President Clinton remains popular among many voters, he said, ''By the way, the opponent is not President Clinton. The opponent is Vice President Gore.'' Mr. Bush sounded defiant about the criticisms that he has relied on his father, the former president, for guidance in picking Mr. Cheney and in making other decisions. Governor Bush is clearly taking the offensive on that count, and said that in his acceptance speech he planned ''to say how much I love my family -- how much I respect my father.'' The Bush campaign and the convention planners took great care to make sure that when viewers tune in they will see only harmony on stage, and a message of moderation and inclusion. People familiar with the discussions said that while there was no choice but to let Senator John McCain speak on Tuesday evening, given that he emerged from his losing primary fight with quite a following, the Bush campaign did not want its message delivered by more conservative, and perhaps, outspoken party members who opposed him, like Alan Keyes and Steve Forbes. Mr. Forbes, in an interview, insisted that he was not offended. ''In terms of speaking, realistically, how many people are going to listen unless you're William Jennings Bryan?'' He said Mr. Bush's acceptance speech ''towers over everything else'' and any other speech delivered this week. Moreover, Mr. Forbes said he was reassured by Mr. Bush's decision to pick a conservative as his running mate. ''His choosing Cheney speaks volumes,'' he said. Many Republicans said by far the most attention will be on Mr. Bush's address. It will be the first time for millions of Americans to get a close look at Mr. Bush -- and for him to appeal beyond the party faithful. Michael K. Deaver, who was President Reagan's image consultant, said Mr. Bush has much the same challenge that his boss had in 1980 at the convention in Detroit, when he used his speech to reassure the public that he had the breadth and command to be president. ''Reagan was a likable guy, people genuinely had a positive impression of him through Hollywood and through his governor's days,'' Mr. Deaver said. ''But they really weren't sure this guy had any depth or any original thoughts. That impression began to change with the speech he gave. Bush is in a similar position.'' Mr. Bush and his advisers have sought to play down how much of a political lift they will draw from the convention. They note that polls show that Republican voters are already much more enthusiastic about their candidate than Democrats are about Al Gore -- so they have less room to gain. In an interview, Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, said of Mr. Gore: ''I think he'll get a bigger bounce out of the convention than we will. There's very little more we can gain by consolidating our base. Our view is that he's going to essentially get twice the bounce out of the convention than we're going to. We're going to find ourselves in a very tight race after Labor Day.'' Asked how much Mr. Bush might gain in the opinion polls after the convention, he said, ''You can pick up four or five points.'' He said he was not worried about Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative who is expected to run as the Reform Party nominee, siphoning votes from Mr. Bush. ''He's something always to watch but he is diminished,'' Mr. Rove said. ''He's not grown in stature or grown in impact as the years have gone on. Why? Because he's Pat Buchanan.'' The Bush campaign and his supporters do not seem worried that Mr. McCain will try to upstage the nominee when he speaks here. ''If he looks like he's a spoiler in some fashion against George Bush,'' said Pat Robertson, the founder of the Christian Coalition and a foe of Mr. McCain, ''it will destroy him.'' Mr. Bush is clearly delighting in this opportunity for him to be glorified all week. Asked what will be the convention's best moment, he referred to his speech, saying, ''It's when, from my selfish perspective, it's walking out on that stage.''
 Editorial contends George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention will signal whether he puts his stamp on party, or party's right wing draws hard-edged, highly ideological template for his candidacy The accepted wisdom nowadays is that the national political conventions are little more than expensive relics, and it is true that the major events of the Republican jamboree that begins tomorrow in Philadelphia are largely foreordained. Gov. George W. Bush's nomination is secure, his vice president chosen. Yet this is a supremely important and surprisingly suspenseful time for Mr. Bush. The image of the man who promised a future based on ''compassionate conservatism'' is murkier than it was a few weeks ago, as is the very meaning of his trademark term. The Philadelphia convention will be an exercise in political packaging whose decisive moments will be Mr. Bush's acceptance speech, the final drafting of the G.O.P. platform, and Richard  Cheney's reintroduction to the national audience. All these, in turn, will determine whether Mr. Bush puts his stamp on the Republican Party or the party's right wing draws a hard-edged, highly ideological template for his candidacy. In short, the political world will be watching to see if Mr. Bush can pull his campaign back to the moderate middle from which he governed in Texas. Clearly, Mr. Cheney's selection did more to muddle Mr. Bush's message than he ever expected, even though he insists he was not ''blindsided'' by the auto-pilot conservatism of Mr. Cheney's voting record in Congress. ''I'm a conservative, too,'' Mr. Bush said, but it is hard to believe that the governor's conservatism would have encompassed Mr. Cheney's votes against Head Start and the equal rights amendment, his hard-line stance on every gun control measure that came his way, or his opposition to a resolution in 1986 that called on South Africa to release Nelson Mandela from prison. The accepted wisdom nowadays is that the national political conventions are little more than expensive relics, and it is true that the major events of the Republican jamboree that begins tomorrow in Philadelphia are largely foreordained. Gov. George W. Bush's nomination is secure, his vice president chosen. Yet this is a supremely important and surprisingly suspenseful time for Mr. Bush. The image of the man who promised a future based on ''compassionate conservatism'' is murkier than it was a few weeks ago, as is the very meaning of his trademark term. The Philadelphia convention will be an exercise in political packaging whose decisive moments will be Mr. Bush's acceptance speech, the final drafting of the G.O.P. platform, and Richard  Cheney's reintroduction to the national audience. All these, in turn, will determine whether Mr. Bush puts his stamp on the Republican Party or the party's right wing draws a hard-edged, highly ideological template for his candidacy. In short, the political world will be watching to see if Mr. Bush can pull his campaign back to the moderate middle from which he governed in Texas. Clearly, Mr. Cheney's selection did more to muddle Mr. Bush's message than he ever expected, even though he insists he was not ''blindsided'' by the auto-pilot conservatism of Mr. Cheney's voting record in Congress. ''I'm a conservative, too,'' Mr. Bush said, but it is hard to believe that the governor's conservatism would have encompassed Mr. Cheney's votes against Head Start and the equal rights amendment, his hard-line stance on every gun control measure that came his way, or his opposition to a resolution in 1986 that called on South Africa to release Nelson Mandela from prison. If Mr. Bush wishes to persuade voters that his G.O.P. will not resurrect the inflexible attitudes and stark policies of the Gingrich era, he must dominate the convention stage. That is still a big stage, despite the decision by the main broadcast networks to limit their coverage to one hour in prime time. There will be a huge audience in those peak periods and a continuing audience of great sophistication for the other media to which the networks are passing the torch of political communications -- cable, C-Span, the 24-hour news shows and the Internet. Mr. Bush must use his acceptance speech to reassert his control of his candidacy and establish his primacy within the party. Nobody knows this better than he does. His father used his brilliantly conceived ''kinder, gentler nation'' speech in New Orleans in 1988 to establish his independence and to distance himself from the social callousness of Reaganism. Not coincidentally, the speech helped give him a lead over Michael Dukakis that he never relinquished. Four years later, the same George Bush damaged himself badly with a pallid speech that left him looking like a helpless bystander as Pat Buchanan hijacked the party's philosophical bank account with his scary rant about cultural warfare. Governor Bush cannot afford to look like a bystander at his convention. He needs a speech proving that his vision rather than Mr. Cheney's crabbed ideology will define Republican ideals. Another place where Mr. Bush can put his brand on the party is the platform. A draft released last week showed some movement away from the sheer venom of the 1996 platform. But the new document offered no evidence of any sustained effort or desire by Mr. Bush to move his party to more sensible ground on two key issues. He left in place a harsh abortion plank, even though he uses a more conciliatory tone in speeches. On gun control, the platform repeats the proven formula for failure through stronger enforcement of existing laws. At a time when conventions no longer decide nominations, they still provide a testing place where candidacies can either soar or flop. In the primaries, Mr. Bush showed that he could take a punch from a strong opponent. In Philadelphia, he will have his chance to show that he can stand up to his party's fiercest factions and sketch a picture of America that will attract, rather than frighten, middle-of-the-road voters.
 Republican national convention in Philadelphia is likely to highlight party's effort to refashion itself, taking cue from Pres Clinton's successful repositioning of Democratic Party toward the middle in 1992; Republican presidential aspirant George W Bush has even appropriated Clinton's claim of being 'a different kind of Democrat,' telling audiences he is 'a different kind of Republican'; photo (M) THERE are three things you will have to look hard for as you tune in to the Republican National Convention here this week: A true-blue conservative icon on center stage. (There may be a few, but they will be sprinkled in a line-up that resembles a Benetton commercial.) Any utterance of the word ''abortion.'' (You're more likely to hear the words, ''poor'' or ''underclass.'') The traditional savaging of the opposition. (Instead, look for subtle denigrations of the Clinton-Gore years and bipartisan overtures.) THERE are three things you will have to look hard for as you tune in to the Republican National Convention here this week: A true-blue conservative icon on center stage. (There may be a few, but they will be sprinkled in a line-up that resembles a Benetton commercial.) Any utterance of the word ''abortion.'' (You're more likely to hear the words, ''poor'' or ''underclass.'') The traditional savaging of the opposition. (Instead, look for subtle denigrations of the Clinton-Gore years and bipartisan overtures.) Eight years after Mr. Clinton captured the White House by venturing toward the middle and running against some of the orthodoxies of his party -- including those on welfare, teacher unions and racial quotas -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas is trying a similar approach. While Mr. Bush is not moving as far as Mr. Clinton in forsaking the principles of his party, he sounds a lot like a Democrat when he holds forth about protecting Social Security, reaching out to the dispossessed and lavishing more money on public education. Mr. Bush last week startled Democrats and Republicans alike when he spoke out about prescription drug benefits for the elderly. Mr. Bush has even appropriated Mr. Clinton's mantra from 1992, ''a different kind of Democrat.'' He would be ''a different kind of Republican,'' he reassures audiences. But to win the White House, Mr. Bush must prove that he is doing more than muffling the vitriol by yanking the Patrick Buchanans and Marilyn Quayles and Phil Gramms offstage. His challenge is to assemble a new Republican majority with the help of constituencies that voted Democratic four years ago. To do that, he has to convince voters that he is not beholden to the right wing. With some success, polls show, Mr. Bush is making a play for the blue-collar Democrats and suburban women who backed Mr. Clinton overwhelmingly four years ago. He is reaching out aggressively to Latino voters. He even dared to speak before the N.A.A.C.P., not because he thought he could convert African American voters -- among the Democratic Party's most loyal backers --- but because of the signal it would send to moderates that he is inclusive. Mr. Bush can afford to reach out to moderates this year because the base of his own party, ravenous to reclaim the White House, is willing to make compromises. Not since the love fest for Ronald Reagan in 1984 have Republicans appeared so harmonious on the eve of their convention. As the campaign intensifies, though, Mr. Gore and the Democrats will increasingly portray Mr. Bush as Newt Gingrich without the scowl. To this end, they were handed some potent ammunition last week, when Mr. Bush picked Dick Cheney as his running mate. The Cheney pairing suggested that Mr. Bush was harkening to his party's conservative past rather than seeking a partner who could broaden the ticket's ideological appeal. Mr. Clinton, in contrast, won credibility as a reconfigured Democrat by picking Al Gore -- assembling a southern moderate ticket. Mr. Bush did not have to settle on a conservative. He has the latitude denied Bob Dole when, four years ago, he picked Jack Kemp as his running mate. Mr. Dole, however, needed someone to rouse the party's conservative faithful, who had not rallied around him, as they have around Mr. Bush. Will he be as successful at co-opting -- or at least taming -- the opposition as Mr. Clinton? Or will he fail, as did Michael Dukakis in 1988? In that year's campaign, Vice President George Bush effectively branded him a Massachusetts liberal and card-carrying member of the American Civil Liberties Union. Thus far, Mr. Bush and the Republicans have had it both ways. It happened this weekend in Philadelphia. The Bush-controlled Republican Party drafted a platform that cast off several hard-edged party positions of the past, like abolishing the Education Department and the National Endowment for the Arts. The hostile language toward immigration four years ago was substituted with a tribute to the role of new Americans. But conservatives were not neglected. The platform contained a reaffirmation of its ban on abortion -- with no exceptions -- despite a drive on Friday by some party members to soften the langauge. It happened in Austin last week. There Mr. Bush was, introducing to the world a running mate who had one of the most conservative voting records in Congress. But in their oratory, they sounded as Democratic as Al Gore. Mr. Bush declared that he called upon Mr. Cheney to help him ''accomplish some great goals'' for the nation: ''To save and strengthen Social Security. To improve Medicare and provide prescription drugs for the elderly. To reform our public schools.'' All but the last point -- ''To rebuild our military to keep the peace'' -- sounded like they would be more likely to issue from Al Gore's mouth. The Democrats, of course, are already  working hard not to let Mr. Bush get away with this balancing act. They argue that many of his proposals for new spending on social projects are modest and symbolic. And most of these proposals, they note, offer traditionally Republican solutions that rely heavily on the power of the private sector, as in his plan to privatize Social Security or his endorsement of vouchers to allow public money to go to private schools. Voters may recognize that there are some real ideological divides between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. A New York Times/CBS News Poll last week showed that the public sees stark differences in how they would handle taxes, health care, abortion and the environment. Still, Mr. Bush's right-down-the-middle tactics may succeed. Both parties have a history of remaking themselves. In 1952, Dwight Eisenhower refused to tear down elements of the New Deal and spoke loftily about retooling the Republican Party. While Mr. Bush calls himself a ''compassionate conservative,'' Mr. Eisenhower favored the term ''dynamic conservatism.'' Yet while prominent conservatives are staying silent as their bread-and-butter issues -- prayer in school, and opposing abortion and homosexual rights -- get short shrift (or no shrift at all), Mr. Bush could be risking his relations with others on the right, who worry that the party is losing its soul. David A. Keene, chairman of the American Conservative Union, warned that Mr. Bush had better be careful that his overtures to moderates do not become more substantive. ''The feel-good stuff and atmospherics is all fine,'' he said. ''But when push comes to shove, Republicans win elections in which there is a clear distinction between their position and the Democratic position on the issues. If you spend all your time reaching out, you're putting your base in danger.'' For now, Mr. Bush seems to be having more luck reassuring conservatives than his father, former President George Bush, whose was never fully trusted on the right. Mr. Robertson, for one, is haunted by the elder Bush's speech, written by Peggy Noonan, at the 1988 Republican convention at which the nominee uttered his famous anti-tax pledge. ''I just hope and pray he doesn't have Peggy Noonan write, 'Read My Lips,' '' Mr. Robertson said. ''We don't need any tax pledge redux!'' So the right is watching. But if the younger Bush has learned anything from his father, it is that if you try to tack right and then dance to the center, you can end up falling off the political stage.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column contends George W Bush's Republican presidential candidacy reflects deep-seated elitist sense that important decisions should be left to those bred to make them (M) Mr. O'Hara, who savored the self-destructive streak among the pampered, would have enjoyed Bushville as much as Gibbsville: a millennial convention rooting for the goof-off son of the fired boss to get the big job. It is the old-boy network writ large, a bunch of mostly rich, white, male, older delegates pouring into the city of underdog ''Rocky'' to see two overdog oilmen who got to go to Yale preach about a more democratic Republican Party. The writer who always had his nose pressed up against the glass would have understood perfectly why George Walker Bush did not scrutinize Dick Cheney's voting record before anointing him -- just as George Herbert Walker Bush never sat down with J. Danforth Quayle to have a substantive conversation about issues, principles or beliefs before anointing him. It would have been rude. As Bush family icon Henry Stimson, F.D.R.'s secretary of war, put it, ''Gentlemen do not read each other's mail.'' The Bushes feel you should trust them to choose trustworthy seconds from the club. The two George Bushes are engaging and unpretentious. But deep down in their genes is that elitist sense that the important decisions should be made by those who are bred to make them. Their ideology is friendship. They equate integrity with loyalty to them. They are genuinely surprised when someone accuses them of callousness -- whether it is the Willie Horton issue with the father or the relentless Texas death-row executions with the son -- because their perspective is, ''I know I'm honorable, therefore I'm best accountable to myself.'' The family code is rooted in the noblesse oblige air of Prescott Bush, a craggy senator and a Wall Street executive who inhabited the partners' room at Brown Brothers Harriman, a rarefied wood-paneled universe filled with Skull and Bones men and roll-top desks and a sense that the fate of the nation was best left in their hands over cigars and brandy. Newsweek reports today that W. was always ''somewhat oblivious to the political power of his family ties.'' Running for Congress in 1978, he went to a Republican candidates' school. ''David Dreier, now a Republican congressman from California,'' Newsweek says, ''recalls young Bush excitedly telling him, 'I've got the greatest idea of how to raise money for the campaign. Have your mother send a letter to your family's Christmas card list. I just did and I got $350,000!' It doesn't seem to have occurred to Bush that not everyone has Barbara Bush's Rolodex full of senators and statesmen and G.O.P. fat cats.'' Asked by Peter Jennings on Friday if it was politically advantageous to be George Bush's son, W. replied, ''No.'' Piffle.
 Democratic party platform committee, brushing aside amendments from embattled liberal wing, adopts positions that adhere closely to Vice Pres Gore's centrist views on trade, fiscal policy, national defense, crime and welfare; photo; document firmly supports limited missile defense system, aggressive debt reduction, modest tax cuts and expanding global trade through World Trade Organization; Tom Hayden of liberal wing warns party is not addressing challenge of Ralph Nader and Green Party on trade (M) Repeatedly brushing aside amendments from its embattled liberal wing, the Democratic Party's platform committee today adopted a party blueprint that hews closely to Vice President Al Gore's centrist views on trade, fiscal policy, national defense, crime and welfare. The 48-page document approved today was a fitting successor to the platform created for Bill Clinton's first presidential campaign in 1992, which broke sharply from the party's liberal roots. Today, the 186-member committee, dominated by Gore supporters, again and again knocked down efforts to tug the party back toward the left. Repeatedly brushing aside amendments from its embattled liberal wing, the Democratic Party's platform committee today adopted a party blueprint that hews closely to Vice President Al Gore's centrist views on trade, fiscal policy, national defense, crime and welfare. The 48-page document approved today was a fitting successor to the platform created for Bill Clinton's first presidential campaign in 1992, which broke sharply from the party's liberal roots. Today, the 186-member committee, dominated by Gore supporters, again and again knocked down efforts to tug the party back toward the left. The liberals did not go down quietly. Talking to reporters outside the committee room, members of a group calling itself the Progressive Caucus to the Democratic National Convention complained that their views had been ignored and that the Gore campaign had pressured committee members to vote against their planks. Tom Hayden, a state senator from Los Angeles who is also a Gore delegate, said the platform had failed to address the challenge of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate who strongly opposes the World Trade Organization and who, polls show, has been drawing voters away from Mr. Gore in California. Mr. Hayden said the center-straddling platform would turn off the party's liberal base, making it more difficult to find committed campaign foot-soldiers. As a result, he warned, Mr. Gore would have to rely on negative attacks against the Republican ticket of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Dick Cheney. An observer for the United Auto Workers, which objects to Mr. Gore's trade policies and has not endorsed him, said the platform committee had addressed the union's concerns in private negotiations. And an official with the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has endorsed Mr. Gore, said that despite its flaws, the platform was generally acceptable to organized labor, the single most important constituency in the Democratic coalition. Liberals contended that the idea was unproven, costly and likely to ignite a new arms race. But Mr. Gore's supporters argued that remaining silent on missile defense would give the Republicans ammunition to attack Democrats as soft on defense. Mr. Bush supports a global missile defense system. The progressives' amendment was tabled. The platform adopts debt reduction -- President Clinton's guiding economic principle -- as the heart of Mr. Gore's economic policies. And it calls for using the federal surplus to strengthen Medicare and Social Security. The platform, like Mr. Gore's campaign agenda, firmly endorses a woman's right to an abortion, strong gun regulations, a hate crimes law, sweeping campaign finance reform and an end to racial profiling. On the environment, supporters of Mr. Gore proposed an amendment endorsing several of the vice president's campaign pledges: to restore the Everglades, restrict oil and gas drilling off the coasts of California and Florida and prohibit drilling or logging in the wildest areas of the national forests.
 ''We all wish this didn't happen,'' Mr. Lesniak said, ''but we also wish that if there was going to be a fight, it would wait until after November, and after we've elected Al Gore and Jon Corzine.''
