 In the days before George W. Bush announced his selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate, Vice President Al Gore and his advisers sensed an unexpected opportunity. Aboard Air Force II and in Mr. Gore's campaign headquarters here, there was a consensus that Mr. Bush and his aides had bungled their selection process, that the Republicans had come across as leak-prone, rushed and uncharacteristically amateurish. The Gore campaign swiftly set out to exploit this perceived weakness by trying to turn the running mate selection process itself into a political weapon. With lock-step discipline, Mr. Gore's spokesmen derided Mr. Bush for conducting his search ''like a fraternity rush.'' They presented Mr. Gore's method as dignified, orderly, pander-free and, above all else, private. In the days before George W. Bush announced his selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate, Vice President Al Gore and his advisers sensed an unexpected opportunity. Aboard Air Force II and in Mr. Gore's campaign headquarters here, there was a consensus that Mr. Bush and his aides had bungled their selection process, that the Republicans had come across as leak-prone, rushed and uncharacteristically amateurish. The Gore campaign swiftly set out to exploit this perceived weakness by trying to turn the running mate selection process itself into a political weapon. With lock-step discipline, Mr. Gore's spokesmen derided Mr. Bush for conducting his search ''like a fraternity rush.'' They presented Mr. Gore's method as dignified, orderly, pander-free and, above all else, private. But the strict secrecy imposed by the Gore campaign shielded from public view an intensely political, highly competitive and sometimes frenetic selection process. Again and again, Mr. Gore's search was shaped by gritty political concerns that had little bearing on what he had repeatedly described as his single most important criterion for a running mate: someone possessed of the experience and ability to assume the presidency if necessary. George J. Mitchell, the former Senate majority leader, for example, never made it to the short list, at least in part because of his work as a lobbyist for the tobacco industry, people involved in the search said. Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana faced opposition from pro-choice groups and gave his assent to a campaign aimed at countering criticism over his voting record on abortion, but faded nonetheless. Senator Bob Graham of Florida was hurt by his habit of filling diaries with mundane aspects of his day, a practice some in the Gore campaign worried would be viewed as eccentric. On the other hand, Democratic officials said, Mr. Bush's repeated efforts to tarnish Mr. Gore with resurrected memories of President Clinton's affair with a White House intern elevated the standing of Mr. Gore's eventual choice, Joseph I. Lieberman, the first Democrat to condemn Mr. Clinton's affair from the Senate floor. The enforced secrecy -- potential running mates were warned not to divulge details about their contacts with the Gore vetting teams -- also served to obscure lobbying efforts by a select group of well-connected political professionals. Several of Mr. Gore's campaign consultants had also worked for those on his list of potential vice presidents, and these men and women fought hard for their favored picks. One adviser, Bob Shrum, has worked with several of the potential candidates but argued for one of them, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina. Another adviser, Michael Whouley, argued for his former boss, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts. Only last week, Al From, president of the Democratic Leadership Council and an influential voice among moderate Democrats, lobbied both Mr. Gore and his campaign chairman, William M. Daley, on behalf of Mr. Lieberman, who is the chairman of the council. As with any presidential candidate, the choice of running mate is an important and telling decision. Mr. Gore's aides argued that the way he went about picking Mr. Lieberman illustrated several of his strengths, notably his meticulous preparation before arriving at major decisions. Mr. Gore, they said, has raised vetting to new levels of thoroughness and inclusiveness. Although Mr. Gore announced in April that former Secretary of State Warren Christopher would lead his selection team, Mr. Gore began to organize his process months before. His vetting teams were led by such veteran lawyers as Charles F. C. Ruff, the former White House counsel who defended Mr. Clinton during his impeachment trial. The team that vetted Mr. Lieberman, led by Jamie S. Gorelick, a former deputy attorney general, went so far as to review the more than 800 legal opinions that Mr. Lieberman rendered when he was attorney general of Connecticut from 1983 to 1989. Sheldon Cohen, a former commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, was drafted to review tax returns. Mr. Gore also instructed Mr. Christopher to consult freely and frequently with an informal group that consisted of Labor Secretary Alexis M. Herman and former Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros, both of whom have faced ethics inquiries, and Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia and Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. ''I gained added respect for his values and judgment,'' Mr. Christopher said when asked in an interview what he had learned about Mr. Gore during the search process. ''I found he went about the process seriously and conscientiously.'' Republicans drew different lessons from Mr. Gore's method of picking a running mate. While praising Mr. Lieberman as a man of integrity, they said Mr. Gore's selection process underscored what they described as his penchant for tactical ruthlessness and a tendency to shade the truth for political gain. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, dismissed the notion that the Gore decision-making process was more orderly and dignified than Mr. Bush's process. He said much of what Mr. Gore did, including his mention that besides the six finalists there was a ''wild card'' candidate, was theater designed for public consumption. He said the important difference was that the Bush campaign had greeted the choice of Mr. Lieberman graciously, while the Gore campaign had attacked Mr. Cheney. One Democratic lawyer who has guided potential running mates through both Mr. Gore's vetting routine and Mr. Clinton's 1992 vetting complained that this year's process was at times ''delayed and disorganized.'' Indeed, just five days before his self-imposed deadline, Mr. Gore said he had narrowed his list to six. Yet one finalist, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the minority leader, had not been vetted -- a task that had taken lawyers weeks of painstaking work for other finalists. Such was the sophistication of Mr. Gore's selection stagecraft that even leaks were orchestrated for maximum effect. Eager to win over women, Mr. Gore has emphasized that several women were under strong consideration. Last week, as interest was peaking over Mr. Gore's progress, his campaign let it be known that one of his finalists was a woman, Gov. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, even though she had already said she would turn down the job and even though one person involved in Mr. Gore's screening process said she had not been under serious consideration for some time. Last fall, before a single primary or caucus had been contested, Mr. Gore was already thinking about running mates. By October his campaign chairman at the time, Tony Coelho, had contacted Mr. Christopher and asked him to start thinking about how to organize a search. Mr. Christopher, 74, was a logical choice. A man who exudes tact and discretion, Mr. Christopher had led Mr. Clinton's search in 1992, and the subsequent selection of Al Gore was widely regarded as a turning point in Mr. Clinton's campaign. But Mr. Christopher was well aware of the perils of the selection process. A hasty vetting job in 1984 left Walter F. Mondale's campaign bogged down in weeks of questions about the finances of his running mate, Geraldine A. Ferraro. ''Anybody who tries to do this has to read the history and see the mistakes that were made and try to avoid them,'' Mr. Christopher said. Those lessons, aides said, were central to one of Mr. Gore's primary search objectives: finding a running mate who could get off to a fast, clean start, unlike Mr. Cheney, for example, who spent his first week defending his votes in Congress. Starting in February, Mr. Christopher and Mr. Gore began to construct what Mr. Christopher came to call his People to Consult List, a roster of senior Democrats that would grow to 70 names. The list included nearly a dozen women, 18 members of minority groups and representatives of several special interest groups. Most were on the list simply because Mr. Gore wanted their advice. But 25, including Mr. Lieberman, were considered potential running mates. Mr. Coelho said the Gore campaign had made an overture to Colin L. Powell, just as the Clinton campaign had done in 1992. ''He was indirectly approached to see if he would ever consider a vice-presidential spot on any ticket,'' he said. But General Powell rebuffed the overture, and the matter was dropped. Even as Mr. Gore's spokesmen insisted that there was no long list, no short list, no list at all, Mr. Christopher began interviews to help Mr. Gore pare the list. As a first step, a team of young Washington lawyers prepared memorandums on the public careers of the 25 possible candidates. But by that point, Mr. Gore had already settled on about a half-dozen names. He told Mr. Christopher to go ahead with full vetting on this group, which included Senator Lieberman, Governor Shaheen, Senator Edwards, Representative Gephardt, Senator Bayh and Senator Kerry, Democratic officials said. But even before the vetting was in full swing, there were indications that Mr. Lieberman was the front-runner. On June 15, the day Mr. Daley replaced Mr. Coelho as campaign chairman, his first substantial conversation with Mr. Gore quickly turned to the question of running mates. ''He said, 'Joe is really close, he's really great, what do you think?' '' Mr. Daley recalled. ''Then he went into the other candidates, but he was the first one he named.'' The Gore campaign set about assembling five to seven vetting teams, all reporting to James Hamilton, a lawyer with long experience examining the lives of troubled Washington figures. Mr. Hamilton has represented Vince W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who later committed suicide; Dennis DeConcini, the former senator from Arizona implicated in the Keating Five scandal; and David Durenberger, the former Minnesota senator who also faced an ethics inquiry. In Mr. Gore's search, Mr. Graham did not make it to the vetting round, but none of the five who did were eliminated on the basis of some shocking revelation contained in their records. ''The vetting process produces pluses and minuses, but there was no show stopper,'' Mr. Christopher said. One such instance came in recent weeks. Mr. Kerry, a popular and seasoned politician, was attractive to Mr. Gore for many reasons, not the least of which was that he is a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War. On Monday Mr. Kerry told The Boston Globe about talking with Mr. Gore's vetters. ''They asked a couple of questions from the period when I was single, and I gave them an explanation,'' he said. ''Three-quarters of the stories that were written when I was single were not accurate.'' Meanwhile, Mr. Edwards's background as a trial lawyer who had won millions for consumers injured by corporate negligence made him an easy fit for Mr. Gore's populist message about taking on major oil and drug companies. And every time Mr. Gore and his spokesmen described Mr. Cheney as part of the Republican ''old guard,'' Mr. Edwards's stock appeared, at least in the eyes of the senator's supporters, to inch higher. But again, Mr. Gore's screening machinery turned up a steady drumbeat of concern about his relative lack of political experience as a first-term senator. On Air Force II on July 24, the day before Mr. Bush announced his selection of Mr. Cheney, Mr. Gore told reporters that Mr. Bush's pick probably would not have an effect on his selection. But behind the scenes, advisers believed that Mr. Cheney's experience had to be accounted for, and that dynamic favored Mr. Lieberman, 58. But for all the thoroughness of the Gore screening process, his vetters never fully explored the possible effect of the largest question mark over Mr. Lieberman: how voters would react to an Orthodox Jew on a national ticket. A number of people on Mr. Christopher's consultation list had repeatedly raised Mr. Lieberman's religion as a possible problem. But Mr. Gore, who has been criticized by Republicans for being excessively guided by polling data, issued orders that no steps were to be taken to gauge public reaction to Mr. Lieberman's religion. ''Gore said: 'That's not part of me. That's not part of my thinking. I exclude that,' '' Mr. Christopher recalled. What the vetters did do, though, was explore dozens of hypothetical situations to test how he would respond to potential conflicts between his observance of the Sabbath and the duties of a vice president, Ms. Gorelick said in an interview today. By late July, Mr. Gore had conducted one-on-one interviews with all of his finalists except Mr. Gephardt. There were no moments akin to 1992, when Mr. Clinton interviewed Mr. Gore well into the early morning. Mr. Lieberman's interview, conducted at Mr. Gore's residence at the Naval Observatory, lasted about an hour, the same amount of time Mr. Gore spent with the others. Ms. Herman, the labor secretary, spoke with Mr. Gore after the interview with Mr. Lieberman. She described Mr. Gore's response to the interview more as one of affirmation than revelation. ''You had this sense of, 'Boy, was I right about this guy,' '' she said. Going into Sunday's decisive meetings in the vice president's 10th floor suite at the Loews Vanderbilt Plaza Hotel here, aides got a definite sense that Mr. Gore had just about settled on Mr. Lieberman but wanted one more ''gut check'' before making the final decision. Not long before Mr. Gore told aides of his decision, he called his oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, who was in her apartment in New York.
 Connecticut Democratic Party officials say they expect Joseph I Lieberman to continue to run for re-election to Senate, race he is overwhelming favorite to win, while running in tougher race for vice president; Republicans hold move shows he lacks full confidence Vice Pres Al Gore will win in Nov; Lieberman's inauguration as vice president would enable Gov John G Rowland, Republican, to pick someone to serve in Senate until Nov 2002 election; Lieberman has until Oct 27 to quit race and be replaced by Democratic nominee (M) Joseph I. Lieberman's life will never be quite the same now that Al Gore has tapped him to be his running mate, but one thing seems likely to remain unchanged: Mr. Lieberman can continue to run for re-election to the Senate, a race he is an overwhelming favorite to win, while also running in the tougher race for vice president. Nothing in Connecticut law prevents Mr. Lieberman from running for both offices simultaneously.  And, as news of his selection by Mr. Gore swept across the country today, state Democratic Party officials said that they expected Mr. Lieberman to be on the ballot for both offices this November. Joseph I. Lieberman's life will never be quite the same now that Al Gore has tapped him to be his running mate, but one thing seems likely to remain unchanged: Mr. Lieberman can continue to run for re-election to the Senate, a race he is an overwhelming favorite to win, while also running in the tougher race for vice president. Nothing in Connecticut law prevents Mr. Lieberman from running for both offices simultaneously.  And, as news of his selection by Mr. Gore swept across the country today, state Democratic Party officials said that they expected Mr. Lieberman to be on the ballot for both offices this November. The obvious benefit to Mr. Lieberman is that he can hedge his bet. Should the Democrats fail to defeat George W. Bush, he could keep his job in the Capitol. Predictably, Republicans in Connecticut and elsewhere pounced quickly today, calling this evidence that Mr. Lieberman lacks full confidence that the Democratic ticket will prevail in November. It was unclear tonight whether Mr. Gore or Democratic leaders in Washington would pressure Mr. Lieberman to give up his Senate re-election campaign. Under state election rules, Mr. Lieberman has until Oct. 27 to quit the race and be replaced by a Democratic nominee. But state party leaders said it was already too late to hold a primary, and that if Mr. Lieberman dropped out, a replacement would have to be chosen at a special convention. Mr. Rowland, during a news conference this afternoon at the State Capitol, said that he had not yet considered whom he would appoint. And although he praised Mr. Lieberman, he described the prospect of appointing someone as far-fetched because he said he expected Mr. Bush to win the White House. Bob Ward, a Republican state representative, said he believed Mr. Gore was trying to distance himself from President Clinton, to no avail. ''There is no question that Joe Lieberman is an honorable and trustworthy individual,'' he said. ''I think Joe Lieberman's problem is that his running mate is Al Gore.''
 Democratic officials say announcement of Vice Pres Al Gore's selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as vice presidential runing mate was timed to quash postconvention Republican thunder with pre-emptory saturation of news media, as well as to make big splash before upcoming Democratic National Convention and to draw contrasts between ways in which Gore and Republican rival Gov George W Bush picked running mates (M) Like a select number of other journalists covering the Gore campaign, Claire Shipman of NBC News received the official word yesterday about Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's selection as Vice President Al Gore's running mate before even Mr. Lieberman did. Like a select number of other journalists covering the Gore campaign, Claire Shipman of NBC News received the official word yesterday about Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's selection as Vice President Al Gore's running mate before even Mr. Lieberman did. At a few minutes to 7, Katie Couric, the co-host of ''Today,'' offered a tease about the news that would be elucidated at the top of the hour. The Associated Press put out an urgent bulletin, and the Gore campaign was off on a fast break with its hottest news day in months. By 7:01 or thereabouts, every major network and a variety of news-oriented Web sites were buzzing over Mr. Gore's choice of Mr. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat, as his running mate. It was all intended to make a big splash before the Democratic convention next week, and to draw vivid contrasts between the ways in which Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush picked their running mates -- as if to put forth the selection process as a metaphor for the kinds of administrations they would preside over. Mr. Gore's aides said that Mr. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney leaked out so haphazardly that the Bush campaign was made to look indecisive. ''We were able to throw out information in a very controlled, businesslike fashion,'' said an official in the Gore campaign, ''while they lost control of the process very early on.'' ''A big part of Gore's message is that he is experienced and intelligent,'' Mr. Begala added. ''Nothing could prove it better than the way he handled this. He kept his own counsel, then he made his choice.'' It was no accident, either, that the news was spread by the campaign 32 hours before the announcement by Mr. Gore at a rally today in Nashville that is to include a performance by the singer Jewel. The idea was to turn the news conference into something like political infotainment. ''You're getting coverage all day today, all day tomorrow and getting a lot of coverage probably on Wednesday and Thursday,'' the Gore campaign official said. ''The pick is a historic pick, and you want to leverage something like this as much as you can.'' Mr. Cheney, having served as defense secretary during the Persian Gulf war, has a higher public profile than Mr. Lieberman, whom the Democrats essentially will have to introduce to a large percentage of American voters. Gore campaign aides said they needed to make sure that they got the first shot at ''defining'' Mr. Lieberman for the public. To that end, close advisers to Mr. Gore spent the wee hours yesterday lining up prominent Democrats to speak for Mr. Lieberman on morning and daytime news programs. ''Basically, it's a situation where once the decision is made by the vice president, you have to be very aggressive to control the news,'' said another Gore aide.
 American Jews express great pride in Vice Pres Al Gore's selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as vice presidential running mate; photo (M) Regardless of political leanings or depth of spirituality, American Jews expressed great pride yesterday that one of their own, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, had been picked by Vice President Al Gore to be his running mate. Regardless of political leanings or depth of spirituality, American Jews expressed great pride yesterday that one of their own, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, had been picked by Vice President Al Gore to be his running mate. By 6 p.m., an America Online message board set up to discuss Mr. Lieberman had more than 14,000 postings, compared with 2,000 messages on a similar board created after Gov. George W. Bush named Dick Cheney his running mate. At times yesterday, anti-Semitic slurs and other offensive language made up half the conversations. Rabbi Ismar Schorsch, chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary in Manhattan, called Mr. Gore's selection of Mr. Lieberman ''a historic step forward in the complete integration of Jews in American society.'' But Rabbi Schorsch added that it was perhaps an inevitable step, given the fact that Jews were already highly visible in the upper reaches of American life, from corporate boardrooms to the United States Senate and even the president's Cabinet.
 Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen Joseph I Lieberman, in his two terms in Senate, has often taken positions at odds with Vice Pres Al Gore and important constituencies of Democratic Party on major issues; his major legislative disagreements with Gore and Clinton administration discussed (M) In his two terms in the Senate, Joseph I. Lieberman has often taken positions at odds with Vice President Al Gore and important constituencies of the Democratic Party on school vouchers, affirmative action, regulation of managed care, capital gains taxes and product liability. In his two terms in the Senate, Joseph I. Lieberman has often taken positions at odds with Vice President Al Gore and important constituencies of the Democratic Party on school vouchers, affirmative action, regulation of managed care, capital gains taxes and product liability. On Social Security, a central point of conflict between Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Lieberman has suggested that he could support allowing workers to invest a portion of their payroll taxes in the private markets. That is Mr. Bush's position. But Mr. Lieberman has never been faced with a vote on the matter and never made explicit what kind of investments he would allow and in what circumstances. He has usually supported the Clinton administration on foreign policy issues, and in 1991, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Gore, who was then a senator, were among only 10 Democratic senators who voted to give President George Bush the authority to use military force in the Persian Gulf. Mr. Gore has argued that such programs could undermine public schools. Teachers' unions, which are important supporters of Democratic causes and contributors to Democratic candidates, strenuously oppose vouchers. And many Democrats believe that vouchers violate the doctrine of separation of church and state. Similarly, Mr. Lieberman has been critical of programs that give special breaks to blacks and other groups to make up for past discrimination. Mr. Gore has been a strong supporter of affirmative action. In the early 1990's, when Democratic senators used a filibuster to block the Bush administration's proposal for a cut in the capital gains tax, Senator Lieberman opposed his party's leaders and voted with Republicans against the filibuster and in favor of the tax cut. Throughout his career in Congress, Mr. Lieberman has voted for proposals to overhaul the campaign finance system. Most recently, he supported legislation that would ban unregulated gifts to political parties, known as soft money, a position also backed by Vice President Gore.
 Determined to transform a potential liability into a defining asset, Vice President Al Gore today formally introduced Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his Democratic running mate and portrayed his selection of Mr. Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, as a measure of his devotion to tolerance and his willingness to break barriers. In his remarks to thousands of supporters at War Memorial Plaza here, Mr. Gore compared his selection of Mr. Lieberman to his party's choice of John F. Kennedy as the first Roman Catholic presidential nominee 40 years ago. Determined to transform a potential liability into a defining asset, Vice President Al Gore today formally introduced Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his Democratic running mate and portrayed his selection of Mr. Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, as a measure of his devotion to tolerance and his willingness to break barriers. In his remarks to thousands of supporters at War Memorial Plaza here, Mr. Gore compared his selection of Mr. Lieberman to his party's choice of John F. Kennedy as the first Roman Catholic presidential nominee 40 years ago. ''When we nominate Joe Lieberman for vice president, we will make history again,'' Mr. Gore said. After word of Mr. Lieberman's selection leaked out on Monday, campaign aides and Democratic leaders made it clear that Mr. Gore had selected him despite his religion and any possible anti-Semitic backlash. Today's event was remarkable for the forthrightness with which Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman and their wives addressed Mr. Lieberman's Jewishness as a topic not to avoid, but to celebrate. Campaign aides even volunteered that the Gores and Liebermans shared a meal on Monday night that had been prepared by a kosher caterer. The intended message was that Mr. Gore, who has been characterized as an exceedingly tentative politician, had acted boldly in making the most important decision of his candidacy. ''Let's be very clear about this,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''It isn't me, Joe Lieberman, who deserves credit and the congratulations for taking a bold step. It is Al Gore who broke this barrier in American history. And you know what it shows? It shows Al's faith in the tolerance of this diverse nation in the basic fairness of the American people.'' Despite sweltering 97-degree heat that left Mr. Gore's drenched shirt stuck to his back (Mr. Lieberman wore an undershirt), the Democratic team got exactly the images of family and rectitude that it wanted out of today's event. Mr. Lieberman, who Democrats hope will help separate Mr. Gore from President Clinton's moral lapses, attested to Mr. Gore's devotion to his wife and children. Tipper Gore spoke warmly of Mr. Lieberman's wife, Hadassah, and the two candidates, having removed their jackets, exchanged a mighty hug after Mr. Gore introduced his running mate. Mr. Lieberman, clearly having the time of his life, smiled giddily and pumped his fists as the crowd chanted, ''Joe, Joe, Joe.'' Mr. Lieberman, who spoke for 20 minutes, described the last 24 hours as ''a magical mystery tour.'' In his prayer, he thanked God for ''bringing me to this extraordinary moment in my life'' and thanked Mr. Gore ''for making this miracle possible for me and breaking this barrier for the rest of America forever.'' Before and after today's event, Mr. Lieberman, 58, spent time meeting campaign aides, receiving briefings on Mr. Gore's positions, working on the speech that he will deliver next week at the Democratic convention in Los Angeles and preparing for a multistate campaign swing that begins on Wednesday with a visit to Mr. Gore's hometown, Carthage, Tenn., and then to Stamford, Conn. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, said in a statement today that he respected Mr. Lieberman ''for his convictions, his strong faith and his record on Social Security, missile defense and reforming our public schools.'' Those were pointed references to positions taken by Mr. Lieberman -- expressing interest in allowing workers to invest part of their payroll taxes in the markets, backing a missile defense system and supporting pilot programs allowing parents to use federal vouchers to pay private school tuition -- that are opposed by Mr. Gore. ''This selection,'' Mr. Bush said, ''now presents the vice president with an interesting test of whether he will continue attacking positions his running mate shares.'' Gore officials today distributed quotations and writings by Mr. Lieberman, including an unpublished article written in June, suggesting that he had moved away from his support for the partial privatization of Social Security because it posed unacceptable risks for retirees. Mr. Lieberman used his speech today to shoot down the Bush campaign's suggestion that he had more in common with Mr. Bush than with Mr. Gore. ''With all due respect,'' he said, ''I think that's like saying that the veterinarian and the taxidermist are in the same business because either way you get your dog back.'' In the interview on CNN, Mr. Lieberman said that there were issues where he did not fully agree with Mr. Gore and that he would feel obligated to discuss those differences privately. But he said, ''when President Gore decides, Vice President Lieberman is with him 100 percent.'' For his part, Mr. Gore, 52, took pains to emphasize the positions on which he and Mr. Lieberman agreed. ''He believes, as I do,'' Mr. Gore said, ''that every family has a right to clean air and clean water. He believes, as I do, in that the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof.'' Neither Mr. Gore nor Mr. Lieberman mentioned President Clinton, though Mr. Lieberman said the Democratic ticket would ''help renew the moral center of this nation.'' In an interview with Mr. Gore on Monday, parts of which were broadcast today, the NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw read portions of a speech in September 1998 in which Mr. Lieberman labeled Mr. Clinton's behavior inappropriate, immoral and harmful. Mr. Brokaw then asked Mr. Gore whether he agreed with Mr. Lieberman ''when he said that.'' ''I did,'' Mr. Gore responded, ''and said so at the time, and I think most Americans agreed with that. I think that most Americans want to talk about the future of our country and want to focus on the choices that we have to make in this election and I think honestly, Tom, that most people are ready to move on.''
 Samuel G Freedman Op-Ed article says Vice Pres Al Gore has shattered the enduring concept of American Jewish insecurity about courting anti-Semitism by naming as his running mate Sen Joseph Lieberman, first Jew ever on a major party's presidential ticket; notes Lieberman's adherence to Modern Orthodoxy, movement that believes in engaging with the larger society while remaining strictly observant; says Lieberman offers proof that a Jew in modern America need not diminish his faith as price of worldly achievement or consider such faith alone a replacement for the crucible of public life (M) More than a half-century later, Al Gore has shattered the enduring concept of American Jewish insecurity by naming as his running mate Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut, the first Jew ever on a major party's presidential ticket. And in ways he himself may not even understand, Mr. Gore has sent a powerful message by choosing a Jew who is Orthodox, and, more specifically, Modern Orthodox. It could be that Joseph Lieberman earned his place on Al Gore's ticket during the Monica Lewinsky scandal, when he rose in the Senate to despair over a president's conduct. From a purely pragmatic standpoint, that speech may help Mr. Gore distance himself from Mr. Clinton's personal behavior. Far more important, though, Mr. Lieberman's oration, suffused as it was with a religious man's sense of propriety, offered proof that a Jew in modern America need not diminish his faith as the price of worldly achievement or consider such faith alone a replacement for the crucible of public life.
 It was apparently with those traits of pragmatic independence and personal integrity in mind that Al Gore yesterday tapped the 58-year-old Mr. Lieberman as his running mate, a choice widely seen as Mr. Gore's boldest stroke yet to distance himself from President Clinton and the scandal-tainted Clinton administration, and one to spark his campaign before the start of the Democratic convention in Los Angeles next week. While Mr. Lieberman is expected to help Mr. Gore rid himself of Mr. Clinton's baggage, his selection also carries a risk, for he would be the first Jew named to a major national ticket. The weeks to come may show whether Mr. Lieberman's faith will raise questions in the same way that John F. Kennedy's Catholicism became a focus in the 1960 presidential election: whether religion might affect his performance as vice president, for example, or the policies of a Gore -- or Lieberman -- administration toward the Middle East. Presumably he would not refuse to attend his own inauguration should a Gore-Lieberman ticket win. Jan. 20, 2001 is a Saturday. Not one to toe a party line, Senator Lieberman broke ranks with Democrats in 1997 during the Senate hearings on campaign finance, which investigated fund-raising abuses by the Clinton-Gore campaign in 1996. Other Democrats lobbed softball questions at administration witnesses, but Mr. Lieberman asked tough questions and tried to position himself as objective and above the fray.
 News analysis of Vice Pres Al Gore selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as vice presidential runnning mate; Gore has made boldest bid yet for autonomy after striving for more than year to outrun Pres Clinton's restless shadow; his objective in picking one of earliest Democrats to rebuke Clinton in Monica Lewinsky affair is to replace political partner of eight years with fresh and untainted candidate who is widely regarded as one of most upstanding elected officials in nation; photo (M) After striving for more than a year to outrun President Clinton's restless shadow, Vice President Al Gore today made his boldest bid yet for autonomy. By picking Joseph I. Lieberman, one of the earliest Democrats to rebuke Mr. Clinton in the Monica Lewinsky affair, Mr. Gore's objective, his advisers and other Democrats say, is to replace his political partner of eight years with a fresh -- and untainted -- candidate who is widely regarded as one of the most upstanding elected officials in the nation. After striving for more than a year to outrun President Clinton's restless shadow, Vice President Al Gore today made his boldest bid yet for autonomy. By picking Joseph I. Lieberman, one of the earliest Democrats to rebuke Mr. Clinton in the Monica Lewinsky affair, Mr. Gore's objective, his advisers and other Democrats say, is to replace his political partner of eight years with a fresh -- and untainted -- candidate who is widely regarded as one of the most upstanding elected officials in the nation. Democrats close to Mr. Gore also said he was seeking a No. 2 who could inject a note of vitality into the race and illuminate the Democratic ticket, as polls show that Gov. George W. Bush is on the ascendancy after his triumphant convention in Philadelphia last week. At that convention, the Bush campaign left no doubt that it would make the moral lapses of Mr. Clinton a basic subtext of its strategy, emphasizing the need to restore dignity and honor to the White House. ''It was very clear after Philadelphia that these guys are going to run a campaign of innuendo and guilt by association,'' said Al From, president of the Democratic Leadership Council, a moderate group of which Mr. Lieberman is chairman. ''It's going to be harder for Republicans to sustain that campaign. A Gore-Lieberman ticket is not going to be associated with bad behavior.'' In picking the first Jewish running mate -- and one who is Orthodox at that -- Mr. Gore hopes to underscore his willingness to break the political rules and display a dash of daring that has largely been absent from his campaign. But while the choice could energize Jewish voters (though they are overwhelmingly Democratic anyway) it could alienate others who might not be comfortable with a Jew in the White House. Mr. Gore hopes to protect himself from scandals of Mr. Clinton by tethering himself to a politician who is above reproach, and who has spoken out not only against the president but for campaign finance reform. The downside is that Mr. Lieberman's public denunciations of Mr. Clinton in 1998 could give the Republicans cover to even more forcefully raise questions about the Clinton administration's conduct. In turning to a politician with a decidedly moderate voting record who prides himself on not being particularly partisan, Mr. Gore also may have an easier time challenging Mr. Bush for the loyalties of the independent voters he desperately needs to win. But that could also unsettle some faithful Democrats who cringe at Mr. Lieberman's breaks with the Democratic Party -- and Mr. Gore -- on issues including school vouchers and capital gains taxes. Some of these voters could even end up defecting to Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee, Democratic strategists fear. Just as the Gore campaign had tried to tar Mr. Bush by invoking Dick Cheney's conservative voting record, the Bush campaign today sought to use Mr. Lieberman to undermine Mr. Gore's positions. The campaign said Mr. Gore picked a running mate whose ideology is closer to Mr. Bush's than the vice president's. ''I've been trying to figure out what the Gore people were thinking,'' said Michael Nelson, a political scientist and authority on the vice presidency at Rhodes College in Memphis. ''He's Jewish, but it's not as if the Democrats don't already have them energized. The only thing it brings is criticism of the president -- and I don't see that as an advantage.'' Republicans acknowledged it was difficult to directly condemn Mr. Lieberman because of his reputation for moral rectitude. William J. Bennett, the conservative morals maven who is close to Mr. Lieberman, said, ''He's arguably the best Democrat in the Senate.'' But asked whether Mr. Lieberman's ramrod reputation would keep Mr. Gore from being linked with Mr. Clinton, he made a point echoed by some Democrats, ''I don't know that Gore becomes a saint because of Lieberman's virtues.'' Ed Gillespie, an adviser to the Bush campaign, practically validated Mr. Gore's choice by calling Mr. Lieberman ''a decent man and an honorable person.'' But, he added, ''There are just a number of significant issues that Gore has just bitterly attacked Governor Bush on and now he turns around and picks a running mate who agrees with Bush on those issues.'' Perhaps an even bigger danger for Mr. Gore is that several political consultants said they did not have to think hard to come up with an attack commercial for the Republicans. It would open with a clip of Mr. Lieberman shaking his finger like an Old Testament prophet, excoriating Mr. Clinton for ''disgraceful'' and ''immoral'' behavior. The next frame would be a clip of Mr. Gore, celebrating Mr. Clinton as ''one of our greatest presidents.'' The commercial could end with side-by-side photographs of a scowling Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore and the tag line, ''Even his running mate disagrees with Al Gore over what is appropriate conduct for a president of the United States.'' However Lieberman is received, this much is clear: it was not a play-it-safe choice, as was Mr. Bush's picking Mr. Cheney. That reflects the political reality that as the convention approaches next week in Los Angeles, Gore advisers said they felt that they had to do something daring -- yet not foolhardy -- to gain ground. In choosing Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Gore also showed he was comfortable with a No. 2 who is not known as an especially scintillating speaker on the campaign trail. (It could be, of course, that after being Mr. Clinton's understudy, Mr. Gore did not want someone who would outshine him.) And the vice president's choice seemed to reflect his genuine concern about having a No. 2 with the experience and temperament to help him govern. In addition, many people close to Gore have long said that if personal chemistry were the more compelling factor, Mr. Lieberman would shoot to the top of the list. In this case, the choice may tell the public something more not just about Mr. Gore, but about his relationship with his political partner for the past eight years.
 Nora A Bailey letter disputes Frank Rich's August 5 Op-Ed column on Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush's leadership skills (S) Surely, Mr. Rich jests when he suggests that George W. Bush's leadership skills are evident in his ''taming'' of the far right during the Republican National Convention, something his father and Senator Bob Dole could not do. The reason is obvious: the far right never trusted the credentials of the two predecessors, whereas they have no doubt that George W. Bush is a true believer and will advance their policies once he is elected.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on Sen Joseph Lieberman says he is perfect match as running mate for Vice Pres Al Gore; notes Lieberman's low key style and ability to rise above party politics; recalls his years in Connecticut legislature (M) I have here a list of the best and worst members of the Connecticut state legislature circa 1978. Mr. Lieberman was sixth-best. Most of the people who came in ahead of him are either dead or lobbyists, so when it came to potential running mates from the Nutmeg State, Al Gore pretty much got the pick of the litter. I have here a list of the best and worst members of the Connecticut state legislature circa 1978. Mr. Lieberman was sixth-best. Most of the people who came in ahead of him are either dead or lobbyists, so when it came to potential running mates from the Nutmeg State, Al Gore pretty much got the pick of the litter. This is one laid-back Democrat, a subtle mix of interesting and boring that solves almost all the main problems facing Al Gore except how to get anybody to listen to the convention speeches. It's a perfect match. Mr. Gore can be stiff but not pompous. Mr. Lieberman can be pompous but not stiff. And who else would qualify as a compelling, thinking-outside-the-box choice without looking more exciting than the top of the ticket? This is an excellent potential bonding tool for the campaign, in which Al Gore is known to do stomach crunches during long flights. Perhaps instead of the traditional post-convention whistle-stop tour, they could travel from one athletic field to another. In your heart, you know they're fit.
 Op-Ed article by law professors Lani Guinier and Gerald Torres says Gov George W Bush is taking credit he does not deserve for remarkably successful '10 percent plan' in Texas, which grants automatic admission to public colleges to all state students graduating in top 10 percent of their high school classes; says plan was adopted following federal appeals court decision outlawing affirmative action at University of Texas, and Bush's sole contribution was that he did not veto plan; says program has spread educational opportunities to poor and minority students, whose college performance has exceeded expectations; suggests that Bush should credit the black and brown leaders who gave him opportunity to crow about plan's success (M) At the Republican Convention last week, Colin Powell boldly challenged his party to be inclusive and follow the leadership of George W. Bush in Texas. As a model of inclusive reform, he touted Texas' 10 percent plan, which grants automatic admission to the flagship public colleges to all state students graduating in the top 10 percent of their high school classes. Governor Bush calls this plan, which has been remarkably successful, an example of his compassionate conservatism. But this claim would be more convincing if his oratory about the program today had been matched by action when it was being debated.  The Texas Legislature adopted it in 1997, after a federal Court of Appeals ruling, the Hopwood decision, had outlawed affirmative action at the University of Texas. Black and Hispanic state legislators conceived and advocated the plan. Governor Bush's contribution? He didn't veto it. At the Republican Convention last week, Colin Powell boldly challenged his party to be inclusive and follow the leadership of George W. Bush in Texas. As a model of inclusive reform, he touted Texas' 10 percent plan, which grants automatic admission to the flagship public colleges to all state students graduating in the top 10 percent of their high school classes. Governor Bush calls this plan, which has been remarkably successful, an example of his compassionate conservatism. But this claim would be more convincing if his oratory about the program today had been matched by action when it was being debated.  The Texas Legislature adopted it in 1997, after a federal Court of Appeals ruling, the Hopwood decision, had outlawed affirmative action at the University of Texas. Black and Hispanic state legislators conceived and advocated the plan. Governor Bush's contribution? He didn't veto it. During the debate over the bill, Mr. Bush ''never publicly supported the idea,'' says Irma Rangel, the Democratic chairwoman of the higher education subcommittee in the Texas House and the plan's sponsor. Despite these successes, and despite the high regard in which Governor Bush professes to hold the plan, there are rumblings among Republicans about trying to change it in the next legislative session. They want to restore a requirement that applicants take the SAT, which rewards those who can afford coaching and test preparation and does not predict the qualities of leadership and achievement that the university values. And Governor Bush is notably quiet about these proposed overhauls. ''Hopwood required forward thinking, and he's been passive,'' Michael Olivas, a professor at the University of Houston who specializes in higher education law, says of Mr. Bush. The 10 percent plan has worked in Texas to spread educational opportunity to those who have had too little of it. It never would have happened without leadership of people of color.  Governor Bush should be bold enough to credit the black and brown leaders who gave him the opportunity to crow about its success today. That would be inclusiveness.
 Prof Roland Delattre letter disputes James Atlas's August 7 Op-Ed article on Vice Pres Al Gore's intellectualism Mr. Atlas finds Al Gore a pedant for citing Reinhold Niebuhr and Descartes. Yet in advising him to state his ideas ''plainly and forcefully,'' he asks why Mr. Gore doesn't ''demonstrate familiarity with deconstruction, with the work of Jacques Derrida.'' Strange advice. There is already a whole industry trying to decipher deconstruction and figure out what Mr. Derrida has written. Mr. Atlas finds Al Gore a pedant for citing Reinhold Niebuhr and Descartes. Yet in advising him to state his ideas ''plainly and forcefully,'' he asks why Mr. Gore doesn't ''demonstrate familiarity with deconstruction, with the work of Jacques Derrida.'' Strange advice. There is already a whole industry trying to decipher deconstruction and figure out what Mr. Derrida has written.
 FRIEDER-Elliot L. Beloved husband of the late Leonie. Loving brother of Jehudith (Rosel) Hermoni, Hannah Lehrman and Sol. Beloved uncle of Lea Pridor, Myriam Beer-Lehrman, Elisheva Goren, Daniel A. Lehrman, Chaim Hermoni and their families. Also survived by the Kranzler family. Services at 12 noon Wednesday, Plaza Memorial Chapel, 91 Street and Amsterdam Avenue. FRIEDER-Elliot L. Beloved husband of the late Leonie. Loving brother of Jehudith (Rosel) Hermoni, Hannah Lehrman and Sol. Beloved uncle of Lea Pridor, Myriam Beer-Lehrman, Elisheva Goren, Daniel A. Lehrman, Chaim Hermoni and their families. Also survived by the Kranzler family. Services at 12 noon Wednesday, Plaza Memorial Chapel, 91 Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore selects Sen Joseph I Lieberman of Connecticut to be running mate, putting Jew on national ticket of major party for first time and choosing first prominent Democrat to chastise Pres Clinton openly for his affair with Monica S Lewinsky; Lieberman was one of five candidates screened by Gore campaign over past two months in selection process headed by former secertary of state Warren Christopher; Gore aides say Lieberman will bring sense of moral rectitude to ticket as well as seriousness of purpose, qualities sought by Gore after selection of Dick Cheney as Republican vice presidential candidate; Christopher says choice of Cheney influenced Gore's decision; comments by Gore aides also suggest desire to move away from scandals of Clinton administration, which provided theme of recent Republican National Convention; Lieberman's vigorous advocacy of campaign-finance reform could greatly benefit Gore, whose aggressive fund-raising in 1996 is expected to be subject of Republican attacks in Fall; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore picked Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to be his running mate today, putting a Jew on a national ticket of a major party for the first time and choosing the first prominent Democrat to chastise President Clinton openly for his affair with Monica S. Lewinsky. Mr. Gore is to announce his decision formally at a rally here at noon on Tuesday. Vice President Al Gore picked Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to be his running mate today, putting a Jew on a national ticket of a major party for the first time and choosing the first prominent Democrat to chastise President Clinton openly for his affair with Monica S. Lewinsky. Mr. Gore is to announce his decision formally at a rally here at noon on Tuesday. Mr. Lieberman was one of five candidates to be vetted by a corps of lawyers over the last two months and emerged as Mr. Gore's choice early this morning, after the vice president huddled for hours with top aides and family members at a hotel suite here. Gore aides said Mr. Lieberman brought a sense of moral rectitude to the ticket as well as a seriousness of purpose, qualities that Mr. Gore was intent on seeking after Gov. George W. Bush, his Republican rival, chose Dick Cheney, the former secretary of defense, as his running mate. Warren Christopher, the former secretary of state, who led Mr. Gore's selection process, said in an interview today that Mr. Bush's choice had influenced Mr. Gore. But the comments of the Gore camp, laced with words like ''integrity'' and ''rectitude,'' also seemed to reflect their desire to use Mr. Lieberman to move their candidate away from the scandals of the Clinton administration, which provided a theme of the recent Republican National Convention. ''If you look at both men, Al Gore and Joe Lieberman, they're both people who throughout their lives made the right choices,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. ''Both led very responsible lives and are people who, when faced with tough choices, have time and time again made the right choice.'' Mr. Lieberman has also been a vigorous advocate of campaign finance reform, and he recently supported legislation that would ban unregulated donations to political parties. His record on the issue could clearly benefit Mr. Gore, whose aggressive fund-raising efforts in 1996 are expected to be the subject of Republican attacks in the fall. But in choosing Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Gore has also picked a running mate whose record on several issues, from school vouchers to capital gains taxes, is more conservative than the vice president's. [Page A19.] Although reporters were informed of Mr. Gore's choice around dawn, Mr. Gore did not formally offer the spot to Mr. Lieberman until shortly before noon, catching him on his cell phone as he drove into his driveway in New Haven after giving a speech to the Connecticut A.F.L.-C.I.O. ''That was the call,'' Mr. Lieberman told reporters waiting at his house. ''It was directly from Al Gore.'' Mr. Gore chose Mr. Lieberman over several other senators, including John Edwards of North Carolina, whose only governmental experience was two years in the Senate, and John Kerry of Massachusetts, whose liberal voting record would surely have become an inviting target for the Republicans. Mr. Lieberman, a 58-year-old Orthodox Jew, is known on the national stage chiefly as the first Democrat to condemn President Clinton in the Lewinsky affair, when he took to the Senate floor and branded Mr. Clinton's behavior ''immoral.'' Mr. Gore, who did not criticize the president throughout the impeachment process, has had a difficult time in his campaign distancing himself from Mr. Clinton's personal behavior, in part because he has also sought to associate himself with the president's positive job performance and the booming economy. The choice of Mr. Lieberman, Gore advisers said, recognizes that the Republicans will try to make the president's character a campaign issue, and they hope the move will  shield Mr. Gore from such attacks. Gore advisers said the decision, and its timing, a week before the opening of the Democratic convention in Los Angeles, also was grounded in Mr. Gore's recognition that he needed to do something to shake up the race. The latest polls show Mr. Gore trailing Mr. Bush by as much as 17 percentage points. The Gore campaign portrayed the selection of Mr. Lieberman as a bold choice because of its historical nature in naming the first Jew to a national ticket, but questions were raised early on and again last night about whether Mr. Lieberman's religion would work against him. At the same time, aides said they believed that the decision would demonstrate something the campaign had been trying to convey for months: that Mr. Gore is a ''principled fighter'' who will stand up for those who have been discriminated against. Mr. Christopher said that the question of Mr. Lieberman's religion had been raised but that Mr. Gore ''shut it down.'' Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster, said Mr. Gore was aiming his selection at independent voters and the 15 percent of the electorate that liked Mr. Clinton professionally but not personally. Mr. Hart also said Mr. Lieberman, with his ''moral absolutism,'' could appeal to supporters of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president. ''Gore is saying, 'I have to find a way of talking to the middle and getting to the middle,' '' he said. The centrist message that Mr. Lieberman sends was an important consideration for Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore began interviewing potential running mates in mid-July and had completed them by July 25. He interviewed Mr. Lieberman in Washington at the vice president's residence, where four of the five candidates were sneaked passed television cameras. He interviewed the fifth candidate in New York. An overriding factor for Mr. Gore was that he pick someone who could become president on a moment's notice. This became more imperative, advisers said, after Mr. Bush picked Mr. Cheney. Although Gore advisers saw immediate weaknesses in Mr. Cheney's voting record, they also saw that Mr. Bush had picked someone whose ability to step into the Oval Office would not be questioned. In an interview today, Mr. Christopher said Mr. Gore had chosen Mr. Lieberman for several reasons. He said he valued his independence. He said the two were personally compatible. And, he said, Mr. Gore regarded Mr. Lieberman as ''a symbol of rectitude.'' ''Gore could visualize his being a very wise counselor in the White House,'' Mr. Christopher said. ''People in the Senate have a very high regard for the values he brings to decisions,'' he said, adding, ''He conveys a very serious purpose.'' The final selection process spanned several hours on Sunday, when Mr. Gore met at his hotel suite here beginning at 3:30 p.m. with top aides and family members. Mr. Gore made his decision after midnight. Some in the room asked him if he wanted to sleep on it. He said no. Mr. Lieberman said he awoke to news reports that he had been chosen. Monica Dixon, a Gore adviser, told Mr. Lieberman's staff that the reports were based on statements by Democratic officials, but Mr. Lehane said she had not told them whether the accounts were true. When the cameras caught up with him midmorning, the senator said he was still awaiting the call. But he was confident enough to be overjoyed, saying, ''Miracles happen.''
 Gore Gridlock In the Hamptons ''Did you have trouble getting here?'' ASHLEY SCHIFF asked. ''I heard they closed the highway.'' And for a moment it seemed as if too many of the traffic headaches in the Hamptons on Saturday had had to do with VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE or his relatives. He was at a fund-raiser in East Hampton, and Ms. Schiff, whose brother is married to Mr. Gore's daughter Karenna, was presiding over a dinner party in Southampton.
 Gore Chooses Lieberman; First Jew on Major Ticket  Vice President Al Gore asked Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to be his running mate, putting a Jewish candidate on a major party's national ticket for the first time and choosing the first prominent Democrat to chastise President Clinton for his affair with Monica Lewinsky. The formal announcement is today. Senator Lieberman has often taken positions at odds with Mr. Gore and important constituencies of the Democratic Party, on school vouchers, affirmative action, managed care, capital gains and product liability. Mr. Lieberman's selection was widely praised, even by Republicans. A spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush called the 58-year-old senator ''a good man who Governor Bush and Secretary Cheney respect.''
 Correction of August 4 article on Bush family members who attended Republican National Convention An article on Friday about Bush family members who attended the Republican National Convention misstated the occupation of Marvin Bush, the former president's son, and the location of his business. He is a co-founder of an investment firm in McLean, Va., not a management consultant in Texas. An article on Friday about Bush family members who attended the Republican National Convention misstated the occupation of Marvin Bush, the former president's son, and the location of his business. He is a co-founder of an investment firm in McLean, Va., not a management consultant in Texas.
 Editorial says Vice Pres Al Gore's decision to choose Sen Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate is most dramatic move of his campaign, and may turn out to be one of smartest; says selection announces a redoubled effort on Gore's part to separate himself from Pres Clinton's personal shortcomings, providing him with insulation on the character issue; lauds selection of first Jew ever to run on national ticket of a major party; notes that Gore has reached out to a fellow centrist with a record of breaking ranks with Democrats on issues where Gore needs to bolster his credibility Vice President Al Gore's decision to choose Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate is certainly the most dramatic move he has made in his presidential campaign, and may turn out to be one of the smartest. It is not just that Mr. Lieberman has been an effective senator. Of far greater significance is that he was the first Democratic senator to denounce President Clinton for ''disgraceful'' and ''immoral'' conduct in the Lewinsky scandal and for his failure to speak truthfully to the American people about his behavior. In a very real sense, therefore, Mr. Lieberman's selection announces a redoubled effort on Mr. Gore's part to separate himself from Mr. Clinton's personal shortcomings. It also provides him with insulation on the character issue at a time when the Republicans, as Richard Cheney made clear in his speech at the Philadelphia convention, plan to make an issue of the erosion of presidential dignity during Bill Clinton's eight years in office. Mr. Gore's decision was bold in one other respect. Mr. Lieberman will be the first Jew to run on the national ticket of a major party. Recent polls have suggested that religion will not be an important factor when Americans make up their minds in this election. Nevertheless, Mr. Gore is in effect inviting the voters to tear down any remaining barriers against Jewish candidates, much as they did for John F. Kennedy's Catholicism a generation ago. Vice President Al Gore's decision to choose Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate is certainly the most dramatic move he has made in his presidential campaign, and may turn out to be one of the smartest. It is not just that Mr. Lieberman has been an effective senator. Of far greater significance is that he was the first Democratic senator to denounce President Clinton for ''disgraceful'' and ''immoral'' conduct in the Lewinsky scandal and for his failure to speak truthfully to the American people about his behavior. In a very real sense, therefore, Mr. Lieberman's selection announces a redoubled effort on Mr. Gore's part to separate himself from Mr. Clinton's personal shortcomings. It also provides him with insulation on the character issue at a time when the Republicans, as Richard Cheney made clear in his speech at the Philadelphia convention, plan to make an issue of the erosion of presidential dignity during Bill Clinton's eight years in office. Mr. Gore's decision was bold in one other respect. Mr. Lieberman will be the first Jew to run on the national ticket of a major party. Recent polls have suggested that religion will not be an important factor when Americans make up their minds in this election. Nevertheless, Mr. Gore is in effect inviting the voters to tear down any remaining barriers against Jewish candidates, much as they did for John F. Kennedy's Catholicism a generation ago. Other aspects of the choice were less surprising. Eight years ago, when Bill Clinton picked Mr. Gore, a middle-of-the-road Southerner, he broke from the traditional practice of selecting running mates from another part of the country to provide a geographical and in some cases ideological balance. Now Mr. Gore has reached out to a fellow centrist with a comparable record of breaking ranks with many of their fellow Democrats on important issues like defense and free trade. Mr. Lieberman was also one of only 10 Democratic senators who supported President Bush on the gulf war. On this issue, too, Mr. Lieberman seems a shrewd political choice, in that he will help inoculate Mr. Gore against charges that the Democrats have been soft on matters of national security. Similarly, Mr. Lieberman was and is a major advocate of campaign finance reform who was forthright in criticizing Democratic fund-raising abuses in 1996. This is also an issue where Mr. Gore, who has promised reforms, needs to bolster his credibility. Some Democratic liberals may be uneasy over Mr. Lieberman's readiness to ally himself with conservatives on social issues. He has criticized the television and music industries for too much violence and sex, and he has also been more willing than party orthodoxy to embrace school vouchers. But he has a solid record on gay rights, gun control and the environment, and he is pro-choice on the abortion issue. The Republicans may be tempted to replay the senator's biting attack on how the president degraded the White House. But if they go that route, they may find themselves reinforcing the virtue of his selection, and perhaps be seen as re-fighting the very battles in Washington that Governor Bush declared in his acceptance speech that he wants to move beyond.
 Republicans praise selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate but quickly seize on votes that differ from Gore's positions, stating that Lieberman's conservative record will not help ticket with core Democratic voters; spokesmen for various interest groups enthusiastically speak out for Lieberman, brushing off his occasional votes against their positions (M) Republicans praised the selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as Vice President Al Gore's running mate today but quickly seized on votes that differed from Mr. Gore's positions and said Mr. Lieberman's conservative record would not help the ticket with core Democratic voters. Republicans praised the selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as Vice President Al Gore's running mate today but quickly seized on votes that differed from Mr. Gore's positions and said Mr. Lieberman's conservative record would not help the ticket with core Democratic voters. In Austin, Tex., Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush, called Mr. Lieberman of Connecticut  ''a good man who Governor Bush and Secretary Cheney respect.'' Mr. Fleischer added, ''From Social Security reform to missile defense, tort reform to parental notification, from school choice to affirmative action, Al Gore has chosen a man whose positions are more similar to Governor Bush's positions than to his own.'' Eddie Mahe, a veteran Republican consultant, said the choice probably had ''a small political downside'' for Mr. Gore. It ''further erodes his support on the left,'' Mr. Mahe said. Mr. May said the selection ''does nothing to solidify his base, and he needs to.'' Only 70 percent of Democrats support Mr. Gore, according to a new CBS News Poll, while 88 percent of Republicans back Mr. Bush. Mr. May and Ed Gillespie, a Republican consultant, both said they looked forward to the first ''Gore-Lieberman debate.'' But Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the minority leader, disagreed. ''I think it will excite the base,'' Mr. Daschle said, ''because it is a clear indication that Al Gore is determined to win this election.'' ''It's also a statement about Gore's commitment to pro-choice values and a woman's right to choose,'' Ms. Michelman said. While the Bush campaign gave the impression that the selection did not trouble it, William Kristol, a Republican strategist and publisher of The Weekly Standard, said the choice destroyed the argument that the Democrats were seeking ''a third term for Clinton-Gore.'' He said it made the ''character issue considerably less relevant.'' The news ''stopped the Bush story in its tracks,'' Mr. Kristol said. ''It ended the 'bounce' today.''
 Condoleezza Rice, chief foreign policy adviser to the Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, said the plan to equip and train West African troops was acceptable as long as it was enacted as currently described to Congress.
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed column say foreign policy advisers to Gov George W Bush are all those of his father, experts in a world that no longer exists; says that for Gov Bush, if elected, to base international policy on old assumptions would be to court disaster; says United States is no longer a cold-war superpower, but a singular hyperpower with both an unrivaled military and an unrivaled information economy, and that if Bush tries out unilateralist policies talked about by his advisers, he will face a ferocious reaction from envious US rivals and allies alike; comments on implications of globalization, Internet interconnectivity and surplus economy (M) Should George W. Bush win, it is useful to consider how different a world he and his foreign policy advisers would confront from the last time Colin Powell, Dick Cheney, Condi Rice and Paul Wolfowitz were in office with President Bush eight years ago. The book on Governor Bush is that while he doesn't know much about the world, his advisers -- who were all his father's advisers -- are experts. That is true, but many are experts in a world that doesn't exist anymore: We do not have a cold-war global system anymore, we don't have a cold-war military and we don't have a cold-war public. In short, this ain't your father's foreign policy. The players may be the same, but the world isn't. Here are five things President Bush could never have taught his son about the world: Should George W. Bush win, it is useful to consider how different a world he and his foreign policy advisers would confront from the last time Colin Powell, Dick Cheney, Condi Rice and Paul Wolfowitz were in office with President Bush eight years ago. The book on Governor Bush is that while he doesn't know much about the world, his advisers -- who were all his father's advisers -- are experts. That is true, but many are experts in a world that doesn't exist anymore: We do not have a cold-war global system anymore, we don't have a cold-war military and we don't have a cold-war public. In short, this ain't your father's foreign policy. The players may be the same, but the world isn't. Here are five things President Bush could never have taught his son about the world: 1. While America was certainly a superpower when President Bush left office, its economy was just coming out of stagnation and the Soviet Union had just collapsed. Today, America is not just a superpower, it's a hyperpower, with both unrivaled military might and an information economy that is the envy of the world. What's new in all this is that while other countries still call for U.S. leadership, they envy and resent America more than ever. No one wants to be America's enemy, but few want to be perceived as its friend. And what that means is that if Mr. Bush tries out some of the more macho-unilateralist policies talked about by his advisers -- such as abrogating the ABM treaty or sponsoring an uprising in Iraq -- he will face a ferocious reaction from U.S. rivals and allies alike. 2. President Bush had to manage the waxing military power of China, the waning military power of the Soviet Union and the soaring economic power of Japan. What U.S. foreign policy is about today is managing the weakness of China, the weakness of Russia and the weakness of Japan, as all three go through the wrenching internal adjustments to globalization that have made their possible collapse more threatening to us than their strength. In the Bush years, U.S. officials liked to say ''We lead, Japan pays.'' Now we must lead and pay. 3. The Internet did not exist as a foreign policy tool when President Bush left office. Today, it's huge. Jody Williams won the Nobel Peace Prize for organizing a global ban on land mines -- against the wishes of the major powers -- using e-mail. If Governor Bush really did try to abrogate the ABM treaty unilaterally, and cram it down the throats of the Russians and Europeans, I believe it could trigger a Seattle-like, Internet-driven, mass-based, anti-nuclear protest against the U.S. -- identical to the popular movement in Europe today against America's genetically modified foods. This could make it impossible for any NATO ally to cooperate with the U.S. on missile defenses. 4. America was a deficit country when President Bush left office, and now it is a surplus country. That means that the Republican ethos of steadily cutting back government, and the foreign affairs budget, is not only unnecessary, it's reckless, and it will be perceived by the world as increasingly selfish. Indeed, it's easy for the Bushies to sneer that they won't be the world's 911 or global cops, but such aloofness is much harder in practice now that America is so dominant. As the Clintonites discovered, we are now held responsible for everything, but Americans don't want to die for virtually anything. So finding ways to make a sustainable difference in places such as Kosovo or Rwanda is a lot harder than uttering a sound bite. 5. Globalization: The speed, interconnectivity and economic impact of global markets today is much greater than eight years ago. If Mr. Bush does try a deep tax cut that the markets perceive as reckless, their judgment on him will be nasty, brutish and swift -- swifter than he may ever imagine.
 Nationally, groups like the Southeast Forest Project have tried to pressure Vice President Al Gore, as an environmental advocate and a native of Tennessee, to address concerns about chip mills and Southern forests.
 But Mr. Lazio, in part because of his obligations in Congress, has not gone on a multiday swing since the week of July 4, when he toured upstate by bus. And he skipped most of the Republican convention, in part to attend fund-raisers in New York, including, he said, two on the night of Gov. George W. Bush's acceptance speech.
 ''The reason Democrats have been winning is because we energize voters on issues like Social Security, education and health care,'' said Michael Whouley, the senior strategy adviser for the Democratic National Committee and Vice President Al Gore's campaign. An additional $13.7 million would be used to defray administrative costs for the Bush campaign. The rest of the pot would go toward miscellaneous Victory 2000 costs. Mr. Meyer is a former chairman of the Texas Republican State Committee and a close ally of the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush. He said one goal of the grass-roots campaign would be to identify undecided voters who are leaning toward Mr. Bush and then aggressively urge them to vote, using follow-up phone calls, mailings and personal visits. Similar efforts in Texas had swayed large blocs of undecided voters to Mr. Bush in 1994, Mr. Meyer said. The alliance of Democrats and labor will be strengthened this week by the endorsement of Mr. Gore by the United Auto Workers whose leaders decided tonight to do that, an official close to the union said. The Democrats are also building get-out-the-vote operations in African-American and Latino communities. Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore's campaign manager, said organizers would try to ''touch'' likely voters in those communities -- with mailings, phone calls or personal contact -- dozens of times before Election Day. Similar campaigns were highly successful in the 1996 and 1998 elections.
 Many Christians, especially conservative evangelicals, regard Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Vice Pres Al Gore's choice for running mate who is Orthodox Jew, as ally on number of social and moral issues; Lieberman is regarded as kindred spirit by some Christians for his willingness to wear his religion on his sleeve; his talk of Talmud's inspiring both his values and his votes has often been cited by those who believe that Bible should guide public policy; some religious leaders comment; photo of Rev Jerry Falwell, who praised his selection (M) In Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Vice President Al Gore has managed to choose as his running mate an Orthodox Jew whom many Christians, and especially conservative evangelicals, regard as an ally on a number of social and moral issues. In Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Vice President Al Gore has managed to choose as his running mate an Orthodox Jew whom many Christians, and especially conservative evangelicals, regard as an ally on a number of social and moral issues. ''I think the vice president made an excellent choice,'' the Rev. Jerry Falwell, who is supporting Gov. George W. Bush, said in an interview yesterday. ''It is a public acknowledgment that his candidacy has two great needs. One is credibility, which Mr. Lieberman brings to anything he touches. The second is an everlasting divorce from Bill Clinton, and this is that.'' Still, Dr. Mohler, Father Neuhaus and others said that having Scripture  in common was not enough. Like Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman is a supporter of both abortion rights and gay rights, and many Catholics and evanglicals who oppose abortion and homosexuality will not vote for a Gore-Lieberman ticket.
