 Not for nothing did Yale hire a spokesman with experience in the White House. LAWRENCE J. HAAS, who worked in the Office of Management and Budget and was Vice President Al Gore's communications director, had an all-politics-is-local spin on Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as running mate. As a result of that pick, a Yalie will be on the winning national ticket, Mr. Haas declared in an e-mail message (either Mr. Lieberman, '64, Law '67; or George W. Bush, '68). And, he pointed out, there has been an alumnus in one of the top two spots since 1980 (George Bush, '48, 1981-93; Bill Clinton, Law '73, since 1993). Not for nothing did Yale hire a spokesman with experience in the White House. LAWRENCE J. HAAS, who worked in the Office of Management and Budget and was Vice President Al Gore's communications director, had an all-politics-is-local spin on Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as running mate. As a result of that pick, a Yalie will be on the winning national ticket, Mr. Haas declared in an e-mail message (either Mr. Lieberman, '64, Law '67; or George W. Bush, '68). And, he pointed out, there has been an alumnus in one of the top two spots since 1980 (George Bush, '48, 1981-93; Bill Clinton, Law '73, since 1993).
 Texas Board Refuses to Halt Execution of Low-I.Q. Inmate**Texas Pardons and Paroles Boards refuses clemency for Oliver Cruz, sentenced to death for rape and murder; United States Supreme Court weighs Cruz's bid for stay of execution based on argument that jury was not properly instructed to consider evidence of his mental retardation; prosecutors, who did not contest at trial defense's evidence that Cruz is retarded, now circulate report showing he is not retarded; American Bar Association and European Union urge Gov George W Bush to block execution of retarded person (M) The 18-member board voted unanimously on Monday to refuse the clemency. It gave no reason for its refusal. The board has rejected all but one of the 74 clemency requests from death row inmates since Gov. George W. Bush took office in 1995. The 18-member board voted unanimously on Monday to refuse the clemency. It gave no reason for its refusal. The board has rejected all but one of the 74 clemency requests from death row inmates since Gov. George W. Bush took office in 1995. The United States Supreme Court is reviewing a request for a stay of execution filed on Friday by Mr. Pokorak, who argues that the jury was not properly instructed to consider the evidence of mental retardation. If the court turns down the appeal, Mr. Cruz's fate will be in the hands of the lieutenant governor, Rick Perry, who is sitting in for Governor Bush, who is out of state. Under Texas law, the governor can grant only a one-time 30-day delay of execution. The American Bar Association urged Mr. Bush late Monday evening not to go forward with the execution. ''The execution of persons who are mentally retarded serves no principled purpose and demeans our system of justice,'' Martha W. Barrett, the organization's president wrote to Mr. Bush. The European Union called on Mr. Bush yesterday not to execute Mr. Cruz, saying the execution of someone who is mentally retarded violated international human rights norms. ''We urge you to demonstrate compassion with regard to this case,'' it said in the letter to Mr. Bush.
 Michael Nicholson got next to nothing after he was hit by a car on a fire call in 1972, when he was a 17-year-old volunteer firefighter in Bushnell Basin, outside Rochester. Both his legs were broken, his skull was fractured, his lungs collapsed, he suffered a stroke, and he sank into a coma for three weeks. His parents were told there was only a 50-50 chance he would live.
 THE MARKETS: BONDS  Correction:  August 10, 2000, Thursday  A picture caption yesterday with a front-page article about the process of choosing Al Gore's running mate misspelled the surname of Mr. Gore's foreign policy adviser. He is Leon Fuerth, not Furth. A picture caption yesterday with a front-page article about the process of choosing Al Gore's running mate misspelled the surname of Mr. Gore's foreign policy adviser. He is Leon Fuerth, not Furth.
 Sen Sam Brownback Op-Ed article notes he, Christian Midwestern Republican, and Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Jewish Northeastern Democrat and Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate, are frequent allies in Senate; holds they are part of political alliance emerging between theologically orthodox Christians and Jews who share belief in moral order ordained by God; notes vice president's principles and positions tend to be subsumed by president's agenda On many issues, including Social Security reform, missile defense and tort reform, Senator Lieberman has followed his conscience across party lines, making his record on these issues more conservative than Al Gore's. It remains to be seen how the two men's differences will play out as the presidential campaign takes off in earnest.
 Mrs. Clinton discussed having Mr. Lieberman come to New York during a congratulatory conversation with the Connecticut senator on the day that Vice President Al Gore formally announced that he had chosen Mr. Lieberman to be the first Jew to run on a major-party ticket for national office. Mrs. Clinton discussed having Mr. Lieberman come to New York during a congratulatory conversation with the Connecticut senator on the day that Vice President Al Gore formally announced that he had chosen Mr. Lieberman to be the first Jew to run on a major-party ticket for national office. Mrs. Clinton, whose aides have been worried about her relative lack of support among Jewish voters in New York, described Mr. Gore's decision as a welcome development for Mrs. Clinton's candidacy, in terms of increasing her support among Democrats in general and Jewish voters in particular. The cross-country exchange yesterday suggested the extent to which a decision made by Mr. Gore to help his own campaign had captured the attention of both candidates in the race for Senate in New York. Republicans and Democrats said yesterday that Mr. Gore's decision would have some effect on the New York race, though there was some debate about how much it had shifted the landscape. Mr. Lieberman's selection almost certainly erases any chance that George W. Bush will invest much time or money in New York. Some Republicans said that was a cause for concern for Mr. Lazio, whose aides have already been worried that they would be unable to swim against the tide of a large victory by Mr. Gore in New York. And even Mrs. Clinton's associates acknowledged that animosity toward the first lady means that Jewish voters who turn out for Mr. Gore could leave the voting booth without casting a vote for Mrs. Clinton. She told an audience of schoolgirls in New Square that Mr. Lieberman ''has been my friend for 30 years,'' and said his selection showed how committed Mr. Gore and the Democratic Party were to Jewish voters.
 Biographical sketch of Hadassah Lieberman, wife of Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate; photo (M) The selection of her husband as Vice President Al Gore's running mate thrust Hadassah Lieberman onto the national stage today and into the type of highly public role she has worked hard to avoid as a political spouse. The selection of her husband as Vice President Al Gore's running mate thrust Hadassah Lieberman onto the national stage today and into the type of highly public role she has worked hard to avoid as a political spouse. At the rally introducing Mr. Lieberman in Nashville, Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, spoke of Mrs. Lieberman today as the daughter of Nazi concentration-camp survivors, something that friends say is at the core of how Mrs. Lieberman views herself and the world. Mr. Lieberman's first marriage to Betty Haas, a psychiatrist, ended in divorce in 1981. They have two children, a son, Matt, 32, who teaches English in New Haven, and a daughter, Rebecca, 31, who lives in New York City and works for the Children's Aid Society. Matt and his wife, April, have two daughters, Willie, 1, and Tennessee, 3, whose name provided fodder for Al Gore at today's rally in Nashville.
 As a Jew, I am proud of Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate (front page, Aug. 8). As a Jew, I am proud of Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate (front page, Aug. 8).
 Mr. Casey, the former governor of Pennsylvania, had asked to speak at the 1992 Democratic convention in New York and deliver a report opposing the party's platform, which called ''reproductive choice'' a ''fundamental right.'' But the nominees -- Bill Clinton and Al Gore -- wanted the convention to send a message of unity for abortion rights, and Mr. Casey was barred from speaking. Now, with the approval of Mr. Gore, this year's nominee, the party has invited two of Mr. Casey's sons -- Robert P. Casey Jr., who is facing re-election as Pennsylvania's auditor general, and Patrick Casey, a candidate for Congress from Scranton -- to participate in a video tribute to their father at the convention. GORE WINS U.A.W. BACKING  The United Auto Workers announced yesterday that it would endorse Vice President Al Gore for president, ending its feud with him over trade and giving him a boost in Michigan and other industrial Midwestern states. Democratic officials said Mr. Gore and the union president, Stephen P. Yokich, who had flirted with Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, had spoken in recent months in an effort to agree on trade and environmental issues. Among other things, the union succeeded in adding language to the platform saying Mr. Gore would push for more fuel-efficient cars ''in a way that preserves and creates jobs for American workers and delivers products that consumers want to buy.'' Mr. Gore will travel to Michigan, which has 450,000 current and retired U.A.W. members, on Friday to accept the endorsement. G.O.P. FIRES BACK  The Republican Party has begun running its first attack ad, a 30-second commercial  accusing Vice President Al Gore of hypocrisy on environmental issues. The spot contends that Mr. Gore has been distorting Gov. George W. Bush's environmental record in Texas and, citing a recent biography, reports that Mr. Gore ''has allowed mining companies to mine zinc from his property'' in Tennessee.
 Whatever other repercussions the selection of Joseph I. Lieberman as the Democratic vice-presidential candidate may hold for the country (front page, Aug. 8), one significant consequence dare not be overlooked. With this one masterful political move, Al Gore has neutralized -- and trumped -- the cherished rhetoric of Republican discourse in debates over national culture and political norms. Whatever other repercussions the selection of Joseph I. Lieberman as the Democratic vice-presidential candidate may hold for the country (front page, Aug. 8), one significant consequence dare not be overlooked. With this one masterful political move, Al Gore has neutralized -- and trumped -- the cherished rhetoric of Republican discourse in debates over national culture and political norms.
 Article profiles career of Sen Joseph I Lieberman following his being named Democratic Vice Presidential candidate by Al Gore (M) Since then, Mr. Lieberman has forged a reputation as the moral conscience of his party, a role he will be asked to play beside Mr. Gore in coming months.
 Re ''Lieberman Will Run With Gore; First Jew on a Major U.S. Ticket'' (front page, Aug. 8): Re ''Lieberman Will Run With Gore; First Jew on a Major U.S. Ticket'' (front page, Aug. 8): In his acceptance speech at the Republican convention, George W. Bush called for inclusiveness. Now Al Gore has led the way. Win or lose, there is no question that Mr. Gore's bold and courageous stroke of choosing an observant Jew to be his running mate has moved the American envelope in a striking new direction.
 Editorial holds Vice Pres Al Gore's groundbreaking choice of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as running mate gives his campaign needed sense of completeness and purpose If Al Gore wins this election, he may well look back on yesterday's boisterous gathering in Nashville as the moment the campaign became truly his own and not merely an extension of the Clinton presidency. The presence of Senator Joseph Lieberman on the rostrum, standing side by side with Mr. Gore in matching white shirtsleeves, seemed to stir both men and give the Gore campaign a jolt of energy and passion. This was partly the result of Mr. Lieberman's own boyish delight at having been chosen as Mr. Gore's running mate and his obvious relish for the political combat ahead. But the mere fact that Mr. Gore had made a groundbreaking choice was itself an important event, giving the campaign a sense of completeness and purpose it had missed. This is now Al Gore's campaign, and it could not have been an accident that President Clinton's name was not mentioned once in nearly 50 minutes of speechmaking from Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman and their wives. Clearly the Gore-Lieberman strategy will be to distance themselves from Mr. Clinton on the character issue while clinging to the fact that he has bequeathed them a strong economy on which to base their campaign. Mr. Lieberman, in fact, spoke glowingly of the millions of new jobs created in the last eight years and borrowed a line that the senior George Bush used to good effect in his 1988 presidential campaign: ''If you have to change horses in midstream, doesn't it make sense to get on the one that's going in the right direction?'' If Al Gore wins this election, he may well look back on yesterday's boisterous gathering in Nashville as the moment the campaign became truly his own and not merely an extension of the Clinton presidency. The presence of Senator Joseph Lieberman on the rostrum, standing side by side with Mr. Gore in matching white shirtsleeves, seemed to stir both men and give the Gore campaign a jolt of energy and passion. This was partly the result of Mr. Lieberman's own boyish delight at having been chosen as Mr. Gore's running mate and his obvious relish for the political combat ahead. But the mere fact that Mr. Gore had made a groundbreaking choice was itself an important event, giving the campaign a sense of completeness and purpose it had missed. This is now Al Gore's campaign, and it could not have been an accident that President Clinton's name was not mentioned once in nearly 50 minutes of speechmaking from Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman and their wives. Clearly the Gore-Lieberman strategy will be to distance themselves from Mr. Clinton on the character issue while clinging to the fact that he has bequeathed them a strong economy on which to base their campaign. Mr. Lieberman, in fact, spoke glowingly of the millions of new jobs created in the last eight years and borrowed a line that the senior George Bush used to good effect in his 1988 presidential campaign: ''If you have to change horses in midstream, doesn't it make sense to get on the one that's going in the right direction?'' Mr. Lieberman, the first Senate Democrat to rebuke Mr. Clinton for his behavior in the Lewinsky affair, said nothing yesterday about the president's conduct. But by his words, and references to his devout faith as an Orthodox Jew, he made clear he was ready to provide a firewall against Republican claims that only a Bush-Cheney victory could restore dignity and integrity to the White House. His wife, Hadassah, added to the sense of high purpose by describing how her parents had nearly perished in the Holocaust. Mr. Lieberman seemed comfortable sharing his religious commitment in public, invoking God about a dozen times in his speech and pointedly referring to Mr. Gore as one who had ''never, never wavered in his responsibilities as a father, as a husband, and yes, as a servant of God Almighty.'' On a tactical level his affirmations of faith should help put the Democrats in a stronger competitive position with religious voters, but Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman must be careful not to let their campaign take on a theocratic tone reminiscent of the Republican alliance with the religious right. Mr. Lieberman's presence does not, of course, guarantee Mr. Gore smooth sailing. Many liberals will not be happy with his stout defense of the insurance and pharmaceutical industries, or his support of school vouchers. Organized labor, despite the United Auto Workers' endorsement yesterday, is not happy with Mr. Lieberman's firm commitment to free trade. His legislative record will be subject to even more careful screening in the days ahead. But given his independent turn of mind and the sense of gravity and rectitude he brings to the ticket, Mr. Lieberman has gotten the attention of the Republicans and invigorated his own party as the Democrats head to their convention in Los Angeles.
 Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece  Vice President Al Gore formally introduced Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his Democratic running mate, portraying the selection of Mr. Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, as a measure of his devotion to tolerance and his willingness to break barriers. On some issues, including those that affect the insurance industry, Mr. Lieberman has been much more of a business ally than Mr. Gore. Mr. Lieberman has also been an ally of other companies that Mr. Gore has blasted in recent speeches, including pharmaceuticals. The announcement that her husband would be Vice President Gore's running mate thrust Hadassah Lieberman into the type of highly public role she has worked hard to avoid as a political spouse. Editorials: Mr. Gore's campaign; the Western fires; more executions in Texas; fair disclosure on Wall Street.
 Clyde Haberman NYC column discusses reaction of New Yorkers to selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Jew, as Vice Presidential running mate to Democratic Presidential hopeful Al Gore (M) Other prominent Jews in New York have made similar points since the Gore-Lieberman ticket took shape on Monday. This move by the Democrats, they said, is less a breakthrough than an affirmation of the relative security that Jews -- and many other ethnic groups, for that matter -- now enjoy.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on Vice Pres Al Gore's choice of believing and practicing Jew, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, as running mate; sees candidates trying to drench politics with religion; urges Democratic ticket not to overdo sanctimony; warns of attacks from nasty Republican fringe But with the two sons fighting over the Son, Mr. Gore decided to find a running mate with direct access to the Father. The usually cautious Mr. Gore made an inspiring and brave choice of a senator named Lieberman, the first Jew on a major party's national ticket and a believing and practicing Jew who regularly invokes God. Bill Clinton dominates the race he is not in. In '92 he chose Mr. Gore as his running mate because he needed the Tennessee senator's Dudley Do-Right image. Having a Vietnam vet and a family man beside him allowed Mr. Clinton to seem less slippery. Al Gore has come away from the White House sex and money scandals with a patina of grime. The vice president who was chosen for rectitude, not geography or charisma, felt he needed to choose a running mate for rectitude, not geography or charisma. After defending the beleaguered Mr. Clinton as ''one of our greatest presidents,'' Mr. Gore had to make up for that ill-considered moment by choosing a new partner whose piety offset his old partner's hedonism. Mr. Lieberman, the first Democratic senator to denounce Mr. Clinton as ''immoral'' during the Monica megilla, saw the offer from Mr. Gore as comparable to being ''called to the ministry.'' In Nashville, the senator hailed Tipper for the puritanical crusade that the Gores have spent years begging Hollywood to forget. Although the Bush team praised the selection, we must keep an eye on that nasty Republican fringe. When the going gets tough, the hardball henchmen around the Bushes have a way of exploiting differences and craftily implying that anyone who is not like us is not ''on the American side,'' as Bush Pere put it at the flag factory during the Willie Horton campaign. The McCains are still seething about Bush supporters in South Carolina spreading word of their dark-skinned adopted daughter from Bangladesh. And in '88 Michael Dukakis, with his Greek roots, was treated as an exotic. On the Bush bus, Loretta Lynn complained of Mr. Dukakis: ''Why, I can't even pronounce his name!''
 Editorial on planned Texas execution of Oliver David Cruz, who is mentally retarded, urges Gov George W Bush to block executions of mentally retarded convicts and urges Texas legislature to pass bill banning such executions In the last legislative session in Texas, the State Senate passed a bill that would have banned such executions. The bill, lacking the support of Gov. George W. Bush, then stalled in the House. But Governor Bush is out of step with the mainstream on this issue, as many states are rushing to ban the execution of the mentally retarded. His brother, Jeb, the Florida governor, supports such a ban. George W. Bush should take the truly compassionate step of using his clemency powers to ensure that no more mentally retarded convicts are executed in Texas. The legislature could then pass the bill banning such executions in its next session. Mr. Bush should not be embarrassed by efforts to improve the administration of justice in Texas. What he should be embarrassed by is the callous execution of the mentally impaired on his watch.
 In the days before George W. Bush announced his selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate, Vice President Al Gore and his advisers sensed an unexpected opportunity. Aboard Air Force II and in Mr. Gore's campaign headquarters here, there was a consensus that Mr. Bush and his aides had bungled their selection process, that the Republicans had come across as leak-prone, rushed and uncharacteristically amateurish. The Gore campaign swiftly set out to exploit this perceived weakness by trying to turn the running mate selection process itself into a political weapon. With lock-step discipline, Mr. Gore's spokesmen derided Mr. Bush for conducting his search ''like a fraternity rush.'' They presented Mr. Gore's method as dignified, orderly, pander-free and, above all else, private. In the days before George W. Bush announced his selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate, Vice President Al Gore and his advisers sensed an unexpected opportunity. Aboard Air Force II and in Mr. Gore's campaign headquarters here, there was a consensus that Mr. Bush and his aides had bungled their selection process, that the Republicans had come across as leak-prone, rushed and uncharacteristically amateurish. The Gore campaign swiftly set out to exploit this perceived weakness by trying to turn the running mate selection process itself into a political weapon. With lock-step discipline, Mr. Gore's spokesmen derided Mr. Bush for conducting his search ''like a fraternity rush.'' They presented Mr. Gore's method as dignified, orderly, pander-free and, above all else, private. But the strict secrecy imposed by the Gore campaign shielded from public view an intensely political, highly competitive and sometimes frenetic selection process. Again and again, Mr. Gore's search was shaped by gritty political concerns that had little bearing on what he had repeatedly described as his single most important criterion for a running mate: someone possessed of the experience and ability to assume the presidency if necessary. George J. Mitchell, the former Senate majority leader, for example, never made it to the short list, at least in part because of his work as a lobbyist for the tobacco industry, people involved in the search said. Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana faced opposition from pro-choice groups and gave his assent to a campaign aimed at countering criticism over his voting record on abortion, but faded nonetheless. Senator Bob Graham of Florida was hurt by his habit of filling diaries with mundane aspects of his day, a practice some in the Gore campaign worried would be viewed as eccentric. On the other hand, Democratic officials said, Mr. Bush's repeated efforts to tarnish Mr. Gore with resurrected memories of President Clinton's affair with a White House intern elevated the standing of Mr. Gore's eventual choice, Joseph I. Lieberman, the first Democrat to condemn Mr. Clinton's affair from the Senate floor. The enforced secrecy -- potential running mates were warned not to divulge details about their contacts with the Gore vetting teams -- also served to obscure lobbying efforts by a select group of well-connected political professionals. Several of Mr. Gore's campaign consultants had also worked for those on his list of potential vice presidents, and these men and women fought hard for their favored picks. One adviser, Bob Shrum, has worked with several of the potential candidates but argued for one of them, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina. Another adviser, Michael Whouley, argued for his former boss, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts. Only last week, Al From, president of the Democratic Leadership Council and an influential voice among moderate Democrats, lobbied both Mr. Gore and his campaign chairman, William M. Daley, on behalf of Mr. Lieberman, who is the chairman of the council. As with any presidential candidate, the choice of running mate is an important and telling decision. Mr. Gore's aides argued that the way he went about picking Mr. Lieberman illustrated several of his strengths, notably his meticulous preparation before arriving at major decisions. Mr. Gore, they said, has raised vetting to new levels of thoroughness and inclusiveness. Although Mr. Gore announced in April that former Secretary of State Warren Christopher would lead his selection team, Mr. Gore began to organize his process months before. His vetting teams were led by such veteran lawyers as Charles F. C. Ruff, the former White House counsel who defended Mr. Clinton during his impeachment trial. The team that vetted Mr. Lieberman, led by Jamie S. Gorelick, a former deputy attorney general, went so far as to review the more than 800 legal opinions that Mr. Lieberman rendered when he was attorney general of Connecticut from 1983 to 1989. Sheldon Cohen, a former commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, was drafted to review tax returns. Mr. Gore also instructed Mr. Christopher to consult freely and frequently with an informal group that consisted of Labor Secretary Alexis M. Herman and former Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros, both of whom have faced ethics inquiries, and Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia and Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. ''I gained added respect for his values and judgment,'' Mr. Christopher said when asked in an interview what he had learned about Mr. Gore during the search process. ''I found he went about the process seriously and conscientiously.'' Republicans drew different lessons from Mr. Gore's method of picking a running mate. While praising Mr. Lieberman as a man of integrity, they said Mr. Gore's selection process underscored what they described as his penchant for tactical ruthlessness and a tendency to shade the truth for political gain. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, dismissed the notion that the Gore decision-making process was more orderly and dignified than Mr. Bush's process. He said much of what Mr. Gore did, including his mention that besides the six finalists there was a ''wild card'' candidate, was theater designed for public consumption. He said the important difference was that the Bush campaign had greeted the choice of Mr. Lieberman graciously, while the Gore campaign had attacked Mr. Cheney. One Democratic lawyer who has guided potential running mates through both Mr. Gore's vetting routine and Mr. Clinton's 1992 vetting complained that this year's process was at times ''delayed and disorganized.'' Indeed, just five days before his self-imposed deadline, Mr. Gore said he had narrowed his list to six. Yet one finalist, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the minority leader, had not been vetted -- a task that had taken lawyers weeks of painstaking work for other finalists. Such was the sophistication of Mr. Gore's selection stagecraft that even leaks were orchestrated for maximum effect. Eager to win over women, Mr. Gore has emphasized that several women were under strong consideration. Last week, as interest was peaking over Mr. Gore's progress, his campaign let it be known that one of his finalists was a woman, Gov. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, even though she had already said she would turn down the job and even though one person involved in Mr. Gore's screening process said she had not been under serious consideration for some time. Last fall, before a single primary or caucus had been contested, Mr. Gore was already thinking about running mates. By October his campaign chairman at the time, Tony Coelho, had contacted Mr. Christopher and asked him to start thinking about how to organize a search. Mr. Christopher, 74, was a logical choice. A man who exudes tact and discretion, Mr. Christopher had led Mr. Clinton's search in 1992, and the subsequent selection of Al Gore was widely regarded as a turning point in Mr. Clinton's campaign. But Mr. Christopher was well aware of the perils of the selection process. A hasty vetting job in 1984 left Walter F. Mondale's campaign bogged down in weeks of questions about the finances of his running mate, Geraldine A. Ferraro. ''Anybody who tries to do this has to read the history and see the mistakes that were made and try to avoid them,'' Mr. Christopher said. Those lessons, aides said, were central to one of Mr. Gore's primary search objectives: finding a running mate who could get off to a fast, clean start, unlike Mr. Cheney, for example, who spent his first week defending his votes in Congress. Starting in February, Mr. Christopher and Mr. Gore began to construct what Mr. Christopher came to call his People to Consult List, a roster of senior Democrats that would grow to 70 names. The list included nearly a dozen women, 18 members of minority groups and representatives of several special interest groups. Most were on the list simply because Mr. Gore wanted their advice. But 25, including Mr. Lieberman, were considered potential running mates. Mr. Coelho said the Gore campaign had made an overture to Colin L. Powell, just as the Clinton campaign had done in 1992. ''He was indirectly approached to see if he would ever consider a vice-presidential spot on any ticket,'' he said. But General Powell rebuffed the overture, and the matter was dropped. Even as Mr. Gore's spokesmen insisted that there was no long list, no short list, no list at all, Mr. Christopher began interviews to help Mr. Gore pare the list. As a first step, a team of young Washington lawyers prepared memorandums on the public careers of the 25 possible candidates. But by that point, Mr. Gore had already settled on about a half-dozen names. He told Mr. Christopher to go ahead with full vetting on this group, which included Senator Lieberman, Governor Shaheen, Senator Edwards, Representative Gephardt, Senator Bayh and Senator Kerry, Democratic officials said. But even before the vetting was in full swing, there were indications that Mr. Lieberman was the front-runner. On June 15, the day Mr. Daley replaced Mr. Coelho as campaign chairman, his first substantial conversation with Mr. Gore quickly turned to the question of running mates. ''He said, 'Joe is really close, he's really great, what do you think?' '' Mr. Daley recalled. ''Then he went into the other candidates, but he was the first one he named.'' The Gore campaign set about assembling five to seven vetting teams, all reporting to James Hamilton, a lawyer with long experience examining the lives of troubled Washington figures. Mr. Hamilton has represented Vince W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who later committed suicide; Dennis DeConcini, the former senator from Arizona implicated in the Keating Five scandal; and David Durenberger, the former Minnesota senator who also faced an ethics inquiry. In Mr. Gore's search, Mr. Graham did not make it to the vetting round, but none of the five who did were eliminated on the basis of some shocking revelation contained in their records. ''The vetting process produces pluses and minuses, but there was no show stopper,'' Mr. Christopher said. One such instance came in recent weeks. Mr. Kerry, a popular and seasoned politician, was attractive to Mr. Gore for many reasons, not the least of which was that he is a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War. On Monday Mr. Kerry told The Boston Globe about talking with Mr. Gore's vetters. ''They asked a couple of questions from the period when I was single, and I gave them an explanation,'' he said. ''Three-quarters of the stories that were written when I was single were not accurate.'' Meanwhile, Mr. Edwards's background as a trial lawyer who had won millions for consumers injured by corporate negligence made him an easy fit for Mr. Gore's populist message about taking on major oil and drug companies. And every time Mr. Gore and his spokesmen described Mr. Cheney as part of the Republican ''old guard,'' Mr. Edwards's stock appeared, at least in the eyes of the senator's supporters, to inch higher. But again, Mr. Gore's screening machinery turned up a steady drumbeat of concern about his relative lack of political experience as a first-term senator. On Air Force II on July 24, the day before Mr. Bush announced his selection of Mr. Cheney, Mr. Gore told reporters that Mr. Bush's pick probably would not have an effect on his selection. But behind the scenes, advisers believed that Mr. Cheney's experience had to be accounted for, and that dynamic favored Mr. Lieberman, 58. But for all the thoroughness of the Gore screening process, his vetters never fully explored the possible effect of the largest question mark over Mr. Lieberman: how voters would react to an Orthodox Jew on a national ticket. A number of people on Mr. Christopher's consultation list had repeatedly raised Mr. Lieberman's religion as a possible problem. But Mr. Gore, who has been criticized by Republicans for being excessively guided by polling data, issued orders that no steps were to be taken to gauge public reaction to Mr. Lieberman's religion. ''Gore said: 'That's not part of me. That's not part of my thinking. I exclude that,' '' Mr. Christopher recalled. What the vetters did do, though, was explore dozens of hypothetical situations to test how he would respond to potential conflicts between his observance of the Sabbath and the duties of a vice president, Ms. Gorelick said in an interview today. By late July, Mr. Gore had conducted one-on-one interviews with all of his finalists except Mr. Gephardt. There were no moments akin to 1992, when Mr. Clinton interviewed Mr. Gore well into the early morning. Mr. Lieberman's interview, conducted at Mr. Gore's residence at the Naval Observatory, lasted about an hour, the same amount of time Mr. Gore spent with the others. Ms. Herman, the labor secretary, spoke with Mr. Gore after the interview with Mr. Lieberman. She described Mr. Gore's response to the interview more as one of affirmation than revelation. ''You had this sense of, 'Boy, was I right about this guy,' '' she said. Going into Sunday's decisive meetings in the vice president's 10th floor suite at the Loews Vanderbilt Plaza Hotel here, aides got a definite sense that Mr. Gore had just about settled on Mr. Lieberman but wanted one more ''gut check'' before making the final decision. Not long before Mr. Gore told aides of his decision, he called his oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, who was in her apartment in New York.
 The only relevant question about Al Gore's choice of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate (front page, Aug. 8) is what effect a Jewish vice president might have on Middle East policy. The only relevant question about Al Gore's choice of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate (front page, Aug. 8) is what effect a Jewish vice president might have on Middle East policy.
 Excerpts from Vice Pres Al Gore's announcement naming Sen Joseph I Lieberman as his running mate and from statements by Gore's wife, Tipper, Lieberman and Lieberman's wife, Hadassah (M) Following are excerpts from the announcement yesterday by Vice President Al Gore that he had named Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate, as recorded by The New York Times. Also speaking in an appearance at a Nashville war memorial were Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, Senator Lieberman's wife, Hadassah, and Senator Lieberman. Following are excerpts from the announcement yesterday by Vice President Al Gore that he had named Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate, as recorded by The New York Times. Also speaking in an appearance at a Nashville war memorial were Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, Senator Lieberman's wife, Hadassah, and Senator Lieberman. Mrs. Gore We are thrilled and very, very deeply moved and honored today to be in the great State of Tennessee with our dear beloved friends, Al and Tipper. When Tipper told me that she was going to talk a bit, just mention my background today, and here I am in this place that commemorates World War II, wars of veterans, and here I am the daughter of survivors from the Holocaust, the most horrendous thing that happened, and here I am in the place that commemorates the American heroes, the soldiers who actually liberated my mother in Dachau and in Auschwitz. So I stand before you very deeply, sincerely thankful that I am an American, grateful that we have such a wonderful, wonderful family in the Gores, and that they've made this bold, wonderful choice to help us be part of the ticket that's going to win. Mr. Gore And in the Gore-Lieberman administration, we will put this nation on the road to completely eliminating our national debt, to keep the prosperity and progress going. And in the Gore-Lieberman administration, we're going to pass a prescription drug benefit in the Medicare program for all of our seniors. And we're going to pass a real patients' bill of rights to take the medical decisions away from the accountants and give them back to the doctors and the nurses and the health care professionals. Joe Lieberman and I have fought together for campaign finance reform. And that will be the very first bill of the Gore-Lieberman administration. And together, Joe Lieberman and I have always stood for a strong national defense. And Al Gore, I thank you for making this miracle possible for me and breaking this barrier for the rest of America forever. God bless you and thank you. . . . Now, my friends, I stand here today with a proud, simple, but I think very important message: Al Gore of Tennessee is the best man to lead America into the new century, and I know you agree with me. And America agrees with us, too. Al and I have been friends for almost 15 years now, personal friends. And I can tell you that before the nation knew Al Gore as a vice president, I knew him as a man of family and a man of faith. There is nothing, absolutely nothing more important to Al Gore in this world than the strength of his family and the love and devotion he has for his wonderful children. Now, my friends, leadership is not just a word. It means something. It requires courage, it requires character. And I can stand here today and say to you from personal experience that Al Gore has both. He has proven time and time again by volunteering to serve his country in Vietnam, by honoring the legacy of his father with 14 remarkable years in the United State Congress, by compiling the most accomplished and successful record of leadership of any vice president in the history of this great country. That record, my friends, speak for itself. Forty years ago, when I was 18 years old, I remember so clearly watching in awe as John F. Kennedy, the inspiration and hero of my political life, became the first Roman Catholic president of the United States. To me that election said so much to me about the courage and the character and the fairness of the American people. And I want to say to you today that choosing me as his running mate says the same thing about the courage and character and fairness of Al Gore of Tennessee. But let's be very clear about this. It isn't me, Joe Lieberman, who deserves the credit and the congratulations for taking a bold step. It is Al Gore who broke this barrier in American history. That's right. And you know what it shows? It shows Al's faith in the tolerance of this diverse nation, in the basic fairness of the American people. And I want to say to the people of America, Al Gore trusts you, which is one good reason for you to place your trust in him as the next great president of the United States. Al Gore -- this is no contest -- Al Gore is without a doubt the most qualified person to be president of the United States. I can tell you, for the last eight years he has served as a full partner in this administration helping to shape this country's economic policy, its social policy, its strong foreign and defense policy and it's fight for America's working middle-class families. . . . I tell you, my friends, that somewhere in America right now, and probably many in this crowd today, there are another father or mother working just as hard to give their children a better life. And I tell you today that they deserve a leader who hears their voice, they deserve to have a government that is on their side, they deserve to have a president who will stand up for them, they deserve the leadership of Al Gore of Tennessee. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN  Correction:  August 10, 2000, Thursday  A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's introduction of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman in Nashville as the first Jewish candidate on a major national party ticket referred incorrectly to Mr. Gore's comparison to John F. Kennedy. Kennedy was the first Catholic elected president; the first one nominated was Gov. Alfred E. Smith of New York, the Democratic candidate in 1928. A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's introduction of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman in Nashville as the first Jewish candidate on a major national party ticket referred incorrectly to Mr. Gore's comparison to John F. Kennedy. Kennedy was the first Catholic elected president; the first one nominated was Gov. Alfred E. Smith of New York, the Democratic candidate in 1928.
 The choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as Al Gore's running mate (front page, Aug. 8) is in large measure due to Mr. Lieberman's reputation as a conscience of the Senate, a reputation that will serve as an antidote to the sullied reputation of the present Democratic administration. The choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as Al Gore's running mate (front page, Aug. 8) is in large measure due to Mr. Lieberman's reputation as a conscience of the Senate, a reputation that will serve as an antidote to the sullied reputation of the present Democratic administration.
 Your statement (front page, Aug. 8) that aides to Vice President Al Gore said Joseph I. Lieberman ''brought a sense of moral rectitude to the ticket'' begs an important question: Your statement (front page, Aug. 8) that aides to Vice President Al Gore said Joseph I. Lieberman ''brought a sense of moral rectitude to the ticket'' begs an important question: Just as Dick Cheney can't make George W. Bush any more experienced to be president, Senator Lieberman can't make Al Gore any more moral. The presidential candidates are experienced or moral, as the case may be, or they aren't, and that's what the American people will decide.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate, is perceived as business-friendly Democrat on wide array of issues; his stands could help ticket in its fund-raising and in reassuring corporate leaders nervous about Gore's environmental views; graphs (M) At a Democratic fund-raiser last month at the Upper West Side duplex apartment of the singer Paul Simon, Vice President Al Gore was introduced by Connecticut's senators, Christopher J. Dodd and Joseph I. Lieberman. After some preliminary remarks about the strength of the economy and the old ideas of Republicans, Mr. Gore began to bash big oil and big insurance companies, a staple nowadays of his stump speech. At a Democratic fund-raiser last month at the Upper West Side duplex apartment of the singer Paul Simon, Vice President Al Gore was introduced by Connecticut's senators, Christopher J. Dodd and Joseph I. Lieberman. After some preliminary remarks about the strength of the economy and the old ideas of Republicans, Mr. Gore began to bash big oil and big insurance companies, a staple nowadays of his stump speech. The moment Mr. Gore uttered the words ''insurance companies,'' several of the people in Mr. Simon's living room snickered loudly. Insurance is to Connecticut what oil is to Oklahoma, what automobiles are to Michigan, what tobacco is to Kentucky. And Mr. Lieberman has been a staunch ally of the industry. Indeed, on a broad array of issues, Mr. Lieberman is perceived as a business-friendly Democrat. On some issues, including those that affect the insurance industry, he has been much more of a business ally than Mr. Gore. This could help the Democratic ticket in its fund-raising and in reassuring corporate leaders who are nervous about Mr. Gore's environmental views. For example, Mr. Lieberman is one of a handful of Democrats who support legislation to limit the amount of damages that can be collected from lawsuits. Such legislation has been at the top of corporate America's Washington wish list for more than a decade. Insurance companies have led the battle in favor it. Trial lawyers, among the Democratic Party's biggest contributors, have led the fight against the limits on damages. Mr. Lieberman has always been on the side of the insurance business. Mr. Gore has always been with the lawyers. Mr. Lieberman has been an ally of other companies that Mr. Gore has blasted in recent speeches, including  pharmaceutical companies. Several,  including the Bayer Corporation, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and Pfizer Inc., have operations in Connecticut. In 1997, when the Senate was considering legislation to reauthorize the Food and Drug Administration, Mr. Lieberman was among the few Democrats who voted on the side of the drug industry on important amendments. But as Democrats go, Mr. Lieberman has been quite friendly to business generally, something that could reassure corporate interests that have been tepid about Mr. Gore. Frank Coleman, a spokesman for the United States Chamber of Commerce, said that in his two terms in the Senate, Mr. Lieberman had voted on the side of business interests more than almost any other Democrat. Mr. Lieberman is a vigorous supporter of international trade, a position similar to Mr. Gore's but different from many Democrats, and he is one of the few Democrats in the Senate who favors a reduction in the capital gains tax. In part for his role in the options fight, the American Electronic Association, a trade group of technology companies, named Mr. Lieberman to the ''high-tech legislative hall of fame.'' Mr. Gore considers the high-tech community an important constituency and has held many fund-raising events and meetings with its executives.
 Does anyone ask the ''born again''  George W. Bush whether he will be able to function as president on Sundays? Why is a religious Jew asked about his capabilities and a devout Christian is not? Despite the attempt to paint Senator Lieberman as a slave to orthodoxy, aren't Mr. Bush and the Republican right more politically wedded to Scripture?
 Determined to transform a potential liability into a defining asset, Vice President Al Gore today formally introduced Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his Democratic running mate and portrayed his selection of Mr. Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, as a measure of his devotion to tolerance and his willingness to break barriers. In his remarks to thousands of supporters at War Memorial Plaza here, Mr. Gore compared his selection of Mr. Lieberman to his party's choice of John F. Kennedy as the first Roman Catholic presidential nominee 40 years ago. Determined to transform a potential liability into a defining asset, Vice President Al Gore today formally introduced Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his Democratic running mate and portrayed his selection of Mr. Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, as a measure of his devotion to tolerance and his willingness to break barriers. In his remarks to thousands of supporters at War Memorial Plaza here, Mr. Gore compared his selection of Mr. Lieberman to his party's choice of John F. Kennedy as the first Roman Catholic presidential nominee 40 years ago. ''When we nominate Joe Lieberman for vice president, we will make history again,'' Mr. Gore said. After word of Mr. Lieberman's selection leaked out on Monday, campaign aides and Democratic leaders made it clear that Mr. Gore had selected him despite his religion and any possible anti-Semitic backlash. Today's event was remarkable for the forthrightness with which Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman and their wives addressed Mr. Lieberman's Jewishness as a topic not to avoid, but to celebrate. Campaign aides even volunteered that the Gores and Liebermans shared a meal on Monday night that had been prepared by a kosher caterer. The intended message was that Mr. Gore, who has been characterized as an exceedingly tentative politician, had acted boldly in making the most important decision of his candidacy. ''Let's be very clear about this,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''It isn't me, Joe Lieberman, who deserves credit and the congratulations for taking a bold step. It is Al Gore who broke this barrier in American history. And you know what it shows? It shows Al's faith in the tolerance of this diverse nation in the basic fairness of the American people.'' Despite sweltering 97-degree heat that left Mr. Gore's drenched shirt stuck to his back (Mr. Lieberman wore an undershirt), the Democratic team got exactly the images of family and rectitude that it wanted out of today's event. Mr. Lieberman, who Democrats hope will help separate Mr. Gore from President Clinton's moral lapses, attested to Mr. Gore's devotion to his wife and children. Tipper Gore spoke warmly of Mr. Lieberman's wife, Hadassah, and the two candidates, having removed their jackets, exchanged a mighty hug after Mr. Gore introduced his running mate. Mr. Lieberman, clearly having the time of his life, smiled giddily and pumped his fists as the crowd chanted, ''Joe, Joe, Joe.'' Mr. Lieberman, who spoke for 20 minutes, described the last 24 hours as ''a magical mystery tour.'' In his prayer, he thanked God for ''bringing me to this extraordinary moment in my life'' and thanked Mr. Gore ''for making this miracle possible for me and breaking this barrier for the rest of America forever.'' Before and after today's event, Mr. Lieberman, 58, spent time meeting campaign aides, receiving briefings on Mr. Gore's positions, working on the speech that he will deliver next week at the Democratic convention in Los Angeles and preparing for a multistate campaign swing that begins on Wednesday with a visit to Mr. Gore's hometown, Carthage, Tenn., and then to Stamford, Conn. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, said in a statement today that he respected Mr. Lieberman ''for his convictions, his strong faith and his record on Social Security, missile defense and reforming our public schools.'' Those were pointed references to positions taken by Mr. Lieberman -- expressing interest in allowing workers to invest part of their payroll taxes in the markets, backing a missile defense system and supporting pilot programs allowing parents to use federal vouchers to pay private school tuition -- that are opposed by Mr. Gore. ''This selection,'' Mr. Bush said, ''now presents the vice president with an interesting test of whether he will continue attacking positions his running mate shares.'' Gore officials today distributed quotations and writings by Mr. Lieberman, including an unpublished article written in June, suggesting that he had moved away from his support for the partial privatization of Social Security because it posed unacceptable risks for retirees. Mr. Lieberman used his speech today to shoot down the Bush campaign's suggestion that he had more in common with Mr. Bush than with Mr. Gore. ''With all due respect,'' he said, ''I think that's like saying that the veterinarian and the taxidermist are in the same business because either way you get your dog back.'' In the interview on CNN, Mr. Lieberman said that there were issues where he did not fully agree with Mr. Gore and that he would feel obligated to discuss those differences privately. But he said, ''when President Gore decides, Vice President Lieberman is with him 100 percent.'' For his part, Mr. Gore, 52, took pains to emphasize the positions on which he and Mr. Lieberman agreed. ''He believes, as I do,'' Mr. Gore said, ''that every family has a right to clean air and clean water. He believes, as I do, in that the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof.'' Neither Mr. Gore nor Mr. Lieberman mentioned President Clinton, though Mr. Lieberman said the Democratic ticket would ''help renew the moral center of this nation.'' In an interview with Mr. Gore on Monday, parts of which were broadcast today, the NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw read portions of a speech in September 1998 in which Mr. Lieberman labeled Mr. Clinton's behavior inappropriate, immoral and harmful. Mr. Brokaw then asked Mr. Gore whether he agreed with Mr. Lieberman ''when he said that.'' ''I did,'' Mr. Gore responded, ''and said so at the time, and I think most Americans agreed with that. I think that most Americans want to talk about the future of our country and want to focus on the choices that we have to make in this election and I think honestly, Tom, that most people are ready to move on.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore's choice of Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Jew, as running mate has spurred barrage of anti-Semitic comments in online chat rooms and on Internet message boards, leading America Online and some other online services to star deleting offensive postings; AOL officials say they will suspend or cancel accounts of those who violate AOL's rules against hate speech, vulgar language or harassment; Anti-Defamation League reports spike in anti-Semitic remarks on Internet (M)
 Re ''Lieberman Will Run With Gore; First Jew on a Major U.S. Ticket'' (front page, Aug. 8): Re ''Lieberman Will Run With Gore; First Jew on a Major U.S. Ticket'' (front page, Aug. 8):
 Pres Clinton has maintained close friendship with Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Vice Pres Al Gore's new running mate, despite Lieberman's early and sharp public rebuke of Clinton and his affair with Monica S Lewinsky; worked for Lieberman as campaign aide while attending law school and later worked with him to bring Democratic Party back to political center; photo (M) ''A decade ago, there were only a few political leaders in America who thought this transformation was possible, and Bill Clinton, Joe Lieberman and Al Gore were in on it from the beginning,'' said Bruce Reed, Mr. Clinton's domestic policy adviser. ''And that forged a bond that is much larger than any issue of the moment.''
 Just as Dick Cheney brought George W. Bush gravitas in foreign policy, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman will bring Al Gore ethical gravitas (front page, Aug. 8). Just as Dick Cheney brought George W. Bush gravitas in foreign policy, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman will bring Al Gore ethical gravitas (front page, Aug. 8). But I wonder how this choice, an obvious effort by Mr. Gore to distance himself from the Clinton legacy and his own shadow of campaign corruption, will do anything more than reinforce those very connections. It seems as if Mr. Gore, by selecting the senator from Connecticut as his running mate, has in effect admitted that Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney were correct in pointing out his vulnerabilities. By admitting his primary weakness and by choosing Mr. Lieberman to alleviate that weakness, Mr. Gore has not only inexorably linked himself to his questionable past but has also joined Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney in making it the principal issue.
 Condoleezza Rice, chief foreign policy adviser to the Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, said the plan to equip and train West African troops was acceptable as long as it was enacted as currently described to Congress.
 Impact on presidential races of choice of running mates discussed in light of Vice Pres Al Gore's selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman; such choices generally produce transient bounce in polls, but have little lasting impact; most of debate about choice focuses on candidate's ability to boost ticket, not candidate's ability to serve as president, even though many vice presidents become or run for president; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate on Monday, the frenzy of speculation that preceded it and the outpouring of analysis that has followed it raise a number of insistent questions. Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate on Monday, the frenzy of speculation that preceded it and the outpouring of analysis that has followed it raise a number of insistent questions. The candidate making the choice usually gets an uptick in the polls after it becomes known. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas benefited from the customary bounce after he chose Dick Cheney, and Mr. Gore closed the gap with Mr. Bush after choosing Mr. Lieberman, at least according to an overnight USA Today/CNN/Gallup survey. That is not to say, of course, that selecting a running mate has no meaning. Since World War II, five vice presidents have moved into the Oval Office -- Harry S. Truman, Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and George Bush. Two others have been nominated for president, only to lose in November -- Hubert H. Humphrey and Walter F. Mondale. George Bush's choice of Dan Quayle in 1988, viewed in hindsight by most politicians as a major gaffe, did no overwhelming harm to the Republican cause. But exit polls nonetheless suggested that Mr. Quayle was a distinct liability, especially when compared with the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, Lloyd M. Bentsen. He may have cost the Republicans as much as four percentage points, which could have proved decisive in a closer race. The Kennedy-Johnson ticket, like the pairing of Adlai E. Stevenson and Estes Kefauver on the unsuccessful 1956 Democratic ticket, was an effort to provide not only geographical balance but also ideological balance. In choosing Mr. Quayle, Mr. Bush sought something else: generational balance. But those modes of selection have gone out of style in more recent elections. Warren Christopher, the former secretary of state, who conducted the vice-presidential searches for Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, said in an interview earlier this summer that the Clinton choice put a new emphasis on the personal relationship between the candidates. President Clinton chose Mr. Gore, a man from the same part of the country as he -- indeed, from an adjacent state -- and from the same part of the ideological spectrum. This year, two candidates from states with relatively few electoral votes were chosen -- Mr. Cheney from Wyoming and Mr. Lieberman from Connecticut -- and both of them are close ideological fits with the men with whom they are running. Both provided a kind of inoculation. Mr. Cheney, well seasoned in government, lent the inexperienced Governor Bush some needed weight. Mr. Lieberman, a politician known for his independence and for his criticism of Mr. Clinton's sexual peccadilloes, lent Mr. Gore some cover from those who think he has marched in lock step with Mr. Clinton, regardless of the issues. ''People suspect vice presidents,'' Mr. Light said. ''Remember Hubert? He was seen as Johnson's captive until he showed his mettle in the speech in Salt Lake City where he broke free on Vietnam. It came too late to save him. Well, I think that Lieberman could be Gore's Salt Lake City, but earlier.''
 Soon after his election on July 2, Mr. Fox announced plans to reorganize the justice system to resemble United States agencies. At the same time, he announced plans to lobby Washington to end the drug-certification program. That will be among the topics to be discussed this month when Mr. Fox travels to the United States to meet President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush.
 The growing-up issue survived the Bradley campaign. Karenna Gore Schiff, a visible spokeswoman for her father, has made her trademark a call to her peers to surrender their ''ironic detachment,'' the emblematic adolescent attitude, and dare to get passionate about presidential politics. Worldly wise indifference can be fun for a while, but no one knows better than a recent Harvard graduate, like Ms. Gore, that it's kid stuff. George W. Bush has defused questions about his own maturity by appearing front and center in the campaign for national adulthood. His acceptance speech at the Republican  Convention took over Mr. Bradley's theme wholesale. Governor Bush, who by several accounts finished his adolescence some 20 years after many of his peers, couched his ''prosperity with a purpose'' theme in an exhortation to his generation to prove itself, to ''reclaim some essential values, to show we have grown up before we grew old.'' His generation ''tested limits'' in its youth, he said, but is now coming to ''a responsibility era.'' That phrase animated the final minutes of Mr. Bush's speech and captured his idea that individuals, religious organizations, corporations and presidents must temper their appetites and self-interest with a sense of duty to children, neighbors, the needy, the nation, the natural world. Everyone must begin acting like a grown-up. Yesterday, Mr. Gore seemed to answer Mr. Bush's challenge by naming a running mate who is more associated with positions of moral responsibility than almost any other politician today. In fact, if there has been a criticism of Senator Joseph Lieberman this week, it is that he becomes sanctimonious about higher purposes. Yet there is a risk for candidates in too loudly enunciating the politics of adulthood. Personal responsibility is as desirable in citizens and leaders as in friends and family. But the main work of politics is not to produce virtue, and personal virtue does not of itself produce good politics. Saying that corporations must be ''responsible to leave the air and waters clean,'' as Mr. Bush did in his acceptance speech, is a reason to pass strong and efficient environmental laws, not a substitute for them.
 ''It's an absurd decision based on a falsehood,'' said Senator Jorge Martinez Bush, a conservative ally of the former dictator. ''This is a judicial fiction that will freeze the relationship between the civilian leadership and the military.''
