 Tonight we focus on education, the keystone to it all. Governor Bush has rightly made children and education the centerpiece of his campaign for president. . . . Every child deserves and must receive a quality education. Because when you give a quality education to a child who believes in himself or herself then even with the bleakest beginning in life that child can make it. And once that child makes it and gets out into the work place and is earning a decent living, you have broken the cycle of poverty and failure for that family forever. Education is the key to breaking that cycle of poverty and failure. Governor Bush has shown in Texas in just a few short years what can be done for education. As governor, he ended social promotions for kids, he increased state funding by $8 billion, he put new text books in every school in the state of Texas, he strengthened standardized testing in all Texas public schools, he insisted on teacher competency and he expanded the charter school movement. Seventeen thousand Texas kids are now in charter school. Seventy-eight percent of those kids are minorities. Their parents had a choice and they decided what was best for their children. And the results, the results in Texas have been dramatic. . . . He hasn't stopped there. To ensure a diverse college population with the loss of affirmative action, Governor Bush has guaranteed acceptance at public universities for the top 10 percent of every high school graduating class in the state. . . . Governor Bush now offers the leadership that he has demonstrated in Texas to the nation. In pursuing educational reform as well as in all other parts of his agenda for Texas, Governor Bush as reached out to all Texans -- white, black, Latino, Asian, Native American. He has been successful in bringing more and more minorities into the tent by responding to their deepest needs. Some call it compassionate conservatism, to me it's just caring about people. Recently, Governor Bush addressed the annual meeting of the N.A.A.C.P. He spoke to the delegates about his plans for housing and health and educational programs to help all Americans. He also spoke the truth to the delegates when he said that the party of Lincoln has not always carried the mantle of Lincoln. I talked with him again today and I know that with all his heart, Governor Bush welcomes the challenge. He wants the Republican party to wear that mantle again. Good for America, that must be the measure for all that we do. I believe that's the measure that Governor Bush will use to guide his actions as president. Whether it's economic policy or military strategy or seeing what we can do to make our American family more inclusive, he will always try to do that which is good and right for America.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on Republican National Convention in Philadelphia says that in producing convention that looks like America, George W Bush has manufactured one that looks nothing like his party (M) In producing a convention that looks like America, George W. Bush has manufactured one that looks nothing whatsoever like his party. It's going to be hard to top the woman who ''won the Miss America pageant with an insulin pump under her evening gown.'' In their drive to refashion themselves into non-threatening winners, Republicans are laying waste to anything that's left of the English language as a meaningful political tool. As a public speaker, Mr. Bush is naturally incoherent, and his genius is his ability to sound both sincere and indecipherable. ''If you don't know what you're supposed to know, we'll make sure you do early before it's too late,'' he said the other day, discussing education policy in Kentucky. He's still out campaigning in the heartland, making his way slowly, slowly toward Philadelphia. The crowds are enthusiastic, and the message is invariable: If you breathe, here's your man. There are still a few people worried about John McCain's prime-time moment tonight. Mr. McCain has fallen in the tank for the Bush campaign so often over the last few days that his suit is shrinking. But what would happen if his evil spirit took over and he launched into a bout of truth-telling about the relationship between the Republican Party and big money?
 Hillary Rodham Clinton, as Republican convention opens with appeals to broad range of voters, warns voters not to be deceived by what she describes as 'well-scripted show' intended to conceal party's extremist record; Clinton, speaking at National Urban League's annual convention in Manhattan, criticizes conservative ideals of Gov George Bush and his running mate Dick Cheney and alludes to link between her opponent, Repr Rick A Lazio, to policies favored by top of Republican ticket; photo (M) Speaking at the National Urban League's annual convention yesterday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, Mrs. Clinton mocked Gov. George W. Bush's slogan of ''compassionate conservatism'' and used especially caustic language to criticize the Republicans for trying, in her view, to promote ''political amnesia.'' She also alluded to her opponent's connections to the policies favored at the top of the ticket. Speaking at the National Urban League's annual convention yesterday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, Mrs. Clinton mocked Gov. George W. Bush's slogan of ''compassionate conservatism'' and used especially caustic language to criticize the Republicans for trying, in her view, to promote ''political amnesia.'' She also alluded to her opponent's connections to the policies favored at the top of the ticket. She reminded her audience of some items from the Republican record, hammering at the words and deeds of both Mr. Bush and his vice-presidential choice, Dick Cheney, and attacking their plans to keep the convention free of dissent. (Republican leaders, including Mr. Bush, have said they would not spend time criticizing Mrs. Clinton, a frequent target of some of the party's  voices.) She repeatedly referred to Mr. Cheney as Congressman Cheney and pointed to his voting record as a member of Congress in the 1980's. No less than three times in a 30-minute speech, she noted Mr. Cheney's 1986 vote against a resolution urging freedom for Nelson Mandela, who was then in a South African prison. She reminded the audience of Mr. Bush's visit to Bob Jones University, the South Carolina campus that at the time banned interracial dating. She told listeners that Mr. Bush had named Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas as model justices on the Supreme Court. ''They speak in these soothing tones about compassion and harmony and inclusion,'' she said. ''Governor Bush and Congressman Cheney want to present an appealing package and it is, I have to say, a brilliant marketing strategy. They don't want us to open that package. Inside, you know what we'll find? We'll find Republican policies well to the right of the Republican ticket of 1996.''
 As he makes his way to Philadelphia, Gov. George W. Bush has pointedly invoked President Clinton and the Monica Lewinsky scandal. In speech after speech on his ''Renewing America's Purpose'' tour, he has ended with a reference to upholding ''the honor and integrity of the office'' of the presidency -- and has gotten his biggest applause. Polls show that while Americans are content with the economy, they are concerned about values; the Bush campaign hopes to capitalize on that discontent.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's list of potential vice presidential running mates is reportedly narrowing (S) Vice President Al Gore's list of running mate possibilities seems to be shrinking, based on playful sign language from his wife today during a beach stroll in North Carolina. As Mr. Gore, his wife, Tipper, and their daughters Karenna and Sarah  walked along the surf on Figure Eight Island for a photo opportunity, reporters asked whether Mr. Gore had narrowed the field and how his convention speech was coming. Mrs. Gore suggested in a gesture that the field was narrowing, holding her hands about two feet apart, closing up the space then expanding it again. Vice President Al Gore's list of running mate possibilities seems to be shrinking, based on playful sign language from his wife today during a beach stroll in North Carolina. As Mr. Gore, his wife, Tipper, and their daughters Karenna and Sarah  walked along the surf on Figure Eight Island for a photo opportunity, reporters asked whether Mr. Gore had narrowed the field and how his convention speech was coming. Mrs. Gore suggested in a gesture that the field was narrowing, holding her hands about two feet apart, closing up the space then expanding it again. Democrats close to the campaign also suggested that Mr. Gore was getting closer to a final decision.
 Editorial says Gov George Bush's focus on education as signature issue at Republican National Convention in Philadelphia is wise choice in terms of giving convention softer and more inclusive feel, but also illuminates its central paradox; says same delegates who cheered Bush's vision of providing education especially for poor and disadvantaged, also ratified platform that defines narrower, less generous world in which federal government has virtually no role to play in shaping country's educational future (M) The first of four theme nights at the Republican Party's meticulously planned national convention focused on what has become George W. Bush's signature issue -- education, particularly education for young, poor children. In terms of giving this convention a softer and more inclusive feel, this was a wise choice. Yet it also illuminated the central paradox of a conclave marking Mr. Bush's emergence as the party's trend-setter. On the one hand, the vast convention hall was positively awash in soaring language and inspiring individual success stories designed to highlight Mr. Bush's signature promise that no child, no matter how disadvantaged, would be left behind. On the other hand, the same delegates who cheered this vision in prime time had earlier ratified a platform that defines a narrower, less generous world in which the federal government has virtually no role to play in shaping the country's educational future. This paradox revolves around a fundamental question about Mr. Bush's candidacy, a question he can go a long way toward answering in his acceptance speech Thursday night. Does his noble rhetoric about compassionate conservatism spring from a genuine determination to lead his party toward a more activist role in education, or is it just empty salesmanship? Based on the numbers, the rank-and-file seems willing to be led. In a New York Times survey of delegates to this convention, 26 percent ranked education the No. 1 issue in their states, whereas four years ago the economy was No. 1 for the same number and education received a measly 2 percent. Yet it was not clear whether they were prepared to spend more money on the problem than their leaders in Congress, who for the last eight years have often tried to cut education spending. The first of four theme nights at the Republican Party's meticulously planned national convention focused on what has become George W. Bush's signature issue -- education, particularly education for young, poor children. In terms of giving this convention a softer and more inclusive feel, this was a wise choice. Yet it also illuminated the central paradox of a conclave marking Mr. Bush's emergence as the party's trend-setter. On the one hand, the vast convention hall was positively awash in soaring language and inspiring individual success stories designed to highlight Mr. Bush's signature promise that no child, no matter how disadvantaged, would be left behind. On the other hand, the same delegates who cheered this vision in prime time had earlier ratified a platform that defines a narrower, less generous world in which the federal government has virtually no role to play in shaping the country's educational future. This paradox revolves around a fundamental question about Mr. Bush's candidacy, a question he can go a long way toward answering in his acceptance speech Thursday night. Does his noble rhetoric about compassionate conservatism spring from a genuine determination to lead his party toward a more activist role in education, or is it just empty salesmanship? Based on the numbers, the rank-and-file seems willing to be led. In a New York Times survey of delegates to this convention, 26 percent ranked education the No. 1 issue in their states, whereas four years ago the economy was No. 1 for the same number and education received a measly 2 percent. Yet it was not clear whether they were prepared to spend more money on the problem than their leaders in Congress, who for the last eight years have often tried to cut education spending. True to Mr. Bush's desire to convey optimism on even the most difficult issues, last night's menu of speeches and visuals was relentlessly upbeat and demographically inclusive -- a fourth-grade teacher from North Carolina discussing math and science, a video from a largely Hispanic school in El Paso, brief testimonials to the virtues of parental involvement and after-school enrichment, and a speech by his wife, Laura, about her experience as a teacher and their joint commitment to education. The evening was topped off by an inspirational testimonial to racial fairness and educational opportunity from probably the most popular Republican in America, Gen. Colin Powell. The reality of the platform was quite different. At Governor Bush's insistence, the committee dropped a harsh and longstanding provision calling for the abolition of the Department of Education. The document also quoted lofty pledges that under a Bush presidency no American child would be ''segregated by low expectations, imprisoned by illiteracy, abandoned to frustration and the darkness of self-doubt.'' Yet when the document turned to substance, it pointed in a direction opposite to that proclaimed in Mr. Bush's oratory. The platform insisted that ''the role of the federal government must be progressively limited as we return control to parents, teachers and local school boards.'' The  platform then goes on to extol remedies like those celebrated in last night's displays -- charter schools, parental involvement and the like -- while writing off Title I, the main federal program aimed at disadvantaged children, as a $120 billion failure. Governor Bush is the only person in Philadelphia who can fix this disconnect. This is a nation in which a lot of children are in trouble -- 11 million with no health insurance and nearly 13 million, one in five, living in poverty, untouched by the present prosperity. Head Start could handle a million more eligible children with more generous financing. It may be too much to expect Mr. Bush to redesign his proposed $1.3 trillion in tax cuts in order to pay for these and similarly worthy ventures. But even those who no longer doubt the sincerity of his belief that no child should be left behind have a perfect right to ask him how he means to balance the scales.
 Mr. Cheney, a former secretary of defense, spent most of the day working on the speech he is scheduled to give on Wednesday night. Aides said he was writing it himself, but would not discuss the themes. Mr. Cheney returned to the convention hall tonight to hear speeches from Gen. Colin L. Powell, his close friend and a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Laura Bush, the wife of Gov. George W. Bush. In a brief interview with CNN on the convention floor, Mr. Cheney defended his conservative voting record in Congress, which had been criticized repeatedly by Vice President Al Gore's campaign in the last week. ''I don't think it has much impact,'' said Mr. Cheney, who appeared on all five Sunday news programs to counter Democratic charges that his votes against the Head Start education program, a ban on armor-piercing bullets and some environmental protection measures were the mark of an extremist.
 G.O.P. Opens Convention On a Theme of Moderation  The Republican National Convention approved a platform intended both to reassure the party's conservative base and signal to the broader electorate that the party had been transformed by Gov. George W. Bush's bid for the center. Democrats and their allies quickly seized on the most conservative provisions, like the call for a ban on abortion, as evidence that little had changed. Colin L. Powell challenged delegates to rally behind Mr. Bush with a genuine commitment to minorities. The Bush team is giving the House campaign effort no prime-time exposure, although many Republicans worry more about losing the House than winning the presidency. Still, no one from the party's Congressional wing was publicly complaining.
 The actions of Vice President Al Gore came under review because he and his ''reinventing government'' operation had suggested ways for the immigration agency to decrease the citizenship backlog. Jim Kennedy, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said the report backs what the vice president and the White House have been saying about the naturalization program all along, ''namely that it was an effort designed to reduce the backlog of citizenship applications and not to further any inappropriate political end.'' In written answers to questions from the inspector general, Mr. Gore denied any political motive to the effort to reduce the backlog. But the report makes it clear that the Clinton administration took an interest in the program's progress. At least one White House aide, Douglas Farbrother, who was assigned to work on Mr. Gore's reinventing government team, reported to the inspector general that he was told by Elaine Karmack, Mr. Gore's senior policy adviser, that the citizenship program was linked to the upcoming election. Mr. Farbrother's own electronic mail messages to Mr. Gore and Ms. Karmack show that he was keenly aware of the link as he criticized the agency for falling down on the job of producing ''a million new citizens before election day.'' Mr. Clinton then asked Mr. Gore to have the reinventing government program ''take a look'' at the backlog, Mr. Farbrother said Ms. Karmack told him.
 Alfred Gutmann letter comments on subheadline of July 30 front-page article on Gov George W Bush's planned address to Republican National Convention The subheadline on your July 30 front-page article ''Bush, in Address, Will Make Appeal Beyond the G.O.P.'' says it all: ''Fosters Harmony Theme; Uses 'Iron-Fist Rule' to Limit the Speakers and Present an Upbeat Message.'' Is that the way George W. Bush will govern the country if he is elected? The subheadline on your July 30 front-page article ''Bush, in Address, Will Make Appeal Beyond the G.O.P.'' says it all: ''Fosters Harmony Theme; Uses 'Iron-Fist Rule' to Limit the Speakers and Present an Upbeat Message.'' Is that the way George W. Bush will govern the country if he is elected?
 Marion Goldin letter says roles fathers have played in lives of Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore should be celebrated as expression of family values (July 28 Editorial Observer) I continue to be surprised at how many observers of this presidential race put the father-son relationships of the Bushes and the Gores in the negative column. Isn't this something that should rank high on the list of positives? Shouldn't we be encouraging close and continuing ties between father and son? Should George W. Bush and Al Gore be deprived of the knowledge gained by the successes and failures of their parents' decades of public service? As a country we have seen the cost and consequences of absentee fathers and nonexistent role models for our children. Let us celebrate the roles their fathers have played in the lives of George W. Bush and Al Gore. If this isn't what family values are all about, what is?
 Mr. Captan said Mr. Taylor was working for peace in Sierra Leone. In an interview, he accused Mr. Holbrooke of making accusations against Mr. Taylor to advance his campaign to become secretary of state if Vice President Al Gore wins the presidency.
 Governor Bush understands the needs of children in foster care. His achievements in Texas demonstrate his commitment to real, lasting change. Governor Bush knows what my father who adopted me, Joe Craig, knew. Children deserve more than promises, more than programs. Every child should grow up in a permanent, loving family. Gov. George W. Bush knows the great contribution that immigrants made to America and he appreciates that America's richness comes from its diverse heritage, individual initiative, the bonds of family and community and God's grace. Well, as president, George W. Bush will change the character of the I.N.S. He will make America more welcoming to immigrants. He will restructure the I.N.S., splitting it into two agencies, one for service and one for enforcement, expediting paperwork and protecting our borders. Literacy and the Bush family are practically synonymous. Barbara Bush for her exceptional contributions is known as the first lady of literacy. Governor George W. Bush implemented a program that dramatically improved reading scores for school children in Texas. Laura Bush, an educator in her own right, has spearheaded a successful statewide family literacy initiative in Texas. Even Millie, the Bush family dog, rose to literary stardom. . . . As president, George W. Bush will launch Reading First, a $5 billion initiative aimed at conquering illiteracy among disadvantaged children and teaching every child to read at grade level by third grade.
 Fred Polvere letter says Gov George W Bush's inability to prevail against more conservative Republicans on education agenda reflects poorly on his leadership abilities (July 29 article) The Republican Party's 2000 platform states that the role of the federal government in education ''must be progressively limited'' (news article, July 29). This is at odds with the agenda put forth by Gov. George W. Bush, the party's presidential candidate. The Republican Party's 2000 platform states that the role of the federal government in education ''must be progressively limited'' (news article, July 29). This is at odds with the agenda put forth by Gov. George W. Bush, the party's presidential candidate. I wonder how Governor Bush will be able to lead a divided Congress and a diverse country when he cannot seem to prevail against the more conservative elements in his own party.
 George W. Bush, the man they have come here to nominate, told The National Journal the other day that conventions have become an anachronism. But that, he insisted, does not -- should not -- mean they are on the way out. ''The convention provides a system of rewards for hardworking, grass-roots people who end up being delegates,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I view it as an opportunity for these people to go back home, energized to help me get elected.'' Mr. Bush also said that the convention has become ''a place to showcase ideas more than in the past.'' Not exactly. To be precise, it has become a place to talk in muted terms about ideas that the nominee wishes to be heard. If there are abortion rights supporters at the podium this week, for example, they will talk about something else, thanks to what Mr. Bush calls his ''iron-fist'' control of the proceedings. But there will be no oratorical fire on the other side of the issue, either, and few attacks on the Democrats. That was the lesson that politicians drew from the contrasting conventions of 1992. The Republicans, nominating George Bush the elder, permitted the clergyman who delivered the opening-night invocation to compare abortion to the Holocaust and allowed Patrick J. Buchanan to issue a shrill call to arms for the ''religious war going on in our country for the soul of America.'' Nor will there be a surprise vice-presidential nominee. In 1956, Gov. Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois left the choice to the delegates at the Democratic convention, and a youngster named John F. Kennedy, then a senator from Massachusetts, though narrowly defeated by Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee, set himself up for 1960. Kennedy, in turn, stunned the country by choosing Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas as a running mate. And George Bush chose Dan Quayle, a senator from Indiana.
 Even though Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush rarely mentions Pres Clinton in recent stump speeches, and even though aides say convention will not be devoted to bashing Democrats, character issue centering on Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky remains subtle subtext of his march toward coronation as Republican presidential nominee at Republican National Convention in Philadelphia; polls show while Americans are content with economy, they are concerned about values and moral state of nation; Bush campaign hopes to capitalize on such discontent; photo (M) He rarely mentions President Clinton in his stump speeches these days, and his aides are constantly pointing out that the Republican convention will not be devoted to bashing the Democrats. But as Gov. George W. Bush marches toward his coronation in Philadelphia, it is clear that the president is not far from his mind. Even as he hits the high notes about family and faith, Mr. Bush's pointed subtext in his five-day, six-state ''Renewing America's Purpose'' tour is President Clinton and Monica S. Lewinsky. Today, as he does at the end of almost every speech, he raised his hand high and made his ritual pledge. He rarely mentions President Clinton in his stump speeches these days, and his aides are constantly pointing out that the Republican convention will not be devoted to bashing the Democrats. But as Gov. George W. Bush marches toward his coronation in Philadelphia, it is clear that the president is not far from his mind. Even as he hits the high notes about family and faith, Mr. Bush's pointed subtext in his five-day, six-state ''Renewing America's Purpose'' tour is President Clinton and Monica S. Lewinsky. Today, as he does at the end of almost every speech, he raised his hand high and made his ritual pledge. Republicans have been running against Mr. Clinton's character for years often to see their efforts boomerang. But Mr. Bush does it more subtly than some Republicans. And polls show that while Americans are content with the economy, they are concerned about values and the moral state of the nation, and the Bush campaign hopes to capitalize on that discontent. ''He talks about restoring the honor and integrity to the White House,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman. ''I think that's something that the American people talk with him about at almost every stop and he does talk about the need for that and I think that's something people are looking for in this election.'' Ms. Hughes took umbrage at the idea that the governor's words amounted to shots at Mr. Clinton. And she disavowed the warmup speakers at Mr. Bush's rally in Cincinnati on Sunday who struck the same anti-Clinton themes less subtly than Mr. Bush. A radio talk show host spoke about the ''filth and degradation of Clinton-Gore'' while the mayor of Blue Ash, Ohio, Jim Sumner, asked, ''Are you ready to have your daughter serve as an intern?'' Ms. Hughes said, ''Governor Bush hopes that the Republicans across the country will join with him in helping to raise our political discourse to a higher level.'' In his speech to the convention on Thursday night, she said, Mr. Bush ''will needle his opponents a little but he will treat them with respect. He will not engage in the kind of trash and burn, attack-style politics that we have become so sick of out of Washington.'' Her words illustrated a basic point and counterpoint of the campaign. While Democrats have gone on the attack against Dick Cheney and his record of votes in Congress, the Bush campaign responds with attacks against attacks, clearly hoping to reinforce the perception of Vice President Al Gore as running a negative campaign. The Gore campaign says the Republicans are counterattacking because they are ''wrong on the issues.'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore said, ''An informed voter is their worst nightmare.'' Ms. Hughes countered: ''Let's point out a vote where Dick Cheney voted to increase funding for Head Start by 16 percent. Al Gore voted no. Now, should we run an ad claiming Al Gore's against Head Start?''
 As they opened their four-day festival of benevolence in Philadelphia, Republicans of all stripes seemed convinced that Gov. George W. Bush's election was a sure thing in November. Yet the best possible reminder of the perils of optimism lay only a couple miles west of the First Union Center at an abandoned convention hall on the other side of the Schuylkill River. As they opened their four-day festival of benevolence in Philadelphia, Republicans of all stripes seemed convinced that Gov. George W. Bush's election was a sure thing in November. Yet the best possible reminder of the perils of optimism lay only a couple miles west of the First Union Center at an abandoned convention hall on the other side of the Schuylkill River. The substance also reflects how much, and how little, has changed in 52 years. Dewey's capture of the Republican nomination came at the height of the hegemony of the party's so-called liberal Eastern establishment. By the 1960's, control of the party shifted south, along with the Bush family. George Bush moved to Texas out of the shadow of his father, Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut, but he was always seen as a son of that establishment. Now Governor Bush, like his father, proclaims himself a man of the Sunbelt, but acts like an internationalist in the Dewey-Eisenhower tradition. The Truman style will be hard to replicate, however. Like Vice President Al Gore in this year's campaign, Truman bragged endlessly on how prosperous farmers and workers had become under the Democrats. But somehow it is hard to imagine Mr. Gore issuing Truman's salty warning to both that ''they are the most ungrateful people in the world if they pass the Democratic Party by this year.'' At the end of their sweltering convention, drenched and wilted Republicans left town convinced they had a winner but feeling somehow uninspired. Dewey, said the Nation magazine, was ''the nominee nobody loves.'' This year, judging from the reaction of delegates in Philadelphia, that is one thing that is strikingly different. But of course Governor Bush is beloved most of all because he looks like a sure winner. From the delegates' perspective, the presumptive nominee's strategy of staging a streamlined convention with plenty of uplifting talk and pictures of a more diverse Republican Party looks like a winner, too.
 Lester Goldstein letter expresses doubts about Gov George W Bush's ability to deal with critical long-term problems if he is elected president On reading ''How Bush Came to Tame His Inner Scamp'' (front page, July 29), I was troubled by the prospect of a president, should George W. Bush be elected, whose personal philosophy of the future seems to be encapsulated in his comment: ''I just don't worry about those things. I kind of figure life is going to work its way out somehow.'' On reading ''How Bush Came to Tame His Inner Scamp'' (front page, July 29), I was troubled by the prospect of a president, should George W. Bush be elected, whose personal philosophy of the future seems to be encapsulated in his comment: ''I just don't worry about those things. I kind of figure life is going to work its way out somehow.'' I fear for our future if such a cavalier attitude reflects how a President George W. Bush would deal with long-term problems like the human contribution to global warming, the international consequences of developing a nuclear missile shield, Social Security shortfalls, defects in our criminal justice system, and so on.
 Excerpts from address by Laura Bush, wife of Texas Gov George W Bush, to Republican National Convention (M) Following are excerpts from the speech by Laura Bush to the Republican National Convention last night, as recorded by The New York Times: Following are excerpts from the speech by Laura Bush to the Republican National Convention last night, as recorded by The New York Times: Growing up, I practiced teaching on my dolls. I'd line them up in rows for the day's lessons. Years later our daughters did the same thing. We used to joke that the Bush family had the best-educated dolls in America.
 Republican Repr Rick Lazio, delegate to Republican National Convention in Philadelphia who is running for New York Senate seat against Hillary Rodham Clinton, will be absent from convention on August 3, when delegates nominate Gov George W Bush for president; possible reasons behind planned absence discussed (M) On Thursday night, Republican delegates from across the nation will gather here to nominate George W. Bush as their candidate for president. But one particularly prominent Republican delegate from the state of New York has decided to skip the climactic night of his party's nominating convention. On Thursday night, Republican delegates from across the nation will gather here to nominate George W. Bush as their candidate for president. But one particularly prominent Republican delegate from the state of New York has decided to skip the climactic night of his party's nominating convention. Mr. Lazio's advisers said that he had decided to steer clear of Philadelphia because he believed that he could more profitably spend his time campaigning in New York. But Mr. Lazio's official campaign schedule for today lists not a single public campaign event -- and his aides were unable today to say precisely what he will be doing in New York on Thursday night when Mr. Bush is nominated in Philadelphia.
 When Mayor James announced his endorsement today, along with other Essex County leaders, including State Senator Richard Codey, it was clear that Mr. Torricelli would face a bitter and divisive primary. The state party chairman, Thomas Giblin, said he was grateful that Mr. Torricelli decided to withdraw rather than further fracture the party, and said Democrats could now focus on helping Al Gore win the state's presidential vote and electing Jon S. Corzine to the United States Senate.
 Republican National Convention in Philadelphia approves platform intended to reassure party's conservative base and signal to broader electorate that party has been transformed by Gov George W Bush's bid for center; platform incorporates Bush's policy proposals and language on set of issues at heart of his campaign and underscores his theme of compassionate conservatism; is hailed by platform committee chairman Gov Tommy G Thompson of Wisconsin for its positive and uplifting tone; its major planks discussed (M) The Republican National Convention today approved a platform intended to both reassure the party's conservative base and signal to the broader electorate that the party had been transformed by Gov. George W. Bush's bid for the center. Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, the chairman of the platform committee, hailed the document's ''positive, uplifting'' tone and described it to the delegates as a platform that ''every Republican can be proud of, and one that will carry George Bush to the White House.'' The Republican National Convention today approved a platform intended to both reassure the party's conservative base and signal to the broader electorate that the party had been transformed by Gov. George W. Bush's bid for the center. Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, the chairman of the platform committee, hailed the document's ''positive, uplifting'' tone and described it to the delegates as a platform that ''every Republican can be proud of, and one that will carry George Bush to the White House.'' ''We're going to use the platform like we're going to use George Bush's record in Texas and Dick Cheney's voting record -- to show the American people that this is still the same old Republican Party,'' said Jenny Backus, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee. The document approved today had been carefully managed by Mr. Bush's allies, and much of it bears his unmistakable mark. It incorporates his policy proposals, and his language, on a set of issues at the heart of his campaign, from education to tax cuts, from health care to immigration. In keeping with his  theme of ''compassionate conservatism,'' it declares that ''for every American, there must be a ladder of opportunity, and for those most in need, a safety net of care.'' Governor Thompson and other Bush allies worked hard over weeks of private and public meetings to ensure that the platform process was free of the divisiveness of prior years and did not distract from the upbeat message of the convention and the campaign. They chose to fight conservatives on some issues -- notably the governor's education plan -- that they felt were imperative to underscore the idea that Mr. Bush was ''a different kind of Republican.'' But they removed the abortion issue from contention early on, declaring that they did not want the plank to change, even though Mr. Bush says his personal position is less restrictive. As passed, the platform embraces Mr. Bush's call for ''bold reforms in education,'' including a strong federal role in more accountability and more school choice; for ''saving and strengthening Social Security'' by allowing some private investment of payroll taxes; for an array of tax cuts; and for a more inclusive tone on immigration. In sharp contrast to the platform of 1996, it does not call for the abolition of a single federal agency, and the partisan attacks are markedly diminished. Mr. Bush has noted that he would personally allow abortion in cases of rape, incest or danger to the life of a pregnant woman, and also says he does not support a litmus test for judicial appointments. But abortion rights groups say that by agreeing to the platform he in fact embraced a litmus test, and that this is a crucial indication of how he would make appointments to the Supreme Court. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, allowed himself some distance from the platform, particularly when responding to Democratic attacks. ''We're very pleased that the platform has departed substantially from earlier platforms, notably in the areas of education and immigration,'' he said, but added, ''Governor Bush is going to run on his record and his views, and it's on that ground that he'll make his stand.'' Mr. Bush differs as well with the platform's position on gays in the military; he supports the current ''don't ask, don't tell'' policy, while the platform declares that homosexuality is ''incompatible'' with military service. The platform also opposes counseling on contraceptives in school-based clinics, any recognition of ''special legal protection'' for homosexuals and any movement to recognize same-sex marriages. Former Representative Robert L. Livingston of Louisiana, now a lobbyist, described it as ''solidly right of center, a good, solid, reasonable platform that George W. Bush as nominee won't have to run away from.''
 The Mary Fisher speech had become a fixture at Republican conventions. She spoke passionately in 1992 and 1996 about living with H.I.V., and offered to do a repeat performance in Philadelphia. The response from the Bush campaign was, well, no direct response. The Mary Fisher speech had become a fixture at Republican conventions. She spoke passionately in 1992 and 1996 about living with H.I.V., and offered to do a repeat performance in Philadelphia. The response from the Bush campaign was, well, no direct response. But there's another difference. Ms. Fisher, whose father, Max, has given generously of his auto body fortune to the Republican Party, is white. Ms. Ware, who worked in the administration of President Bush, is black. ''I think it was important that it be an African-American,'' said Carl E. Schmid, a leading gay supporter of Governor Bush, citing the disease's demographics. Tim Fitzpatrick, a spokesman, said simply that Ms. Ware ''is reflective of Governor Bush's call for soldiers in the army of compassion.'' Ms. Ware did not return calls. Anyone who happened to be milling around the convention hall yesterday afternoon caught something unusual: Laura Bush, unvarnished and unpracticed. The wife of the Republican presidential candidate turned up unannounced on stage for a sound check and a run-through of her speech, with a crowd of Bush aides. And Mrs. Bush made the most of it. Aides offered advice about speaking to the cameras, but Mrs. Bush was confident. ''This will be great,'' she said, heading off stage. But Representative Jennifer Dunn of Washington, a member of the Republican House leadership and a deputy convention co-chair, was positively buoyant. She said George W. Bush was strong on issues that deal with women, citing his plans for Social Security reform as an example. ''We must look beyond the gauze and the haze and the happy promises and look at Bush's record in Texas,'' he said, his leather satchel leaking manifestos. ''He is not, despite what some voters think, a mainstream Republican. As a Republican, I personally feel I ought to let voters know.'' Mr. Rockefeller, a self-described ''mainstream Republican,'' contributed $2,000 to Al Gore's campaign last year.
 ''We hardly ever mention Clinton-Gore,'' Gov. Tommy B. Thompson of Wisconsin told MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell. ''We're talking about moving forward.'' ''We hardly ever mention Clinton-Gore,'' Gov. Tommy B. Thompson of Wisconsin told MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell. ''We're talking about moving forward.'' ''We're thrilled to be here and my husband and I are excited about the future of the party,'' Cindy McCain, wife of Gov. George W. Bush's chief primary opponent, told MSNBC. ABC had outfitted Ms. McCain with a video camera and was planning to regularly show portions of her ''video diary'' during the four-day gathering. Not surprisingly, much of the early footage featured her husband. Some networks decided that the relatively slow news day -- when the chief speakers were Laura Bush, the candidate's wife, and retired Gen. Colin L. Powell -- was a good time to hook up with individual delegates and follow them around. The Web site also offered a quiz, asking when the last time was a Republican ticket did not include a Bush or a Dole (1972) and when a woman first addressed a Republican convention (1920). A score of 9 out of 10 meant ''you should get a job running a political campaign.''
 Jeff Zucker, the executive producer of convention coverage for NBC News, wanted a live interview tonight from the First Union Center with one of the event's most sought-after guests: George P. Bush, the telegenic 23-year-old nephew of the Texas governor. But to the dismay of NBC officials, the Republicans turned down the request, and not because young Mr. Bush is camera-shy. No, Mr. Zucker contended, NBC was spurned because it was covering the proceedings in prime time tonight only on its cable channel, MSNBC, which garners substantially lower ratings than the broadcast network. Jeff Zucker, the executive producer of convention coverage for NBC News, wanted a live interview tonight from the First Union Center with one of the event's most sought-after guests: George P. Bush, the telegenic 23-year-old nephew of the Texas governor. But to the dismay of NBC officials, the Republicans turned down the request, and not because young Mr. Bush is camera-shy. No, Mr. Zucker contended, NBC was spurned because it was covering the proceedings in prime time tonight only on its cable channel, MSNBC, which garners substantially lower ratings than the broadcast network. That truism is reflected in the way the convention program is structured. Virtually all the major speeches this week, from those of Laura Bush and Gen. Colin L. Powell tonight and continuing with Senator John McCain and Elizabeth Dole on Tuesday, the vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, on Wednesday, and Gov. George W. Bush on Thursday, are to take place between 10 p.m. and 11 p.m. That just happens to be the hour each night that one or more of the over-the-air networks will be covering the Philadelphia proceedings live. Tonight, the Republicans got those eyeballs, at least on ABC, but not exactly the program they had concocted. Like clockwork, the preseason football game -- begun an hour early to accommodate the convention coverage -- ended a few minutes before 10 p.m., paving the way for Peter Jennings to introduce several minutes of highlights before seguing about a third of the way into a speech by Laura Bush. CBS broke into its ''48 Hours'' program early with an update and returned at 10:30 to cover the final half-hour. Viewers of ABC got a taste of what cable and PBS broadcast all night: an unusual showcase for multiculturalism. It was certainly the ''different'' sort of Republican evening the planners promised: videos of Gospel choirs and vignettes of inner-city school students, who were used at times to underline the Bush campaign's promises of a more inclusive kind of Republicanism and to reinvigorate education reform. Governor and Mrs. Bush -- the  former appearing by satellite from a classroom in Westerville, Ohio -- both spoke with backdrops consisting of children seated at desks. For Mrs. Bush's remarks, ABC even spliced in footage from a graduation ceremony in Crawford, Tex., that the Bushes had attended. Reporters were to fan out and report on the conservative bent of the delegates, and try to score interviews with more coveted Republican luminaries. (George P. is widely considered a significant ''get,'' as is former President Bush, who spoke exclusively to Maria Shriver on MSNBC about 10 p.m.) The Republicans seem unfazed about the lack of drama. Their big worry is to keep up the pace and make sure they exploit the television moment. On the convention floor today, Ed Gillespie, a Bush adviser who had been working on the convention for six weeks, was preoccupied with the endless logistics. Between cell phone calls placed to find one of the evening program's participants, he explained that the schedule was merely the most rational use of time.
 30 Republican House candidates address Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, with most seeking to tie themselves to Gov George W Bush and his policies; photos (M) Even though many Republicans worry more about losing the House than capturing the presidency, Gov. George W. Bush's team has given the House campaign effort no prime time for the week and indeed just half an hour of throw-away time at midday today. But nobody from the Congressional wing of the Republican Party could be found to complain that Mr. Bush was putting his election ahead of theirs. Even though many Republicans worry more about losing the House than capturing the presidency, Gov. George W. Bush's team has given the House campaign effort no prime time for the week and indeed just half an hour of throw-away time at midday today. But nobody from the Congressional wing of the Republican Party could be found to complain that Mr. Bush was putting his election ahead of theirs. Representative Thomas M. Davis III of Virginia, chairman of the National Republican Campaign Committee, said the un-prime time was just fine, even though the Republican majority, with a margin of just 13 seats, is not as good shape as the Bush candidacy appears to be. ''The governor is going to be our spokesman,'' Mr. Davis said, adding that for Republicans, ''Bush is a great brand name.'' Recalling his state's Kentucky Derby, Mr. McConnell valiantly tried to persuade the half-empty hall that there was more than a first-place bet on Mr. Bush on the board; there was  a trifecta, a wager in which the bettor picks the first three finishers. ''Winning a trifecta takes real skill,'' Mr. McConnell said. ''The true measure of victory in addition to George W. Bush winning the White House is keeping a Republican Senate and a Republican House.'' Most candidates sought to tie themselves to Mr. Bush, none more forcefully than Mr. Stenberg, who complained that his argument before the Supreme Court for his state's ban on a particular type of abortion need not have been unsuccessful. ''If I had one more conservative justice,'' he said, ''Nebraska's ban on partial-birth abortion would have been upheld. President George W. Bush can make that happen.''
 In truth, impeachment is forgotten but not gone. When George W. Bush refers to restoring ''honor and dignity'' to the White House, everyone knows that he is talking about the internship program. Republican congressmen have used the issue in fund-raising appeals to gingerly chosen conservative donors. And when pressed about it, Republicans involved declare their pride in having done what they believed was right, at great political cost.
 Two new television commercials released by Democratic Party chiding Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush on health care and environment appraised; photo (M) The Democratic Party released two new 15-second television commercials yesterday timed to the opening of the Republican National Convention that attack the Texas record of Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican's presumed presidential nominee, on health care and the environment. The Democratic Party released two new 15-second television commercials yesterday timed to the opening of the Republican National Convention that attack the Texas record of Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican's presumed presidential nominee, on health care and the environment. THE SCRIPT -- In one spot, the narrator reads: ''Tonight in Philadelphia, you'll hear a lot about 'leaving no child behind.' Meanwhile, back in Texas, George W. Bush opposed health coverage for 200,000 more children. The state ranked second to last in children with health insurance. Get the facts.'' In the other spot, the narrator reads: ''Tonight in Philadelphia, you won't hear a lot about 'the environment.' Maybe that's because back in Texas, George W. Bush appointed a chemical company lobbyist to enforce the environmental laws. Houston is now the smog capital of the U.S. Get the facts.'' ACCURACY -- On health care, it is true that Mr. Bush fought for a plan in 1999 that would have excluded 200,000 of the more than 400,000 children eligible for the federal Children's Health Insurance Program. But the Legislature insisted on the more expansive plan, and Mr. Bush signed the bill. It is also widely accepted that Texas has more uninsured children than any state other than Arizona. The Bush campaign contends that the number of uninsured children is increasing four times faster nationwide than in Texas. On the environment, Mr. Bush's first appointee to the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission was a former Monsanto executive, Ralph Marquez, who was also vice chairman of a chemical trade group that did lobbying. And according to preliminary statistics from the Environmental Protection Agency, Houston surpassed Los Angeles last year for having the most days that exceeded smog standards. The Bush campaign says it has significantly reduced industrial air pollution since 1995. SCORECARD -- Polls suggest Mr. Bush has been adept at reaching out to centrist swing voters on education and health care, traditionally strong issues for the Democrats. The two new advertisements are part of a broader effort to stop Mr. Bush's march toward the center by portraying Texas as suffering an array of social maladies and the governor as beholden to the rich and powerful.
 Condoleezza Rice  Bush foreign policy adviser Condoleezza Rice is quarterback of Gov. George W. Bush's foreign policy team, whose members call themselves the Vulcans. That name, taken from the god of metalworking in Roman mythology, also reflects Ms. Rice's hometown, Birmingham, Ala., where a statue of Vulcan overlooks the city. Of the foreign policy team, Ms. Rice is the closest to Mr. Bush. He has said he feels comfortable asking her the most basic questions. Ms. Rice, 45, joined the faculty of Stanford University in 1981 and later became the youngest person to be the university's provost as well as the first woman and first nonwhite to hold the job. Condoleezza Rice  Bush foreign policy adviser Condoleezza Rice is quarterback of Gov. George W. Bush's foreign policy team, whose members call themselves the Vulcans. That name, taken from the god of metalworking in Roman mythology, also reflects Ms. Rice's hometown, Birmingham, Ala., where a statue of Vulcan overlooks the city. Of the foreign policy team, Ms. Rice is the closest to Mr. Bush. He has said he feels comfortable asking her the most basic questions. Ms. Rice, 45, joined the faculty of Stanford University in 1981 and later became the youngest person to be the university's provost as well as the first woman and first nonwhite to hold the job. A thirst for politics and a knack for leadership have made Elizabeth Dole probably the most recognized woman in the Republican Party. Her appearance at the 1996 convention when she introduced her husband, Bob Dole, was widely praised. She had placed second to Gov. George W. Bush in many polls before dropping out of the presidential race this year. A native of Salisbury, N.C., she has a political science degree from Duke and a law degree from Harvard. She married Mr. Dole, the Republican senator from Kansas, in 1975, and has held cabinet posts in two administrations. In 1999, she resigned as head of the American Red Cross to run for president. Starting as a marginal candidate for president, John McCain emerged as a threat to Gov. George W. Bush in the primaries, attracting independents and Democrats. Before dropping out in March, he won primaries in New Hampshire and Michigan. Mr. McCain, 63, was born in the Panama Canal Zone, the son of a naval officer. He graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1958 and was a pilot in the Vietnam War. In 1967, his plane was shot down and he spent five and a half years as a prisoner of war. After retiring from the Navy, Mr. McCain moved to Arizona and was elected to Congress in 1982. He ran successfully for the Senate in 1986, 1992 and 1998.
 . . . It's long past time to debate what works in education. The verdict is in, and our Republican governors provided the key testimony: strong parental involvement, excellent teachers, safe and orderly classrooms, high academic standards, and a commitment to teaching the basics - from an early start in phonics to mastery of computer technology. Federal programs that fail to support these fundamental principles are sadly out of date and, under the next president, out of time. For dramatic and swift improvement, we endorse the principles of Governor Bush's education reforms, which will: . . . We renew our call for replacing ''family planning'' programs for teens with increased funding for abstinence education, which teaches abstinence until marriage as the responsible and expected standard of behavior. Abstinence from sexual activity is the only protection that is 100 percent effective against out-of-wedlock pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases, including H.I.V./AIDS, when transmitted sexually. We oppose school-based clinics that provide referrals, counseling, and related services for contraception and abortion. We urge the states to enforce laws against statutory rape, which accounts for an enormous portion of teen pregnancy. We support the establishment of Second Chance Maternity Homes, like the ones Governor Bush has proposed, to give young unwed mothers the opportunity to develop parenting skills, finish school, and enter the work force. Because many youngsters fall into poverty as a result of divorce, we also encourage states to review their divorce laws and to support projects that strengthen marriage, promote successful parenting, bolster the stability of the home, and protect the economic rights of the innocent spouse and children. Finally, because so many social ills plaguing America are fueled by the absence of fathers, we support initiatives that strengthen marriage rates and promote committed fatherhood. . . . Our goal is to ensure that women with problem pregnancies have the kind of support, material and otherwise, they need for themselves and for their babies, not to be punitive towards those for whose difficult situation we have only compassion. We oppose abortion, but our pro-life agenda does not include punitive action against women who have an abortion. We salute those who provide alternatives to abortion and offer adoption services, and we commend congressional Republicans for expanding assistance to adopting families and for removing racial barriers to adoption. The impact of those measures and of our Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997 has been spectacular. Adoptions out of foster care have jumped forty percent and the incidence of child abuse and neglect has actually declined. We second Governor Bush's call to make permanent the adoption tax credit and expand it to $7,500. . . . In the federal courts, scores of judges with activist backgrounds in the hard-left now have lifetime tenure. Our agenda for judicial reform is laid out elsewhere in this platform, but this is the heart of the matter: Whom do the American people trust to restore the rule of law, not just in our streets and playgrounds, not just in boardrooms and on Wall Street, but in our courts and in the Justice Department itself? The answer is clear. Governor Bush is determined to name only judges who have demonstrated respect for the Constitution and the processes of our republic. This is a challenge that demands the kind of presidential leadership the country has not seen in almost a decade. Governor Bush has shown his commitment by proposing a bold alternative to the collapse of Social Security. Along with Americans everywhere, we pledge to join him in this endeavor of a lifetime. We call for full repeal of the death tax, as proposed in Governor Bush's program, Prosperity with a Purpose, and as recently passed by congressional Republicans. Hard-working Americans should not live with the fear that the fruits of their lifetime of labor will fall into the hands of government instead of their children. . . . . . . We will use Superfund resources to actually clean up places where people live and labor, rather than waste it on costly litigation. The old approach of mandate, regulate, and litigate has sent potential developers away from brownfield neighborhoods. The result: no new businesses, no new jobs - only dirty and dangerous sites. Governor Bush has pledged to transform this failure into an environmental win for those communities, just as he did in Texas, and we heartily endorse his agenda for doing so.
 Re ''How Bush Came to Tame His Inner Scamp'' (front page, July 29): Re ''How Bush Came to Tame His Inner Scamp'' (front page, July 29):
 Republican National Convention opens in Philadelphia with keynote speeches by Gen Colin Powell and Laura Bush, wife of Gov George W Bush, forming centerpiece of tightly choreographed presentation that seems aimed at convincing public at large that its rightful place is in Republican Party; Powell challenges delegates to rally behind Bush's genuine commitment to minorities and appeals for inclusiveness; says party must make sustained effort to reach out to minority communities, particularly African-Americans; criticizes party's record on affirmative action; Laura Bush delivers warm testimonial about husband's values, extolling his commitment to education and literacy; says his core values will not change with with winds of polls or politics or 'fame, fortune or misfortune;' Bush addresses convention by satellite from Westerville, Ohio; applauds wife's speech; his effort to reach out to blacks is seen as part of determination to portray party as tolerant and inclusive, in hopes of appealing to independents and moderate Democrats; photos (M) The Republican Party put on its newly moderate and disciplined face at the opening of its national convention today as one of the party's most compelling figures, Colin L. Powell, challenged delegates to rally behind Gov. George W. Bush with a genuine commitment to minorities. The Republican Party put on its newly moderate and disciplined face at the opening of its national convention today as one of the party's most compelling figures, Colin L. Powell, challenged delegates to rally behind Gov. George W. Bush with a genuine commitment to minorities. ''The party must follow Governor Bush's lead and reach out to minority communities and particularly the African-American community -- and not just during an election-year campaign,'' General Powell said pointedly. ''It must be a sustained effort. It must be every day. It must be for real.'' The address by General Powell, and a warm testimonial by Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, about education and her husband's values, formed the centerpiece tonight of a tightly and painstakingly choreographed presentation by the Bush campaign and by the Republican Party that was aimed far beyond the First Union Center. It was intended to convince the public at large -- particularly women, independents and even Democrats -- that their rightful place was in the Republican Party. For the Republicans, it was not so much a matter of reaching out for the black vote, but part of Mr. Bush's determination to portray his party as tolerant and inclusive, in hopes of appealing to independents and moderate Democrats. This image of a remade party was also unlikely given that many delegates seemed stirred by two famous faces of the past in the audience: Mr. Bush's mother and father. After the Bush campaign decreed there would be no searing swipes at Democrats, Mrs. Bush, in describing her husband, confined herself to an implict comparison with Bill Clinton and Al Gore, whom the campaign often portrays as obsessed by bald political calculations. ''His core principles will not change with the winds of polls or politics or fame or fortune or misfortune,'' Mrs. Bush said of her husband. ''I know because I've known him through big legislative successes and a few defeats. I sat by his side during some winning and many losing baseball seasons. But George never loses sight of home plate.'' Mrs. Bush, a former teacher and librarian, extolled her husband's commitment to education and literacy. And she said Mr. Bush was devoted to Head Start, a subject upon which the Republican ticket has become suddenly vulnerable because of votes cast against it by Dick Cheney, the vice-presidential candidate, when he was a congressman. While the party's new standard bearer was still wending his way eastward to Philadelphia as part of a six-day tour of swing states, Mr. Bush dominated the convention today. In a play on his nickname -- and an appeal to women -- the letter W  was emblazoned big and red on signs throughout the arena. Underneath, in smaller letters, were the words, ''Stands for women.'' Yet Mr. Bush was not entirely absent. Shortly after his wife's speech, he paid a surprise visit to the convention via satellite, from Westerville, Ohio, where he spoke from a classroom. Appearing on a giant screen, he applauded his wife's speech, and said, ''I can't wait to stand before you on Thursday night and tell America how I want to use these good times for great purposes.'' Then he introduced General Powell with a hint that he would appoint him to serve in a Bush administration, declaring, ''I hope his greatest service to America still lies ahead.'' While General Powell has been mentioned as a possible secretary of state, it was notable that Mr. Bush made those comments from a classroom and that General Powell spoke only about domestic issues. That may be, of course, that education was the dominant theme tonight. When he addressed the convention in 1996, he also spoke of compassion and people in need. But in that speech, he reminded delegates of his support for abortion rights and, while he then saluted Bob Dole as a war hero, he was much more effusive this year about Mr. Bush. When Mr. Bush appeared before the N.A.A.C.P. earlier this month, General Powell said, it was not mere window dressing. He quoted Mr. Bush's declaration that ''the party of Lincoln has not always carried the mantle of Lincoln.'' And he said that he spoke with Mr. Bush today and that ''he wants the Republican Party to wear that mantle again. But he knows that it will take hard work.'' But the effort by General Powell to avoid saying anything that could stoke unrest among the roughly 22,000 people who crammed into the hall, including 2,066 delegates and 2,066 alternates, underscored the degree to which Republicans are united behind Mr. Bush in their determination to win back the White House. The program ran so tightly that at one point it was 20 minutes ahead of the minute-by-minute schedule. In his remarks, General Powell focused on Mr. Bush's achievements in Texas; he emphasized the ''compassion'' in the governor's ''compassionate conservative'' slogan. ''For Texas, Governor Bush has reached out to all Texans -- white, black, Latino, Asian, native American,'' he said. ''He has been successful in bringing more and more minorities into the tent by responding to their deepest needs. Some call it compassionate conservatism. To me, it's just about caring about people.'' That left those tuning in on television with a buffed view of the Republican Party -- and Mr. Bush -- far more moderate than the delegates in the hall who voted today for a platform that hewed to some fiercely conservative tenets, like the party's call for a ban on abortion. With the usual internecine maneuvering largely absent, and Mr. Cheney already selected as the running mate, there was little suspense. That was reflected in the lack of enthusiasm in a roll call to make Mr. Bush's nomination official -- the party's first three-day rolling roll call -- that drew only the most perfunctory rounds of cheers by delegates. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, said he did not believe there was a contradiction between the moderate, inclusive message tonight and the fact that polls of the delegates show that they are notably conservative. Despite all the stage managing, convention organizers had an easy job because delegate after delegate said the party had not been so unified since 1984, when Ronald Reagan cruised to a second term. On the opening night of that convention, in Detroit, Republicans bashed Walter F. Mondale relentlessly. But tonight, party officials expressed such confidence with Mr. Bush's positioning that they said they felt they could go easy on Vice President Gore. In keeping with the effort to portray Mr. Bush as a leader who could work across party lines, his name was placed in nomination by his lieutenant governor, Rick Perry. Mr. Perry told reporters that Mr. Bush helped persuade him to defect from the Democratic Party to the Republicans more than a decade ago. ''I proudly place the name of the current governor of the great state of Texas and the next president of the United States into nomination, George W. Bush,'' Mr. Perry said. While cable networks and Websites covered the evening's events extensively, coverage on the big three broadcast networks was fleeting and confined to the 10 o'clock hour at best. Only ABC covered any part of Mrs. Bush's address; CBS and ABC covered General Powell's speech virtually in its entirety. NBC relegated its prime-time coverage to MSNBC, its cable sister. Breaking from tradition, the Republicans abandoned their one-night roll calls of states, which officials said has become too interminable for a single sitting of prime-time television, and tonight began a rolling state-by-state tally that will be spread over three nights. The party was careful to juggle which states cast their votes so that Mr. Bush would not be officially nominated before Wednesday night. Mr. Bush's father and mother strode into the hall at 8:40 P.M. Their arrival was not announced. But as delegates began catching sight of these most famous of Republicans, a swell of applause came from the floor. When they were announced moments later, they were greeted with a 30-second standing ovation and chants of ''Bush! Bush! Bush!''
 Ted Bache letter praises Gov George W Bush's sense of humor (July 29 front-page article)
 When George W. Bush announced that Dick Cheney would be his running mate, Jon Stewart drily observed: ''Cheney has opposed the Equal Rights Amendment, busing and abortion, but he is in favor of prayer in schools. So he should really help Bush open up the Republican Party to the much-sought-after white conservative vote.'' When George W. Bush announced that Dick Cheney would be his running mate, Jon Stewart drily observed: ''Cheney has opposed the Equal Rights Amendment, busing and abortion, but he is in favor of prayer in schools. So he should really help Bush open up the Republican Party to the much-sought-after white conservative vote.'' Certainly his convention coverage won't be predictable. On the day of the vice presidential announcement, Mr. Stewart showed a video clip in which Mr. Bush explained his choice of Mr. Cheney, who had been running the vice presidential screening process. ''I was impressed by the thoughtful and thorough way he approached his mission,'' Mr. Bush said emotionally, ''and then I realized the person who was best qualified to be my vice presidential nominee was working by my side.'' At that Mr. Stewart turned to the camera. ''And Bush added,'' he said earnestly, '''and once [Cheney] took off his glasses and let his hair down, I also realized he was beautiful.' '' Who knows, maybe the Republican Convention can be fun.
 HITCHMAN-Grace C. Of Pine Bush, NY. Retired executive secretary for James Felt and Co., NYC, died Friday, July 28, 2000, at home. She was 95. Devoted daughter of Robert F. and Mary E. Wallace Hitchman. She was born October 9, 1904, in NYC. Survivors include her loving sister Rose F. Leonard, four nieces, one nephew, three grandnieces and four grandnephews. Visitation Tuesday, August 1, at the William M. Gagan Funeral Home, Pine Bush. Funeral Wednesday, August 2, at 10 AM, at the Church of the Infant Savior, Pine Bush. Interment New Prospect Cemetery, Pine Bush, NY. Memorial contributions to the Pine Bush Ambulance Corps, Box 407, Pine Bush, NY 12566. HITCHMAN-Grace C. Of Pine Bush, NY. Retired executive secretary for James Felt and Co., NYC, died Friday, July 28, 2000, at home. She was 95. Devoted daughter of Robert F. and Mary E. Wallace Hitchman. She was born October 9, 1904, in NYC. Survivors include her loving sister Rose F. Leonard, four nieces, one nephew, three grandnieces and four grandnephews. Visitation Tuesday, August 1, at the William M. Gagan Funeral Home, Pine Bush. Funeral Wednesday, August 2, at 10 AM, at the Church of the Infant Savior, Pine Bush. Interment New Prospect Cemetery, Pine Bush, NY. Memorial contributions to the Pine Bush Ambulance Corps, Box 407, Pine Bush, NY 12566.
 Condoleezza Rice, Governor Bush's international-affairs adviser, on international relations.
