 Social conservatives feel they are winning their core issues at Republican National Convention, but some clearly miss red-meat rhetoric and partisan edge of conventions past; are grumbling about shortage of strong conservative speakers and lack of stronger and more direct attacks on Clinton-Gore administration as Bush campaign focuses on appeal to center; share campaign's focus on victory (M) These are complicated times for social conservatives. They feel they are winning on their core issues at this Republican National Convention, but some of them clearly miss the red-meat rhetoric and partisan edge of conventions past, replaced this week by the Bush campaign's relentless appeal to the center. There was, unmistakably, a wave of grumbling in the conservative ranks -- about the shortage of strong conservative voices on the stage, about the convention speech awarded to an openly gay member of Congress, about the lack of a stronger and more direct condemnation of the Clinton-Gore administration. Delegates reacted with pure pleasure tonight to the partisan nature of Dick Cheney's speech. These are complicated times for social conservatives. They feel they are winning on their core issues at this Republican National Convention, but some of them clearly miss the red-meat rhetoric and partisan edge of conventions past, replaced this week by the Bush campaign's relentless appeal to the center. There was, unmistakably, a wave of grumbling in the conservative ranks -- about the shortage of strong conservative voices on the stage, about the convention speech awarded to an openly gay member of Congress, about the lack of a stronger and more direct condemnation of the Clinton-Gore administration. Delegates reacted with pure pleasure tonight to the partisan nature of Dick Cheney's speech. Some argue that the Bush campaign has merely repackaged core conservatism into a more inclusive appeal; others say that they may well have to remind Gov. George W. Bush of his conservative commitments once he is elected; all agree, passionately, that he is infinitely better than Vice President Al Gore. So the Rev. Jerry Falwell and other leaders were putting out word that it was time to hold ranks, maintain discipline and help Mr. Bush win. The unease among some social conservatives bubbled up on the convention floor on Tuesday night when a small group of Texas delegates protested in silent prayer while Representative Jim Kolbe of Arizona, who is gay, spoke on trade. Cathie Adams, president of the conservative Texas Eagle Forum and one of those protesting delegates, said that Mr. Kolbe's selection was ''all about affirmative action.'' She added, alluding to social conservatives: ''We're not the favored sons. That's very apparent and that makes me sad.'' But she made it clear that she would work hard for Mr. Bush. Once Mr. Bush is elected, Mr. Donovan added, ''We'll certainly be there with the fire that's in the platform and say, 'This is the fire we're going to hold your feet to.' '' Ralph Reed, a former executive director of the Christian Coalition and now a top Bush adviser, said in an interview today that ''social conservatives have become increasingly mature and sophisticated about the political process and understand that a political party is not a church, and that becoming a governing majority requires that you work with others with whom you occasionally disagree. And if there wasn't a full understanding of that 8 or 10 years ago, there certainly is now.'' Eight years out of power have certainly fueled the social conservatives' political pragmatism. Mr. Falwell said, ''There's no question that the Clinton-Gore philosophy has lowered the moral bar in this country, almost irreparably.'' The paramount importance of the abortion issue was cited again and again by social conservatives this week. Well before he had the nomination, Mr. Bush signaled that he would support the Republican platform's abortion plank, which calls for a ban on the procedure without exception, and the appointment of judges who support the ''sanctity of innocent human life.'' Mr. Bush, however, says he personally would allow abortion in cases of rape or incest, or when the life of the woman is in danger. And while Mr. Bush says he does not have a litmus test for the appointment of judges, a New York Times/ CBS News poll in late July showed that conservative Republicans overwhelmingly expected him to appoint Supreme Court justices who would vote against abortion rights.
 You chide George W. Bush for sticking to a defense plan that includes building a missile defense system. Do you have any alternative suggestions besides good diplomacy and eternal optimism to deal with the looming threat posed by rogue nations like North Korea and Iraq? You chide George W. Bush for sticking to a defense plan that includes building a missile defense system. Do you have any alternative suggestions besides good diplomacy and eternal optimism to deal with the looming threat posed by rogue nations like North Korea and Iraq?
 News that he had been hospitalized injected a somber note into a convention that up to then had been one big joyful celebration of George W. Bush.
 Biographical sketch of Gov George Walker Bush, who is set to accept Republican presidential nomination; much remains unknown about his beliefs and leadership style; photos (M) Just six years ago, when George W. Bush ran for governor of Texas, even his parents expected him to lose. It was his younger brother Jeb who held the family's confidence and aspirations, who had diligently prepared for his bid to become governor of Florida in 1994. George W., in contrast, had come to his ambitions haphazardly, and his mother, Barbara, flatly tried to discourage his seemingly quixotic resolve. Friends and family members say that the elder Bushes worried that George W. would be forced to bow again, as he had several times before, to failure. Just six years ago, when George W. Bush ran for governor of Texas, even his parents expected him to lose. It was his younger brother Jeb who held the family's confidence and aspirations, who had diligently prepared for his bid to become governor of Florida in 1994. George W., in contrast, had come to his ambitions haphazardly, and his mother, Barbara, flatly tried to discourage his seemingly quixotic resolve. Friends and family members say that the elder Bushes worried that George W. would be forced to bow again, as he had several times before, to failure. But that story had a surprise ending: while Jeb lost, George won. And in the process, George Walker Bush, now 54, launched himself, without any grand plan or intricate forethought, on a trajectory that on Thursday will place him in the spotlight as the Republican nominee for president, continuing along what historians may recall as a most remarkable path to the White House. Mr. Bush is almost an accidental candidate, a cocky and cheerful fellow who drifted through much of his life and who was largely unknown in the United States until he assumed his first political office five and a half years ago. Yet he now leads the polls and will have, if elected, one of the thinnest resumes in public service of any president in the last century. Mr. Bush's exceptional trajectory also means that he remains a riddle wrapped in layers of paradox. It would be too much to describe him as the Republican Party's blind date, but there still is a great deal about his beliefs and leadership style -- about the kind of president he would be -- that remains unknown. Yet he has a dazzling charm, tremendous social skills, a bold self-confidence, growing political savvy, great popularity among the Texans who know him best -- and a past littered with opponents who underestimated him. Those who have worked with Mr. Bush, Democrats as well as Republicans, mostly say that contrary to all the jokes, he is smart, shrewd and a quick study. Better than virtually any other politician, Mr. Bush reflects Kipling's ideal -- ''If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, or walk with kings -- nor lose the common touch.'' He has hobnobbed with Queen Elizabeth and is equally at ease with beer-bellied baseball fans; he would be a gold medalist in small talk if it were an Olympic sport. Yet he is the scion of one of America's most prominent political families. (The word ''dynasty'' is taboo around the Bushes, sometimes turning Mr. Bush's charm congealing into something close to icy fury. But Mr. Bush is a direct descendant of President Franklin Pierce on his mother's side and of a more recent president on his father's side.) Always quick to lampoon bigwigs, Mr. Bush used to entertain friends with splendidly cruel impressions of some of his father's more haughty cabinet members. And now this man who delights in deflating important people may himself become the most important person in the world. It is too early to resolve these paradoxes with any certainty, and Mr. Bush, somebody allergic to what he dismisses as ''psychobabble,'' is not much help. But it may be possible to venture a few useful clues. One is that Mr. Bush is -- and perhaps always has been -- more of a ''people person'' than a political person. In high school  and college, he always sought to be the center of attention but showed no interest in political debate. Marlin Fitzwater, who was President Bush's spokesman, says that in the late 1980's and early 90's, when he saw the Bush children young George was amiable, but far from political. That may overstate the case. Mr. Bush, who was born on July 6, 1946, has been around politics since he helped his father campaign for the Senate in 1970 (giving such good pep talks, remembers Anson Franklin, then an aide to his father, that some people even then said he was a better speaker than his father). But when he helped his father run for the Senate, or later for president, he seemed impelled more by love and loyalty than by passion about the issues. Friends say that when he himself ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1978, he was motivated not by deep-seated ideological convictions but by the thought that it would be cool to be a congressman. In adulthood, one of the best ways to be in the spotlight and get the loudest laughs for your jokes is to be successful in politics, and Mr. Bush has seemingly drifted toward that spotlight less because of political beliefs than because he enjoys it and is very good at it. But there is something more: the pressure to uphold his family legacy of public service and the expectations it created. This Bush legacy offers another clue to understanding him. Deep in the family aristocratic tradition there is a commitment to public service that is easy to mock as a version of the white man's burden -- a sort of Bushes' burden. One of Mr. Bush's heroes was his grandfather, Prescott Bush, an impossibly tall, impossibly severe financier who would have died rather than kiss a baby. Yet Prescott Bush subjected himself to the indignity of electioneering so as to be elected senator. He was pragmatic and nondoctrinaire in much the same way as his grandson, and he became one of the first senators to denounce Joseph McCarthy. Herbert S. Parmet, a historian and biographer of President Bush, said he believed that the younger Bush's political career arose from that family legacy honoring public service. His political flexibility, his talk of inclusiveness and his speeches about ''compassionate conservatism'' all reflect Bush family values, Professor Parmet said. Another clue is that in place of an ideology, Mr. Bush seems to have something milder and sketchier -- call it instinct. It is not rigid or deeply partisan, and its essence is to incline toward pro-business policies, tax cuts and limited government. In recent years, Mr. Bush has fleshed it out a bit more, relying upon right-wing thinkers and writers like Marvin Olasky and Myron Magnet, who have written books harshly criticizing 1960's liberalism and the welfare state.  In a note to Mr. Magnet, Mr. Bush praised him for having ''charged our intellectual batteries.'' Still, these batteries often seem like triple A's. Mr. Bush is determinedly anti-intellectual, gives little evidence of having thought out a political philosophy, waffles on many issues and often jokes about his fondness for reading the executive summary and skipping the long report. All this means that he is not exactly a blank slate, but a relatively illegible one. The famous pop quiz that he flunked last year, about foreign leaders, may have been silly in some respects, but it perhaps got at something deeper: this is a man who is often very casual about geopolitical information, and it is another way in which he is an unusual and sometimes awkward candidate. Mr. Bush seems deeply out of sync with America's elite, dismissive of its icons and ignorant of what it regards as essential information. Left to his own devices, on his campaign plane, Mr. Bush talks more about his pets than his proposals. When heading back home to Austin after a campaign trip, he talked about his upcoming weekend. To understand the world around him, Mr. Bush reaches first not for policy papers but for his Bible. He says he reads it every day. When asked to name his favorite philosopher-thinker, he simply replied: ''Christ, because he changed my heart.'' He does not wear his faith on his sleeve, does not thump on his Bible and is reluctant to talk about his views on evolution. But Mr. Bush, who was raised Presbyterian and then joined his wife's Methodist church after his daughters were born, is clearly shaped in important ways by his religious beliefs. If Mr. Bush has an ideology, it is personal, not political; it is simply loyalty. It is a deep loyalty to his father and to friends who have stood by him and his family. Many of his top aides have been friends for many years or decades, and loyalty was again a subtext when Mr. Bush chose as his running mate Dick Cheney, the defense secretary under President Bush. The Texas governor was not merely going to restore honor and integrity to the White House, as he pledged in many a stump speech. He was going to reunite the personnel. Mr. Bush often seems an echo of Prince Hal, the likable but dissolute son of King Henry IV in Shakespeare's histories. Hal sobers up when he inherits the crown as Henry V -- and ultimately becomes a model leader who is a better ruler for his past wildness. One of the most interesting questions about Mr. Bush is whether he will grow in the same way. That discipline and self-restraint have been evident in a taut campaign this year, in which Mr. Bush kept his temper in check and relentlessly stayed ''on message.'' After a divisive primary season, he managed better than many had expected to unite the Republican Party and get what he wanted in this convention. Central to this political success is his campaign style. Mr. Bush's years as a farmer of wild oats left him with a down-to-earth manner that resonates with voters in a way his father's and grandfather's styles never quite did. ''I never thought of myself as a bad campaigner,'' President Bush mused in a recent interview. ''After all, I was elected president of the United States. And I like people and all. But I think George is better.'' One aspect of Mr. Bush's personality that irritates his critics and endears him to his supporters is that he seems to have a mere human-sized ambition. One sometimes gets the sense that Vice President Al Gore wanted to be president from second grade; little Georgie wanted to be a major league baseball player. Mr. Bush has always put a priority on having a good time. Of his schoolbook Latin, the phrase that he summons from memory is, characteristically: ''ubi ubi sub ubi.'' It is a sophomoric pun, which he translates as: ''Where, oh where, is your underwear?'' Even now, Mr. Bush balances his ambition with his desire for comfort. It is important to him; he carries his own feather pillow on the road, goes out of his way to vow that the couches will be ''comfortable'' in the house he is building on his Texas ranch. ''During the Democrat convention, it's traditional for a candidate to go out of the news, which I plan to do,'' Mr. Bush mused recently. ''We started thinking about a lot of places to go. I said, 'I want to go to my own place, my own bed, my own house, my own dog.' So that's what I'm going to do.'' Of course, for most of his life Mr. Bush  had little reason to be pretentious. Until the late 1980's, he was simply a struggling oilman in Texas, albeit the son of the vice president, and his career took off mostly after he became a part-owner of the Texas Rangers baseball team in 1989, and then was elected governor of Texas in 1994. His name and connections helped him, and without them it is difficult to imagine that he would be a candidate today (a proposition that Mr. Bush does not really argue with, although he hates to talk about it). But Mr. Bush's underdog victory as governor did not seem to be a harbinger at first; ''Bush'' was then a four-letter word in many Republican circles, a reminder of a president who had broken his no-new-taxes pledge and surrendered the White House to those exasperating Clintons. But then Governor Bush was re-elected in 1998 with an astonishing 69 percent of the vote, and his fortunes soared. He became the great Republican hope, the money poured in, and he was crowned as the presidential front-runner. There was a bumpy stretch in the primaries after Senator John McCain won in New Hampshire, but within six weeks Mr. Bush had recovered. He has been almost constantly ahead of Al Gore ever since. Perhaps it is this front-runner status, or more likely a trait ingrained since childhood, but Mr. Bush campaigns as an utter stranger to self-doubt. He seems certain that he will win. One result is that he reaches out to formidable policy advisers; he does not seem to worry that he will look ignorant in comparison -- or, more searchingly, that he should, like them, devote himself more energetically to understanding the world. Mr. Bush's self-confidence leaves him one of the least neurotic people on the planet, and also one of the least inclined to examine himself. He glides along, glibly and optimistically, confident that his innate cleverness will make up for whatever else he lacks, deliberately ignoring the slings and arrows of his outrageous good fortune. ''That's apparent,'' Mr. Bush replied, never missing a beat, ''in the other half of what I read.'' THE REPUBLICANS: MAN IN THE NEWS  Correction:  August 4, 2000, Friday  The front-page Man in the News article yesterday about George W. Bush misstated his family relationship to President Franklin Pierce. The relationship is through Mr. Bush's great-grandfather Scott Pierce, but Mr. Bush is not a direct descendant. None of Pierce's children survived to adulthood. The front-page Man in the News article yesterday about George W. Bush misstated his family relationship to President Franklin Pierce. The relationship is through Mr. Bush's great-grandfather Scott Pierce, but Mr. Bush is not a direct descendant. None of Pierce's children survived to adulthood.
 William Safire Op-Ed column holds Gov George W Bush's campaign, by suppressing internal dissent on platform and by muting vigorous criticism of Democrats, has drained Republican National Convention of vitality and undercut it as showcase for him (M) By vitiating the first two purposes of a convention -- no internal dissent allowed, and then no external issues clearly drawn with the opposition -- George W. Bush offers voters in a prosperous time little compelling reason to switch control of the White House. That, in turn, undercuts his ability to showcase both what's in his heart and what's on his mind. Here is the tactical reason Bush operatives give for repressing internal G.O.P. dissent: If, for example, the anti-abortion plank had been amended to make it palatable to most Republican voters, pro-life absolutists in at least seven states would have triggered a floor fight. That would have negatively dominated news of the convention as well as alienated the ''base.'' (By such hardball did Pat Robertson get his payoff and do the Democrats keep their powerful gender-gap issue.) Again, the tactical, practical reasoning: Voters are turned off by partisan bickering. Because impeachment was not popular, overt criticism of any Clinton scandal, from lying under oath to illegal Asian fund-raising, is taboo. The only permitted reference is oblique: women speakers talk of ''restoring respect'' or promise Bush will ''tell the truth,'' allowing alert viewers to impute dishonor or untruthfulness to the White House incumbent, whatsisname. And if Bush's smiling-in-lockstep strategy backfires, the next G.O.P.  convention may be much livelier.
 Susan Lamoreaux letter replies to Maureen Dowd's Aug 2 column on presidential campaign, saying nation needs the dignity, manners and respect of Gov George W Bush This country has been mired in Clinton-Gore for eight years. If George W. Bush represents the ''new,'' as in dignity, manners and respect, we are on the right track, back to concentrating on what is important in running a country. This country has been mired in Clinton-Gore for eight years. If George W. Bush represents the ''new,'' as in dignity, manners and respect, we are on the right track, back to concentrating on what is important in running a country. The American people crave role models in their leaders. Surely, nothing is perfect, but aren't we due for a positive change? We are due for a presidency in which we can be proud.  Yes, there may be grudges, but they are there for a good reason. Bill Clinton did what was expedient. Mr. Bush knows that he will have to represent the country with class and stature. He is someone who has the carriage of dignity. What a welcome change!
 Republican Party nominates Gov George Walker Bush for president and Dick Cheney for vice president at National Convention, Philadelphia; Cheney warns election of Vice Pres Al Gore would perpetuate what he calls Pres Clinton's misguided policies, speech; delegates hail his taunts at Democrats after three nights of sunny, even apolitical speeches; campaign showcases Cheney by breaking tradition and giving him own night to speak; photos (M) Burning to reclaim the White House after eight years on the outside, the Republican Party tonight nominated George Walker Bush for president and sent forth his running mate with the most stinging and unabashedly partisan assault of the convention. Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's No. 2, said the election of Al Gore would perpetuate what he called the misguided policies of President Clinton. Burning to reclaim the White House after eight years on the outside, the Republican Party tonight nominated George Walker Bush for president and sent forth his running mate with the most stinging and unabashedly partisan assault of the convention. Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's No. 2, said the election of Al Gore would perpetuate what he called the misguided policies of President Clinton. ''We are all a little weary of the Clinton-Gore routine,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''But the wheel has turned.'' [Excerpts, Page A28.] Then, appropriating Mr. Gore's 1992 campaign slogan as his own, he said, ''It is time for them to go!'' In the ritual roll call, the 22 votes from Mr. Cheney's home state, Wyoming, cast at 10:04 p.m. gave Mr. Bush more than the 1,034 votes needed to grasp the nomination. The hall erupted in a prolonged ovation as jubilant delegates, many of them dancing, were awash in a sea of beach balls, confetti and balloons. Casting aside the high-minded oratory that had marked this convention, Mr. Cheney portrayed Mr. Gore as mean-spirited by reviving former Senator Bill Bradley's pungent dismissal of him six days before the New Hampshire primary: ''A thousand promises. A thousand attacks.'' Mr. Cheney, defense secretary under former President George Bush, said he was lured back into public service because of his belief in Governor Bush and his fear that Mr. Gore's election would perpetuate everything that he believed was wrong with Mr. Clinton's stewardship. Drawing a contrast with Mr. Bush's achievements as governor of Texas, Mr. Cheney contended that the Clinton administration had made no headway on Social Security, taxes or military readiness. Mr. Cheney's address capped Mr. Bush's night of triumph, which had been honed for weeks, if not months. It was a political and emotional peak for the two-term governor, one-time baseball team owner and son of a former president who did not appear on the public stage until he first won election in 1994. Just eight years ago, Republicans nominated Mr. Bush's father for a second term, only to have their president ousted by Bill Clinton. But tonight, Mr. Cheney told the 2,066 delegates that the era of Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore had been one of dashed hopes and squandered opportunities. Mr. Cheney depicted Mr. Gore as intimately connected to an administration mired in scandal, and he sought to turn Mr. Gore's attacks on Mr. Bush's ''risky tax scheme'' back against the vice president. Mr. Cheney's comments left no doubt that despite his mild-mannered demeanor, the Bush campaign intended to employ him in the somewhat traditional role of running-mate-as-attacker. In his acceptance speech four years ago as Bob Dole's No. 2, Jack F. Kemp was far more restrained; he mentioned Mr. Clinton only once, and his sharpest words were casting Democrats as ''elitist.'' But Mr. Cheney picked up a mantle that has been carried in the past by Bob Dole and Mr. Gore himself. The speech by the vice-presidential nominee is typically delivered on the closing night of the convention -- and is usually overshadowed by the one delivered by the head of the ticket. But by giving Mr. Cheney his own night, the campaign was able to showcase Mr. Bush's running mate. And though Mr. Bush had planned the break with tradition well before Mr. Cheney was chosen, the move offered the public an opportunity to take a measure of a man who has been out of the public eye since leaving the Pentagon eight years ago after playing a crucial role in the Persian Gulf war. After his defeat to Mr. Clinton, former President Bush was shunned at many Republican events. But this week, delegates expressed supreme confidence that his son was their best hope to retake the White House. For the third night in a row, the former president sat through the proceedings, logging more time there than many delegates. At the very end of the night, he smiled and sang along as Lee Greenwood appeared on stage to sing what had been Mr. Bush's campaign anthem, ''I'm Proud to Be an American.'' While acknowledging that Mr. Cheney's speech was the most hard-edged of the convention, Mr. Bush's aides insisted that it did not violate their pledge to keep the discourse from Philadelphia largely high-minded and positive. ''The secretary's speech sets a new tone,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''It draws contrasts with Vice President Gore, but far more respectfully than typical politicians.'' Mr. Bush had said to expect some barbs aimed at Mr. Gore. Yet some passages in Mr. Cheney's speech veered closely to the personal, especially those that linked Mr. Gore to Mr. Clinton. ''As the man from Hope goes home to New York,'' Mr. Cheney said, ''Mr. Gore will try to separate himself from his leader's shadow, but somehow we will never see one without thinking of the other.'' Then he added, ''Does anyone, Republican or Democrat, seriously believe that under Mr. Gore the next four years would be any different from the last eight?'' In the eight days since Mr. Bush named him as his running mate, Mr. Cheney has found himself largely on the defensive, fighting off attacks by Democrats that his voting record was too conservative for most voters. They concentrated on his opposition to the Head Start preschool education program and his votes against a ban on armor-piercing bullets. Yet in his speech tonight, Mr. Cheney did not even allude to the controversy -- or his own ideology -- and instead took the opportunity to say glowing things about his former boss, then-President Bush, and about the president's son. Governor Bush -- who arrived in Philadelphia today after a six-day tour through six states carried by Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore in 1992 and 1996 -- took to the sprawling stage at the convention hall this afternoon to run through his acceptance address for Thursday night. Expressing, perhaps, Mr. Bush's disdain of long-winded addresses -- and perhaps his own self-assuredness -- his aides said that his acceptance speech might well be the shortest in years. Karen Hughes, the campaign's communications director, told reporters that, allowing for applause, Mr. Bush's speech would last roughly 38 minutes. In contrast, acceptance speeches by President Bush in 1992 and Bob Dole in 1996 each ran 57 minutes. Beyond the effort tonight for Mr. Cheney to extol Mr. Bush's virtues, the program was intended to highlight the Republican Party's signature economic issue: tax cuts. To drive home the point, speakers included a Hispanic small-business owner, Hector Barreto, who spoke of how Mr. Bush would help entrepreneurs by cutting the burden of taxation and regulation, and Kim Jennings, a single mother, who discussed how the tax plan would help her edge toward the middle class. Democratic officials countered that the Republicans were trying to obscure the fact that Mr. Bush's tax-cut proposals would disproportionately benefit the wealthy. And Mr. Gore's aides pressed their case that the Republican tax cuts passed this year by Congress and those proposed by Mr. Bush would both endanger the nation's newfound fiscal health and the economy's long-term prospects. The very theme of the Republicans' evening, ''prosperity with a purpose,'' contained a tacit acknowledgment that the economy is hardy, a fact that could ultimately be expected to help Mr. Gore. When Mr. Bush arrived at the airport here this morning, he received a red-carpet welcome, replete with a fife and drum corps and a replica of the Liberty Bell, which he gonged. Then he was off to the Philadelphia Museum of Art for what was billed as a Hispanic welcome event. Mr. Bush was introduced by his Hispanic-American nephew, George P. Bush, who asked the crowd, ''Are you excited about electing a president who represents the diversity of our society?'' The governor and his wife, Laura, then appeared with Senator John McCain and his wife, Cindy. Mr. Bush praised his once-bitter foe -- who had paid tribute to him at the convention on Tuesday -- as a ''living example of duty, honor and country.'' Gov. George W. Bush will deliver his acceptance speech to the Republican National Convention tonight at 10. It will carried live on ABC, CBS, CNN, C-Span, Fox News Channel, MSNBC, NBC and PBS.
 When Maureen Dowd says ''W. and Mr. Gore will probably keep campaigning, but we all know it's not about them anymore. Maybe it never was,'' she hit the nail on the head (column, Aug. 2)! The Republican Party never really acknowledged Bill Clinton's victory in 1992 and in effect is still trying to prove that he shouldn't have won. The destructive concept of ''politics as a permanent campaign'' has never been more clearly on display. When Maureen Dowd says ''W. and Mr. Gore will probably keep campaigning, but we all know it's not about them anymore. Maybe it never was,'' she hit the nail on the head (column, Aug. 2)! The Republican Party never really acknowledged Bill Clinton's victory in 1992 and in effect is still trying to prove that he shouldn't have won. The destructive concept of ''politics as a permanent campaign'' has never been more clearly on display.
 As for the Dos Blockos squatters, after several losing court battles, they awoke on the morning of April 27, 1999, to a police helicopter and officers in riot helmets coming to remove them from their homes. The encounter was noisy but nonviolent. Dan and several other squatters ultimately ended up in Bushwick, Brooklyn, renovating a loft in another poor, long-neglected neighborhood. More recently, he decided to leave Bushwick for Harlem, where another wave of pioneers, black and white, are riding another neighborhood through transition.
 Editorial urges Gov George W Bush, in speech to Republican Convention accepting presidential nomination, to go beyond broad themes and offer some details about specific policies and programs When Gov. George W. Bush addresses the Republican Convention tonight, in the most important speech of his career, he will face an oddly difficult challenge of his own making. For four days Philadelphia has echoed with uplifting talk about diversity, inclusion, family values and ''compassion.'' Last night the vice-presidential nominee, Richard B. Cheney, added a strong dose of partisan combativeness by turning Vice President Al Gore's 1992 attack line -- ''It's time for them to go'' -- back on the Democrats. But what is still missing is any discussion of the specific policies and programs that Mr. Bush intends to present to the country. Even Republican policies that the delegates hold dear --  tax cuts, distrust of government, privatizing Social Security -- have scarcely received mention from the podium. Mr. Bush's task tonight is to go beyond broad themes and begin to add some substance to this campaign. When Gov. George W. Bush addresses the Republican Convention tonight, in the most important speech of his career, he will face an oddly difficult challenge of his own making. For four days Philadelphia has echoed with uplifting talk about diversity, inclusion, family values and ''compassion.'' Last night the vice-presidential nominee, Richard B. Cheney, added a strong dose of partisan combativeness by turning Vice President Al Gore's 1992 attack line -- ''It's time for them to go'' -- back on the Democrats. But what is still missing is any discussion of the specific policies and programs that Mr. Bush intends to present to the country. Even Republican policies that the delegates hold dear --  tax cuts, distrust of government, privatizing Social Security -- have scarcely received mention from the podium. Mr. Bush's task tonight is to go beyond broad themes and begin to add some substance to this campaign. In shunting aside the party's traditional wedge issues in favor of pleasing banalities, Governor Bush's political strategists are no doubt confident in their political judgment. Even the seasoned movement conservatives who support Mr. Bush are withholding their criticism, apparently certain that hiding their positions in a fog of generalities is the right way to go this year. But it should give Republicans some pause that the convention's television ratings have slipped sharply, perhaps because viewers have not encountered much in the way of ideas and policies. Mr. Cheney, for his part, did raise the energy level by showing how the Bush-Cheney ticket will use the attack-by-comparison to tie Mr. Gore to President Clinton and attempt to discredit both. Wheeling out what will probably be key words of the fall campaign, Mr. Cheney called Mr. Bush ''a man of principle, a man of honor'' who will ''restore decency and integrity to the Oval Office.'' He also placed the lightly experienced Texas governor in a G.O.P. leadership pantheon of Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush. The Cheney performance cut against Mr. Bush's assertions that he does not like attack politics, although he is likely to salt his own speech tonight with language designed to remind voters of the Clinton administration's ethical problems. But it is also time for Mr. Bush to begin leveling with Americans on what he plans to do. He could start by laying out exactly why the economy needs the proposed 10-year, $1.9 trillion tax cut that would start in 2002 and eat up the federal surplus. It may sound odd to say it, but the time has come for Republicans to stand up for what they believe.
 If the Republicans really wanted to embrace black voters (and not just black children at photo ops) they would honestly address such things as Dick Cheney's voting record; George W. Bush's campaign appearance at Bob Jones University; George Herbert Walker Bush's use of the disgraceful Willie Horton (let's-scare-the-white-folks) campaign ads; President Bush's cynical selection of Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court; and the G.O.P.'s viciously anti-black Southern strategy, which has been a divisive force in American politics for more than 30 years. George W. Bush says he is a ''different'' kind of Republican. But different from what? We need to know what it was about the Republican Party of the last several decades that he thinks should be changed. Does Mr. Bush think that should change? I asked what he thought Mr. Bush meant when he talked about a ''different'' kind of Republican. Mr. Kasich looked uncomfortable. ''I don't know,'' he said. ''I don't know. You'd have to ask George Bush how he's different.''
 Center for Public Integrity founder Charles Lewis Op-Ed article notes government largess played key role in business success of both Dick Cheney and Gov George W Bush, while Vice Pres Al Gore remains closely tied to Washington lobbyists; holds affirmative action for special interests scored by Colin Powell is likely to continue (M) Like Mr. Cheney, Gov. George W. Bush talks of the importance of self-reliance and getting government out of the way of private initiative -- unless, of course, there is a little ''affirmative action'' for your company. His success in business was also famously tied to government largess. Mr. Bush made $14.9 million from the sale of the Texas Rangers, a 25-fold return on his investment of $606,302. The team's phenomenal rise in value was directly tied to a new stadium financed by more than $200 million in public subsidies and tax incentives. Taxpayers didn't get a return from the Rangers' surging new revenues. The profits went almost exclusively to the team's owners. The Republicans hold no monopoly on hypocrisy. Despite the move of his campaign operation from Washington to Nashville, Vice President Al Gore is still close to the lobbyists on K Street. His closest confidants and campaign advisers are lobbyists for all kinds of corporate interests. His $30 million in 1999 contributions, a Democratic  record for fund-raising in a year before a presidential election, didn't come from backyard barbecues. Mr. Gore says that as president he would reform the campaign finance system. Yet he has clung steadfastly to legalistic evasions about the nature of both the notorious White House coffees, which collected $26.4 million for the Democratic Party from 1,544 people who sought face time with the president and vice president, and the Buddhist monastery event, which he has said was nothing more than ''community outreach.'' Such sustained sophistry is tiresome and does not speak well for a candidate who claims to want to clean up the system.
 SpeakOut.com puts these analyses online. For instance, of 1,200 people using the mood meter to judge the first convention night speeches, Laura Bush scored particularly well among women who were undecided. Colin L. Powell scored as high as George W. Bush's taped presentation among Bush voters, but he was outscored by Mr. Bush among undecided voters.
 Richard Toh letter on Maureen Dowd's Aug 2 column says former Pres Bush has been conducting himself more honorably during presidential campaign than Pres Clinton has Maureen Dowd writes (column, Aug. 2) that ''the race turns out to be what we thought it was all along: President Bush vs. President Clinton.'' Indeed, President Clinton has been behaving less than presidential by taking every opportunity to take a cheap shot at George W. Bush. Maureen Dowd writes (column, Aug. 2) that ''the race turns out to be what we thought it was all along: President Bush vs. President Clinton.'' Indeed, President Clinton has been behaving less than presidential by taking every opportunity to take a cheap shot at George W. Bush. This election is best left to  the candidates, and the better candidate will emerge as the winner. Former President Bush has been honorable. His reactions were reasonable in light of the attacks made on his family.
 Republican National Convention, including night designated for discussion of national security, has produced few details of what George W Bush administration might do in foreign policy area; speeches have been particularly vague, dealing with Bush's personal qualities, not policy (M) This year, en route to nomination for president, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has hammered the Clinton administration's foreign policy, suggesting that it has been inept, ill-focused and lacking in priorities. But the first three nights of a Republican convention that Mr. Bush had promised would lay new ideas before the American people, including a night designated as an occasion to discuss national security, produced few details of what a Bush administration might do overseas.  The speeches have been vague even by the lax standards of convention oratory, an art form that was tailor-made for bloviation. Most of what has been said dealt with Mr. Bush's personal qualities, not with policy -- grist for People magazine, not Foreign Affairs. It may be that Mr. Bush himself will fill in the gaps when he appears before the convention on Thursday night. But if so, he will change the pattern that has emerged this week. On Monday, Colin L. Powell, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff during the war in the Persian Gulf, talked almost exclusively about domestic affairs, including the ills afflicting urban areas, the need to pay more attention to the education of the nation's children and the problems of minorities. Only at the end did he look overseas, assuring the delegates that Mr. Bush ''will not repeat the mistakes of the past and let our insurance policy, our armed forces, fall into disrepair.'' Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, who commanded American troops in the Middle East during the war, said that American military strength had withered since then. But he gave no prescription for rebuilding it, except to voice a wish for ''another commander in chief named George Bush with Dick Cheney on his team.'' Mr. Cheney, nominated tonight as Mr. Bush's running mate, served as defense secretary during the war. Senator John McCain of Arizona, whom Mr. Bush defeated for the nomination, said that Mr. Bush ''knows well that there is no safe alternative to American leadership, and he will not squander this unique moment in history by allowing America to retreat behind empty threats, false promises and uncertain diplomacy'' -- an indirect indictment of Mr. Clinton, presumably, but one unaccompanied by even shadowy proposals for policy initiatives. Mr. Bush's main foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, was only slightly more forthcoming. She said that Mr. Bush would not regard the American military as ''a global police force'' without a clue as to where and under what circumstances troops should be used; she promised that Mr. Bush would move at the earliest possible date to institute ''the deployment of effective missile defenses,'' without saying when that might be, and asserted that Mr. Bush ''recognizes the challenge the Chinese government poses to our interests and values,'' without outlining how that challenge might be met. Much of what she said sounded like cheerleading, as when she praised Mr. Bush -- ''the George W. Bush that I know'' -- as a man of ''uncommonly good judgment'' who is ''focused and consistent'' and knows ''that we Americans are at our best when we exercise power without fanfare and arrogance.'' Tonight, Mr. Cheney joined in the chorus, praising Mr. Bush in his advance text as ''a man who has the courage and the vision and the goodness to be a great president.'' Big changes, he said, are coming to Washington, following eight years of ''squandered opportunities.'' He did not name them. Like Mr. Clinton eight years ago, Mr. Bush began the campaign with an inconvenient dearth of foreign policy experience. Like Mr. Clinton, and unlike Vice President Al Gore, his Democratic rival, he has no service in Vietnam to dwell upon with pride. Early on, Mr. Bush surrounded himself with an impressive array of national security experts, most of them veterans of past Republican administrations, including Ms. Rice, Paul Wolfowitz, Robert Zoellick and Richard Perle. (The notable exception is James A. Baker, one of his father's secretaries of state, whose performance in his father's unsuccessful 1992 campaign the younger Mr. Bush has often faulted). In a ''coming-out'' speech at the Ronald Reagan Library near Los Angeles on Nov. 19, George W. Bush won good marks for what most experts considered a polished performance. His choice of Mr. Cheney lent the ticket further heft on foreign policy. If Mr. Bush leaves too much unspoken for too long, he may hand Mr. Gore a significant opening. Mr. Gore, after all, has had broad experience in foreign policy matters, first on Capitol Hill, then in the White House. And while the Clinton administration has had its flops overseas, in places like Africa and Haiti, it has also recorded significant achievements, particularly in peace efforts in Northern Ireland and the Middle East. But then, Mr. Bush may have decided that too much talk about foreign policy is bad business. He has talked often to friends and acquaintances about his father's loss to Bill Clinton eight years ago, when the elder Bush focused on foreign affairs and the Arkansas neophyte emphasized the economy.
 The first campaign stop that Lynne and I were privileged to make with Governor and Laura Bush was in our home town of Casper, Wyo., where Lynne and I graduated from high school some 41 years ago. I have been given an opportunity to serve beside a man who has the courage, and the vision, and the goodness, to be a great president: Gov. George W. Bush. I left Congress to join the cabinet of President Reagan's successor. And I'm proud to say that I'm not the only man on this ticket who has learned from the example of President George Bush. I saw resolve in times of crisis, a steady hand that shaped an alliance and threw back a tyrant. He earned the respect and confidence of the men and women of America's armed forces. George W. Bush will repair what has been damaged. He's a man without pretense, without cynicism. A man of principle, a man of honor. On the first hour of the first day, he will restore decency and integrity to the Oval Office. George W. Bush came to the governor's office with a clear view of what he wanted to achieve. But Governor Bush does not accept old lines of argument and division. He brings people together, reaching across party lines to do the people's business. He leads by conviction, not calculation. But in Washington today, politics has become war by other means, an endless onslaught of accusation, a constant setting of groups one against another. This is what Bill Bradley was up against, and others before him. The Gore campaign, Senator Bradley said, is ''a thousand promises, a thousand attacks.'' We are all a little weary of the Clinton-Gore routine. But the wheel has turned. And it is time. It is time for them to go! For all of their sentimental talk about children, Clinton and Gore have done nothing to help children oppressed by bureaucracy, monopoly, and mediocrity. When George W. Bush is president and I am vice president, tests will be taken, results will be measured, schools will answer to parents and no child will be left behind. For eight years, Clinton and Gore have talked about social reform, Social Security reform, never acting, never once offering a serious plan to save the system. George W. Bush and I, with the united Congress, will save Social Security. For eight years, Clinton and Gore have extended our military commitments while depleting our military power. Rarely has so much been demanded of our armed forces, and so little given to them in return. George W. Bush and I are going to change that, too. And now, as the man from Hope goes home to New York, Mr. Gore will try to separate himself from his leader's shadow, but somehow we will never see one without thinking of the other. Does anyone, Republican or Democrat, seriously believe that under Mr. Gore, the next four years would be any different from the last eight? If the goal is to unite our country, to make a fresh start in Washington, to change the tone of our politics, can anyone with conviction say that the man for the job is Al Gore? This campaign will not be easy. Governor Bush and I face a real fight. We're ready for it. We know the territory, we know the opposition, and we know what's at stake. We will give all we have to this cause. And in the end, with your help, George W. Bush will defeat this vice president, and I will replace him. Let us go forth, knowing that our cause is just, and elect George W. Bush the 43rd president of the United States.
 These are not the ways of the Republican Party, as George W. Bush's and Dick Cheney's records show. These are not the ideals of the Republican Party, despite the stage show that it is putting on in Philadelphia. All the truly important progress we've made is in serious jeopardy in the event of a Bush-Cheney victory.
 William Friedman letter, commenting on Aug 1 article, says George W Bush should name Colin L Powell to Supreme Court if he is elected president He is often asked about the possibility of being named secretary of state in a Bush administration. I would like to ask George W. Bush if he would also consider this most respected of Americans for an appointment to the Supreme Court.
 Carefully scripted Republican National Convention had given journalists little actual news to cover until former Pres Gerald R Ford was hospitalized with stroke, former Pres Bush attacked Pres Clinton for deriding his son and Dick Cheney was nominated for vice presidency (M) Or maybe it was when Fox News tracked down a giddy delegate wearing a hat that had a live plant on its crown and a slender chain hanging from the brim along with a four-inch ''E.'' What did it mean? ''Bush,'' she said, pointing to the plant. ''And chain-E, Cheney.'' But suddenly there was the disclosure that former President Gerald R. Ford had gone to the hospital with what was thought to be a sinus infection but was actually a stroke. That followed the beginning of a whiff of a semi-controversy about former President George Bush attacking President Clinton for attacking Mr. Bush's son. And then there was an actual event that took place, with the Republicans getting an official vice presidential candidate. The all-news channels and streaming Web sites suddenly had something to cut back to regularly (correspondents standing outside the hospital, promising updates on Mr. Ford's condition), a fresh bone to gnaw on (whether former President Bush should have kept quiet) and a convention floor that at long last began to go a little wacky around the edges. Some news outlets that had done interviews with Mr. Ford on Tuesday, before he was hospitalized, replayed the tapes throughout the afternoon, so viewers could watch the 87-year-old former president slurring his words. At the same time, the pundit class was making much of former President Bush's remark that he was growing irritated with President Clinton's attacks on Mr. Bush's son. This allowed Democrats and some pundits to argue that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas apparently needed his daddy to protect him. Yesterday morning, when former President Bush and his wife, Barbara, appeared on ''Good Morning, America,'' he was promising to be good. ''They're making a federal case about it,'' he said. ''It's better to say nothing about it, future, now, nothing, period.'' The show's host, Charles Gibson, however, knew raw meat when he saw it and prodded once more. ''Not going to talk about it,'' former President Bush insisted. Then Mrs. Bush leapt to her husband's aid, saying that his was not really a personal attack, just an observation about the state of the presidency. Again, Mr. Gibson detected sirloin. Oh, is there something wrong with the state of the presidency? Has it been sullied? And who might have been responsible for that? ''You know who I mean,'' she said. Former President Bush tried to shush his wife. ''They're going to get all over your case,'' he warned. By the end of the day, though, the pundits seemed to have gnawed all the meat off the bone. Besides, Governor Bush had finally arrived in Philadelphia and was himself criticizing President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore.
 G.O.P. Formalizes Ticket; Cheney Lashes Out at Gore  The Republican party formally nominated Gov. George W. Bush for president. His running mate, Dick Cheney, delivered the most partisan attack of the convention, asserting that the election of Al Gore would perpetuate the failed policies of President Clinton. Editorials: Mr. Bush's next speech; an ugly move by big tobacco; Senator Torricelli retreats; Verlyn Klinkenborg on the damp July.
 Diary of happenings at Republican National Convention: Gov George W Bush makes his public party debut at convention's biggest fund-raiser, which raises $10 million; former House Speaker Newt Gingrich attends convention, but does not have leading role; protesters fail to disrupt convention; photos (M) Dinner at Alain Ducasse for two might set you back $500, but lunch with Gov. George W. Bush and 3,099 of his best friends on Wednesday ran to at least twice that at the Pennsylvania Convention Center. Dinner at Alain Ducasse for two might set you back $500, but lunch with Gov. George W. Bush and 3,099 of his best friends on Wednesday ran to at least twice that at the Pennsylvania Convention Center. Governor Bush chose to make his  public party debut yesterday at the Republican convention's biggest fund-raiser, which seemed in step with last night's convention message of ''prosperity with a purpose.'' The lunch certainly added to the party's prosperity, raking in $10 million, according to party officials. Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, attended; so did brother Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida and Dick Cheney. One of Mr. Bush's nephews, George P. Bush, the thinking woman's Ricky Martin, flashed his extremely white teeth and spoke heart-melting Spanish with one woman. Bush Family Values One of Governor Bush's first stops in Philadelphia on Wednesday was the Philadelphia Museum of Art for what was billed as a Hispanic welcome event. Latin music blared. But while Hispanic children were up on the stage and Hispanic supporters up front, the crowd was filled out with a sizable contingent of blond College Republicans waving ''Viva Bush'' signs. Mr. Bush was introduced by his  Hispanic-American nephew, George P. Bush, who said, ''Are you excited about electing a president who represents the diversity of our society?'' About 60 Bush family members -- all the siblings, the parents, most or all of the siblings' kids -- planned an early dinner at the Ritz Carlton. For the Bushes, national political conventions have become family reunions. One campaign aide who is staying near the family ay the Wyndham Hotel described the scene as ''very exuberant, with lots of children running up and down the hall.''
 Alan K. Simpson defends Dick Cheney's voting record by saying ''the last time I checked, members of Congress are encouraged to represent their constituency.'' This is the same rationale rejected by Republicans who criticize Al Gore's shift in positions since he was a congressman from Tennessee. Alan K. Simpson defends Dick Cheney's voting record by saying ''the last time I checked, members of Congress are encouraged to represent their constituency.'' This is the same rationale rejected by Republicans who criticize Al Gore's shift in positions since he was a congressman from Tennessee.
 Harvey Sullivan letter replies to Brent Staples's Aug 2 column on George W Bush, saying Bush has a long history of bringing together people of different races and political viewpoints in Texas I disagree with Mr. Staples's view of the Republican National Convention. George W. Bush has a long history of bringing together people of different races and political viewpoints in Texas, and not just as window dressing but to get positive things done. It's about time we had such a man in Washington to create an environment of cooperation. I disagree with Mr. Staples's view of the Republican National Convention. George W. Bush has a long history of bringing together people of different races and political viewpoints in Texas, and not just as window dressing but to get positive things done. It's about time we had such a man in Washington to create an environment of cooperation. Also, this race is not about a former president, George Bush, and a soon-to-be former president, Bill Clinton, as Maureen Dowd suggests (column, Aug. 2). Rather, it is a choice between a governor with a strong record and a man who can't seem to figure out who he is.
 Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader, displaying broadcast media credentials, crashes Republican National Convention and attacks Republican Party and Gov George W Bush during presidential nomination roll-call; calls convention 'most spectacular display of cash-register politics' in nation's history; photo (M) Right in the middle of the presidential nomination roll-call, Mr. Nader charged onto the convention floor, plopped himself in front of the Florida delegation and began tearing into the Republican Party and  George W. Bush. Right in the middle of the presidential nomination roll-call, Mr. Nader charged onto the convention floor, plopped himself in front of the Florida delegation and began tearing into the Republican Party and  George W. Bush. Although polls show that Mr. Nader's campaign has cut into support for Vice President Al Gore, his venture tonight out among the Republicans was met with something less than an enthusiastic reaction from the Florida delegates, who seemed a bit shocked. First there were chants of ''Go, Bush! Go, Bush!'' Then Mel Martinez, a delegate from Orlando, stepped forward to thrust a Bush-Cheney sign into Mr. Nader's hands. Mr. Nader courteously thanked Mr. Martinez for the souvenir and promised to relish it.
 Tim Harte letter asks how moderates can accept George W Bush's efforts to appeal to them only a few months after wooing the right wing of Republican Party Six months ago, during the primary season, George W. Bush swung to the right. He took a passive stance toward the Confederate flag over the South Carolina Statehouse, and he visited Bob Jones University. People wondered whether he could recapture the center after such a strong appeal to the Republican conservative wing. Six months ago, during the primary season, George W. Bush swung to the right. He took a passive stance toward the Confederate flag over the South Carolina Statehouse, and he visited Bob Jones University. People wondered whether he could recapture the center after such a strong appeal to the Republican conservative wing. Yet Mr. Bush has proved extremely adept at wiping away the immediate past. Now Mr. Bush is wooing all the amnesiac moderates. He parades a long line of minorities through Philadelphia, and everyone seems to have forgotten Bob Jones and the Confederate flag. What a show this is!
 Discipline is rigid at Republican National Convention, with Gov George W Bush's lieutenants roaming floor with precise schedules and delegates given daily talking points to guide press interviews; control over speakers is subtler, but is producing uniform results sought by Bush's aides; planners have built each night around specific theme, chosing officials and members of public who can speak to it in approved way; photo (M) Like nearly all the speakers who have taken the sprawling and colorful stage at the Republican convention here, Melissa Hart, a candidate for Congress from Pennsylvania, made sure to submit an early draft of her remarks to aides to Gov. George W. Bush for review and approval. Like nearly all the speakers who have taken the sprawling and colorful stage at the Republican convention here, Melissa Hart, a candidate for Congress from Pennsylvania, made sure to submit an early draft of her remarks to aides to Gov. George W. Bush for review and approval. Her experience was not unusual. The week has been characterized by rigid displays of discipline, with Mr. Bush's lieutenants roaming the floor with schedules that list the precise second that each event is supposed to occur, and delegates being handed daily talking points to guide their interviews with reporters. But the control over what is being said from the stage has taken a decidedly subtler form, albeit with precisely the uniform result sought by Mr. Bush's aides. That is not to suggest that dissidents are clamoring for floor time. ''There just hasn't had to be the usual arm-twisting,'' one of Mr. Bush's senior advisers said, with clear relief. These are different times, and Republican leaders have made the best of them. There are no rebels trying to commandeer the microphone, and no opposition candidates vying for attention. Indeed, the most potentially risky moment for Mr. Bush's convention organizers should have been when Senator John McCain of Arizona, who lost the nomination to Mr. Bush, appeared on Tuesday. But Mr. McCain had submitted his speech to Mr. Bush in advance, and not a single change was demanded. ''I saw the draft,'' said Mike Murphy, formerly Mr. McCain's strategist. ''It went to Bush and I saw the draft after it came back. I can't remember a single change.'' Mr. McCain was one of Mr. Bush's sharpest critics in the primaries, saying at one point that the governor ''twists the truth'' like Mr. Clinton, and he was the only major rival of the Texas governor to speak at the convention. Yet in this environment, where Republicans are intent on not doing anything that might distract from the march to the nomination, Mr. McCain was not about to harm his future standing with the party. Beyond the question of Mr. McCain, Mr. Bush's absolute control of the convention has been evident every night in the choice of speakers and their content, the result of a team that includes Andrew Card, former secretary of transportation who is chairman of the convention, and Ed Gillespie, who is in charge of assigning and reviewing each day's events. With such a free hand, Mr. Bush's advisers built each evening around a theme (''Prosperity with a purpose'' is tonight's). Indeed, a number of speakers said that time, not substance, seemed to be the top concern of Mr. Bush's convention organizers. Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania said that when he submitted his greeting to convention planners for review, they left in a veiled reference to Mr. Specter's support of abortion rights, but asked him to cut a joke that put a positive spin on W. C. Fields's famously disparaging remark about the city and his home state, just to save a few minutes.
