 There are clear and important differences between Gov. George W. Bush and and Vice President Al Gore on Russia, China, missile defenses and other pressing issues. We intend to return to some of these matters as the campaign unfolds. But specific policies cannot be developed or evaluated in isolation. They should flow from principles that reflect the nation's core values and interests. There are clear and important differences between Gov. George W. Bush and and Vice President Al Gore on Russia, China, missile defenses and other pressing issues. We intend to return to some of these matters as the campaign unfolds. But specific policies cannot be developed or evaluated in isolation. They should flow from principles that reflect the nation's core values and interests. Once Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore engage foreign policy, they should spell out their thoughts about these broad national interests. Mr. Bush has so far taken the more creative approach to the question of nuclear weapons reductions. Mr. Gore has been more forward looking on environmental issues and has shown a more nuanced appreciation of the role American troops could play in halting regional conflicts. But the debate between them has not moved much beyond rhetorical flourishes. Voters deserve a serious discussion of how this country's power should be used to advance the global interests of its people.
 Former commerce secretary William M Daley has significantly revived once flagging morale of Democratic campaign six weeks after taking charge of Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential drive; has curtailed infighting and imposed badly needed discipline on campaign's strategy and message; has freed Gore to focus on essential decisions rather than on power struggles back home, and has reassured Democratic partisans that campaign is back on track; photo (M) Six weeks after taking charge of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, William M. Daley has not yet figured out where everybody works in the sprawling and frenetic Gore headquarters here. Six weeks after taking charge of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, William M. Daley has not yet figured out where everybody works in the sprawling and frenetic Gore headquarters here. After a spring when the campaign was accused of squandering any momentum created by Mr. Gore's victories in the Democratic primaries, Mr. Daley has moved to curtail the infighting that had sapped the campaign's energy and to impose badly needed discipline on its strategy and message. He has freed Mr. Gore to focus on essential decisions rather than on the power struggles back home, and he has reassured Democratic partisans that the campaign is back on track. Top Gore supporters, including Congressional leaders and officials with major constituent groups, say that they have noticed a distinct change since Mr. Daley replaced the ailing Tony Coelho and that they have been soothed by Mr. Daley's straightforward presence. John J. Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., had initially complained that he had not been consulted about Mr. Gore's appointment of Mr. Daley, who earned the enmity of labor by leading the administration's lobbying for the North American Free Trade Agreement and the normalization of trade relations with China. But after Mr. Daley spent two days this week meeting with labor leaders in Chicago, Mr. Sweeney had nothing but kind words. The latest change in the campaign's leadership, its second in barely a year, could have been deeply destabilizing. But as Mr. Gore moves into two critical weeks in which he will select a running mate and accept his party's nomination in Los Angeles, his aides and leading supporters say they feel more optimism than at any point since the vice president swept the primaries. ''Morale is shockingly high here for a campaign that's 10 points behind,'' one top Gore aide said. Mr. Gore's campaign, by almost any standard, had a lousy spring. After the primaries, the campaign drifted for weeks with little sign of a general-election strategy. Mr. Gore allowed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to cruise unchallenged back to the center after he was forced to the right in the Republican primaries. The campaign also manufactured its own crisis when the vice president broke with the White House to maintain that Elian Gonzalez should be given permanent residence status, a move seen as such a craven appeal for Cuban-American votes that it reinforced Mr. Bush's contention that the vice president would say anything for political advantage. The campaign experimented constantly with its message and its tone, first attacking Mr. Bush stridently, then backing away. That, too, only seemed to buttress the Republican criticism of Mr. Gore, whose various public transformations inspired Mr. Bush to declare in his acceptance speech at the Republican convention that he was ''not running in borrowed clothes.'' By late spring, Mr. Gore had unwittingly made himself an underdog, consistently trailing in the polls despite his association with the prosperity of the Clinton era. Mr. Daley, a 51-year-old Chicago native, was not looking for work when Mr. Gore woke him from a deep slumber at 12:15 a.m. on June 15 to tell him that Mr. Coelho, who had led the campaign for a year, was resigning for health reasons. He said he felt he had the best job in government and was content to ride out the Clinton administration in his spacious office in Washington, and on the golf course on weekends. But Mr. Gore, who had spoken to Mr. Daley about leading the campaign a year before, was insistent that he needed his considerable political skills. ''I was out of it, I mean dead sound asleep,'' Mr. Daley said of the phone call. ''I said, 'Well, why don't we get together tomorrow and have a cup of coffee?' And he said, 'Why don't you get up and make a cup of coffee?' '' Forty-five minutes later the deal was sealed, and Mr. Daley immediately began to shed his duties at Commerce. He started full time on July 17, commuting between Washington and Nashville. Mr. Daley, who is known for his straight talk, acknowledged in an interview this week that the Gore campaign was troubled at the time. ''It's not a secret that there was a period there of internal debate on the thrust of the campaign,'' he said, ''a concern that we had lost some ground from the primaries, that Bush was running a good noncampaign campaign, that his base came home quicker and that we were still working on our base.'' In addition, the direction of the campaign had become a struggle among distinct power bases: the paid staff, led by Mr. Coelho and Donna Brazile, the campaign manager, who themselves had occasional disputes; Washington consultants like Carter Eskew, Tad Devine, Robert Shrum, Bill Knapp and the pollster Harrison Hickman, some of whom have moved to Nashville; Gore family members, including Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, his daughter Karenna Gore Schiff and his brother-in-law, Frank Hunger; staff members in the office of the vice president in Washington; and old Gore hands like Peter Knight, Roy Neel, Tom Downey and Jack Quinn, all of whom are now Washington lobbyists. Mr. Coelho, who resigned after suffering epileptic seizures and intestinal problems, receives mixed reviews from Mr. Gore's aides. He is  almost revered, for having guided Mr. Gore successfully through his primary fight with Bill Bradley and for obsessively pursuing goals like winning the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. He and Ms. Brazile made difficult but needed cuts in staff and budget and oversaw last fall's move of the campaign from Washington to Nashville (the headquarters are now in an office park conveniently on Mainstream Drive). But despite his long tenure as a congressman from California, Mr. Coelho was never able to become the public face of the campaign, largely because his role as leader of the United States exhibit at a 1998 world exposition in Portugal was the subject of a State Department investigation into suspicions of financial irregularities. And by insisting on tight control of all aspects of the campaign, including access to the candidate, he bred resentment and alienation among many advisers with long relationships with Mr. Gore. For instance, Mr. Quinn, a former Gore chief of staff, said he and other former aides had felt ''underutilized'' during Mr. Coelho's tenure. The internal tensions were papered over while Gore aides made common cause of defeating Mr. Bradley. But they re-emerged after the primaries, and all too often the candidate himself was called upon to mediate, Mr. Daley said. Mr. Daley's arrival coincided with the unveiling of the campaign's latest message, a double-barreled populist appeal that casts Mr. Gore as the candidate most likely to continue the country's prosperity and Mr. Bush as the captive of powerful interests. Mr. Daley has insisted that the campaign stick with those themes for the last month and has encouraged the kind of dexterity that led Mr. Gore to rip up his schedule one day in July and go to Texas to blame Mr. Bush for that state's fiscal problems. ''It used to be we couldn't stay on message for a week,'' one senior Gore aide said. He also brought Ronald A. Klain, a former Gore chief of staff, and Monica Dixon, a former deputy chief of staff, to Nashville to invigorate the campaign's rapid response operation (known as ''the kitchen''), a mainstay of the 1992 and 1996 Clinton campaigns. And he has renewed contact with Gore allies who felt shut out, prompting Mr. Quinn to observe that ''he's the sort of guy who leaves no resource unused.'' In a close election, such things can matter, several Gore aides said.
 Mr. Cheney, the second-ranking House Republican until he became defense secretary in 1989 under President George Bush, also denied waging a specific offensive against President Clinton.
 Vice Pres Al Gore huddles with close aides and family members to make decision on vice presidential running mate as August 8 deadline approaches; speculation centers on four Democrats in Senate: John Kerry, John Edwards, Joseph I Lieberman and Evan Bayh; Gore says no decision has been made; photos (M) With just hours to go until his self-imposed deadline of noon on Tuesday, Vice President Al Gore huddled with close aides and family members tonight to make his decision on a vice presidential running mate. Speculation continued to center on four Democrats in the Senate -- John Kerry of Massachusetts, John Edwards of North Carolina, Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and Evan Bayh of Indiana -- although Mr. Gore raised the possibility last week that he might pick a ''wild card.'' With just hours to go until his self-imposed deadline of noon on Tuesday, Vice President Al Gore huddled with close aides and family members tonight to make his decision on a vice presidential running mate. Speculation continued to center on four Democrats in the Senate -- John Kerry of Massachusetts, John Edwards of North Carolina, Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and Evan Bayh of Indiana -- although Mr. Gore raised the possibility last week that he might pick a ''wild card.'' The vice president met here this afternoon with Warren Christopher, the head of his vice presidential search committee, to discuss his choices. Also in the meeting were Mr. Gore's brother-in-law, Frank Hunger; Bill Daley, his campaign chairman, and Donna Brazile, his campaign manager. At every opportunity today, Mr. Gore said he had not made a decision. ''I have not decided yet,'' he said at a fund-raiser in New York this afternoon. ''But I will, and shortly.'' Mr. Daley appeared on several talk shows this morning, determined not to tip Mr. Gore's hand. But he did discuss how the campaign might respond to concerns that have been raised about each of the possible candidates. Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said, ''There is no firm timetable, but it's unlikely that any phone calls will take place until later on on Monday or early Tuesday.'' Mr. Lehane said that the process was being run in the manner that Mr. Gore had insisted on. ''We haven't engaged in soliciting Democrats by sending out questionnaires, we haven't held a series of press conferences with possible candidates, and you haven't had a range of names put out there,'' he said. Mr. Christopher said this afternoon that he thought Mr. Gore had conducted his search in ''a professional manner.'' Mr. Gore has not brought up any names publicly, but officials close to the campaign have confirmed a list of six. Besides the four senators, the list included Gov. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire and Representative Richard A. Gephardt, both of whom have said they are not interested. The question of whom Mr. Gore may pick for his running mate has dominated political talk here and wherever Mr. Gore has appeared over the weekend. When he arrived in Nashville from New York this afternoon, his hotel was swamped with camera crews and reporters, and Mr. Gore tried to turn the focus of attention from speculation on his running mate to his campaign themes. Mr. Gore began the day at a church service in Sag Harbor, N.Y., on the east end of Long Island. He had asked to speak to honor the 35th anniversary of the signing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which gave the federal government the authority to oversee voter registration and elections in counties that had used literacy tests and other unconstitutional means to determine voter eligibility. The occasion allowed Mr. Gore to reflect on his, and his father's, support for civil rights although, as a United States senator from Tennessee, his father, Albert Gore Sr., voted against the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The occasion allowed Mr. Gore to showcase more of his personal biography, a goal that is becoming more urgent for Mr. Gore as he heads toward the Democratic National Convention next week in Los Angeles. Speaking today from the pulpit of Christ Episcopal Church, Mr. Gore said that the congregation of about 70 people, who included several African-Americans, ''looks like America.''
 FISHMAN-Emily Colin. On August 5, 2000, at age 95. Beloved wife of the late Samuel. Mother of Elinore Stone and Adele Gorelick, and mother-in-law of Albert Stone. Adored grandmother of Steven and Marcia Stone, Jessica Gorelick and great-grandmother of Jonathan Stone. Services Monday, 12:45 PM, at ''The Riverside,'' 76th St. and Amsterdam Ave. FISHMAN-Emily Colin. On August 5, 2000, at age 95. Beloved wife of the late Samuel. Mother of Elinore Stone and Adele Gorelick, and mother-in-law of Albert Stone. Adored grandmother of Steven and Marcia Stone, Jessica Gorelick and great-grandmother of Jonathan Stone. Services Monday, 12:45 PM, at ''The Riverside,'' 76th St. and Amsterdam Ave.
 James Atlas Op-Ed article says Vice Pres Al Gore's credentials as an intellectual are clear but that he needs to state ideas plainly and forcefully, not dreseed up in intellectual platitudes of 'broken-spined paperbaacks' exhumed from his old college days; holds framework for many of Gore's ideas is dated; drawing (M) Al Gore is an intellectual. In case we doubted his credentials, a recent New Yorker profile of the vice president made this clear. Mr. Gore referred to ''the Cartesian revolution,'' Reinhold Neibuhr's work and Thomas Kuhn's theory of paradigms. Wonky to the point of weirdness, Mr. Gore loves nothing more than a dorm-room bull session. To Nicholas Lemann, The New Yorker writer, he held forth with uncanny fluency on ''the origins of our modern world view, and its curious reliance on specialization and ever-narrower slices of the world around us into categories.'' O.K., so the man's a pedant. Faced with the threat of another bibliophobic President Bush, what card-carrying intellectual wouldn't embrace the prospect of a president who casually invokes Niebuhr and Descartes? Mr. Gore's bookish bent is tonic; his habit of convening academics and policy types to conduct informal seminars at the vice presidential mansion conjures up memories of the Kennedy era, when, as the late Alfred Kazin grandly put it, ''Intellect was in touch with power.'' Al Gore is an intellectual. In case we doubted his credentials, a recent New Yorker profile of the vice president made this clear. Mr. Gore referred to ''the Cartesian revolution,'' Reinhold Neibuhr's work and Thomas Kuhn's theory of paradigms. Wonky to the point of weirdness, Mr. Gore loves nothing more than a dorm-room bull session. To Nicholas Lemann, The New Yorker writer, he held forth with uncanny fluency on ''the origins of our modern world view, and its curious reliance on specialization and ever-narrower slices of the world around us into categories.'' O.K., so the man's a pedant. Faced with the threat of another bibliophobic President Bush, what card-carrying intellectual wouldn't embrace the prospect of a president who casually invokes Niebuhr and Descartes? Mr. Gore's bookish bent is tonic; his habit of convening academics and policy types to conduct informal seminars at the vice presidential mansion conjures up memories of the Kennedy era, when, as the late Alfred Kazin grandly put it, ''Intellect was in touch with power.'' Why, then, do Mr. Gore's showy displays of erudition provoke in me a tremor of alarm? Is it because of their provenance? Earlier this year, Michael Wolff, a media critic for  New York magazine, dated the formation of Mr. Gore's intellectual template back to the 50's and 60's when ''Ivy League classiness'' flourished. I think a more precise date is 1966 to 1970, Mr. Gore's Harvard years. The books that Mr. Gore has cited as his intellectual touchstones -- Kuhn's ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,'' Maurice Merleau-Ponty's ''The Phenomenology of Perception,'' the work of Edmund Husserl -- adorned every bookshelf on campus, along with Emile Durkheim's ''Suicide,'' David Reisman's ''The Lonely Crowd,'' and Erik Erikson's ''Childhood and Society.'' The trouble with Mr. Gore's perpetual theorizing is that it's straight out of the 60's. In interviews, Mr. Gore presents himself as a precise and systematic thinker. He diagrams his points, dilates on English constitutional history, produces complex metaphors like ''the clockwork universe'' and the world as ''a machine of moving parts.'' Brown's masterwork, ''Love's Body,'' was a touchy-feely tract disguised as philosophy. When Mr. Gore writes, in his 1992 book, ''Earth in the Balance,'' about the ''psychic pain at the very root of the modern mind,'' and ''the experience of living in one's body as a fully integrated physical and mental being,'' one is tempted to respond with a rousing, ''Dig it!'' Is this a problem? Should we expect our presidential candidates to be au courant with the latest intellectual touchstones? Why doesn't Mr. Gore demonstrate familiarity with deconstruction, with the work of Jacques Derrida or the critical legal studies pioneered by Stanley Fish? In fact, Mr. Gore does have ideas. It's exhilarating to hear him attacking government bureaucracy or applying business-management theory to the original principles of freedom espoused by the framers of the Constitution. In his book, he trenchantly argues that the looming environmental crisis is a moral crisis. But he needs to state these ideas plainly and forcefully, not dressed up in the intellectual platitudes of broken-spined paperbacks exhumed from his college days.
 Op-Ed article by Houston businessman Paul W Hobby objects to Texas being caught in cross fire because Gov George W Bush is running for president; says state, in its rugged individualism, is close to American ideal (M) Politically, Texas is caught in crossfire because our governor, George W. Bush, is running for president. Every shortcoming, real or imagined, has been cited by his detractors as proof of government failure or a heartless culture. Despite Governor Bush's warning in his nomination speech on Thursday not to ''mess with Texas,'' the broadsides will continue because of the way America elects presidents. A majority of Texans will be voting for Mr. Bush, and the Electoral College will issue no transferable credits to Al Gore. Politically, Texas is caught in crossfire because our governor, George W. Bush, is running for president. Every shortcoming, real or imagined, has been cited by his detractors as proof of government failure or a heartless culture. Despite Governor Bush's warning in his nomination speech on Thursday not to ''mess with Texas,'' the broadsides will continue because of the way America elects presidents. A majority of Texans will be voting for Mr. Bush, and the Electoral College will issue no transferable credits to Al Gore. I am no shill for the Bush campaign; Mr. Bush replaced me as chairman of a state agency after his first election and openly campaigned against me in 1998, when I ran for state comptroller and was the state's leading Democratic vote-getter. But I appreciate what is different about Texas, and it boils down to this: In our view freedom is so intertwined with individual risk that the two are almost indistinguishable at the core.
 ''Gore should ask Oprah to be his vice presidential nominee,'' I heard an amateur pundit -- one of legions, I'm sure -- declare last week. Think of what follows as theatrical speculation then, set against a backdrop of some of the dreariest political performances we've yet been subjected to. George W. Bush got a father figure in Dick Cheney, one who supplies him with authority and stability but who still has to take a back seat when it comes to visibility and sex appeal. Vice President Al Gore would get a sister with a touch of the mother in Oprah Winfrey; she would give him an aura of spontaneity, generosity and basically sexless titillation. I refer, of course, to the race angle: theirs would be a chaste union undertaken solely for the public good. Tipper Gore's position wouldn't be usurped: the children are there as visible proof of who the real wife is, and Oprah's companion, Steadman Graham, would be by Oprah's side, as proof that everyone goes back to the old neighborhood when day is done. ''Gore should ask Oprah to be his vice presidential nominee,'' I heard an amateur pundit -- one of legions, I'm sure -- declare last week. Think of what follows as theatrical speculation then, set against a backdrop of some of the dreariest political performances we've yet been subjected to. George W. Bush got a father figure in Dick Cheney, one who supplies him with authority and stability but who still has to take a back seat when it comes to visibility and sex appeal. Vice President Al Gore would get a sister with a touch of the mother in Oprah Winfrey; she would give him an aura of spontaneity, generosity and basically sexless titillation. I refer, of course, to the race angle: theirs would be a chaste union undertaken solely for the public good. Tipper Gore's position wouldn't be usurped: the children are there as visible proof of who the real wife is, and Oprah's companion, Steadman Graham, would be by Oprah's side, as proof that everyone goes back to the old neighborhood when day is done.
 ''I can't deny it has been a two-way street,'' Mr. Cheney said, on the third and final day of a rail trip across the Midwest with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''The process by which we Republicans took control in '94 left some scar tissue.'' Mr. Cheney, the second-ranking House Republican until he became defense secretary in 1989 under President George Bush, also denied waging a specific offensive against President Clinton. But in his sharply worded convention speech, Mr. Cheney said, ''We are all a little weary of the Clinton-Gore routine'' and promised ''a stiff dose of truth'' to counter the ''lectures and legalisms and carefully worded denials'' of the Clinton White House. ''For all of their sentimental talk about children,'' Mr. Cheney said in a typical passage, ''Clinton and Gore have done nothing to help children oppressed by bureaucracy, monopoly and mediocrity.'' Mr. Cheney said today that the style of Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois was more in line with Mr. Bush's ''compassionate conservatism'' than the scorched earth tactics of the former speaker, Newt Gingrich, a friend of Mr. Cheney's.  ''Denny Hastert is probably more suited to the kind of thing we're talking about now than Newt,'' Mr. Cheney said. Mr. Gingrich, of course, is a name that most Republicans are running away from these days. There is little mention of the hard-edged politics of confrontation that predated Mr. Bush. And Mr. Cheney fits that mold of the conservative pragmatist who brings the campaign depth in foreign affairs and the business world. In his speeches, Mr. Bush describes Mr. Cheney, 59, as ''humble,'' ''strong,'' ''steady'' and someone who has brought ''nobility to public service.'' Throughout the rail tour, Mr. Cheney has stuck to his role as the solid, substantive but colorless understudy, the intellectual ballast who would never upstage the top of the ticket. And that is just how Mr. Bush wants it, his aides say. ''Because Republicans are so united, we have the freedom to send him to swing states,'' said Karen P. Hughes, communications director for the Bush campaign. While Mr. Bush will campaign in California and the Pacific Northwest later this week with his former rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Cheney will visit Missouri, Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky and Illinois. When Mr. Cheney campaigns alone, he said, he will hammer home the same issues -- education, Social Security reform, tax cuts and rebuilding the military -- that are staples of Mr. Bush's stump speech. The two candidates' body language at rallies on this four-state trip suggests that Mr. Bush is comfortable with Mr. Cheney, but not close in the way between Bill Clinton and Al Gore were on their first post-convention bus tour in 1992. Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney, for example, usually just shake hands after the introductions. Today, for the first time, each threw an arm around the other's waist, and they waved together to a cheering crowd in Joliet, Ill. Of course, it always takes time to mesh two candidates. At times, Mr. Cheney seems more appended than integrated into the well-oiled Bush campaign. The 13-page schedule for the campaign's whistle-stop tour repeatedly describes when ''the governor'' arrived or departed. But Mr. Cheney was mentioned only once -- when he and his wife are scheduled to get off the campaign plane in Dallas, one stop before Mr. Bush flies on to Austin. He introduces Mr. Bush usually in two minutes or less. Mr. Cheney delivers two lines from his convention speech -- ''It is time for them to go,'' and ''Help is on the way'' -- in a matter-of-fact monotone. When the more dynamic Mr. Bush speaks, Mr. Cheney tends to fidget on stage, folding his arms, then jamming his hands in his suit pants, then clasping his hands behind his back. In the interview, Mr. Cheney insisted that he is running for ideals developed over three decades of public service. When Mr. Bush asked him to run, Mr. Cheney said he had no good reasons other than personal considerations.
 Article focuses on issue of gun control in 2000 Presidential campaign; Gov George Bush's record has been decidedly sympathetic to gun owners, stance has earned him many admirers in Texas, where guns are entwined with culture; has galvanized opponents, from gun control advocates to Vice Pres Al Gore, who have eagerly tried to cast Bush as willing pawn of gun lobby; both candidates are using issue to pursue broader themes of attack; Gore cites Bush's pro-gun record to try to tie him to his party's right wing while offering string of gun-control proposals; Bush aides, noting Gore once opposed gun control, have used issue as part of effort to depict Gore as opportunistic (M) One expectation of anyone running for governor of Texas is that he or she must grab a gun and shoot something. So in 1994, George W. Bush, then the Republican  candidate for governor, borrowed a 20-gauge shotgun and invited a group of reporters on a dove hunt. In the dawn mist, Mr. Bush fired seven times, bagged a bird for the cameras, and then left to continue campaigning. But the dead bird turned out to be a killdeer, a protected species, and a photo opportunity meant to underscore Mr. Bush's kinship with gun owners instead became an embarrassment, as he paid a small fine and apologized. One expectation of anyone running for governor of Texas is that he or she must grab a gun and shoot something. So in 1994, George W. Bush, then the Republican  candidate for governor, borrowed a 20-gauge shotgun and invited a group of reporters on a dove hunt. In the dawn mist, Mr. Bush fired seven times, bagged a bird for the cameras, and then left to continue campaigning. But the dead bird turned out to be a killdeer, a protected species, and a photo opportunity meant to underscore Mr. Bush's kinship with gun owners instead became an embarrassment, as he paid a small fine and apologized. Yet in the eyes of gun owners in Texas and national gun-lobbying groups like the National Rifle Association, Mr. Bush's illegal shot was the last mistake he has made. The N.R.A.'s chief lobbyist in Washington, James Jay Baker, could not recall a single instance in which Mr. Bush, as governor, had opposed the group. ''Not that I can remember,'' Mr. Baker said. Governor Bush's record has been decidedly sympathetic to gun owners. He has signed far-reaching pro-gun legislation, including a 1995 law making it legal to carry concealed weapons, an expansion of that law in 1997, and a 1999 law making it extremely difficult for cities to sue gun manufacturers. One national survey by a gun-control group found that only three states -- Louisiana, Arkansas and Maine -- had looser gun laws than Texas. This stance has earned Mr. Bush many admirers in Texas, where guns are entwined in the culture. But it has also galvanized his opponents in this presidential campaign, from gun-control groups to Vice President Al Gore, who have eagerly tried to cast Mr. Bush as a willing pawn of the gun lobby. Both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are using the gun issue to pursue broader themes of attack. Mr. Gore has cited Mr. Bush's pro-gun record to try to marry the Texas governor to his party's right wing, and, in contrast, has offered a string of gun-control proposals. Mr. Bush's aides, noting that Mr. Gore once opposed gun control, only to change his position, have used the issue as part of their effort to depict Mr. Gore as opportunistic. Both the rifle association and the leading gun-control group, Handgun Control Inc., are treating this election as historic. Handgun Control ran commercials attacking Mr. Bush during the Republican National Convention and will continue to do so. Mr. Baker, who said the N.R.A. would spend $15 million in this year's election campaigns, said the candidates' divergent views on guns made this presidential race the most important in 20 years. The governor's supporters say he has put Texas in the national mainstream with the 30 other states that have similar laws allowing the carrying of concealed weapons. But his critics note that several other Republican governors, including George Ryan in Illinois and George E. Pataki in New York, have pushed for stronger gun laws. Mr. Bush supports better enforcement of existing laws, as does the rifle association. ''There hasn't been a Texas governor that compares to Bush in carrying water for the N.R.A.,'' said Nina Butts, president of Texans Against Gun Violence, a gun-control group. In February, a high-ranking N.R.A. official was videotaped telling supporters that in a Bush presidency, ''we work out of their office.'' The official said the association and Mr. Bush would have ''unbelievably friendly relations.'' Mr. Bush bristled at that remark and has sought to signal his independence from the association by endorsing ideas that include background checks on the buyers of firearms at gun shows and raising the minimum age for buying handguns to 21 from 18. This spring, when the Million Mom March on Washington was held in support of gun control, Mr. Bush announced that he would spend $1 million a year of state money to to hand out free trigger locks to  handgun owners. He said that if elected president, he would support a similar national program. But critics note that Mr. Bush  declined to put his clout behind gun-show background checks in Texas even though he is now supporting them nationally. Texas residents recall that Mr. Bush ran for governor on four issues in 1994 -- juvenile justice, tort changes, and overhauling education and welfare. But guns were also an issue. The incumbent Democrat, Ann Richards, had vetoed a 1993 bill to permit a statewide referendum on allowing Texans to carry concealed weapons. Mr. Bush pledged to sign such a bill, and gun lobbyists now say the issue was crucial to his victory. In 1995 the Legislature again passed a concealed-weapons bill. Many law enforcement agencies, including the Texas Association of Police Chiefs, opposed the bill, but Mr. Bush, as he had promised, signed it into law. The law, which did not require a referendum, allows residents to carry hidden weapons if they undergo a background check and 10 to 15 hours of training. Two years later, Mr. Bush signed an amendment that allowed people to carry concealed weapons into previously excluded institutions, including churches, nursing homes and hospitals, unless those institutions expressly prohibited it. The bill's supporters were pleased, but if they regard Mr. Bush as an ally, they do not consider him a soul mate. ''Bush is being given the mantle of the pro-gun zealot and he's really not,'' said Jerry Patterson, a former Republican state senator who was a chief sponsor of the concealed-weapons bills in 1995 and 1997. Mr. Patterson said some ''pro-gun people are not comfortable with Mr. Bush.'' Gun-control supporters were outraged, particularly by the provision involving churches. Mr. Patterson said it had been in response to complaints from pastors who could not carry their weapons onto the grounds of their own churches. As of July 3, state statistics showed that 212,969 Texans had licenses to carry  concealed weapons, and Mr. Bush has argued that the law has made Texas safer. The rifle association shifted emphasis in 1999, beginning an effort to blunt lawsuits filed by cities against gun manufacturers. In Texas, which includes 3 of the nation's 10 largest cities, the Legislature passed a bill prohibiting such municipal lawsuits, though it did allow the state attorney general to file such suits. Mr. Bush signed the law and has suggested that he would sign similar federal legislation if elected president. When asked about gun control, Mr. Bush often repeats the theme that government should enforce existing laws, not restrict the rights of law-abiding citizens. As part of his juvenile-justice package, Mr. Bush increased the penalties for minors committing crimes with a gun. In 1999, he helped institute the Texas Exile Program, which helps law enforcement agencies prosecute gun crimes under stricter federal sentencing guidelines. In 1995, he signed the Texas Child Access Prevention law, which holds adults criminally responsible for not keeping loaded guns out of the hands of children. Finally, gun-control advocates say Mr. Bush should be judged not only by what he has done, but what he has not. Last year, Debra Danburg, a Democratic state representative from Houston, introduced a bill to close the loophole that allows people to buy weapons at gun shows from unlicensed sellers without a background check. Texas has the most shows of any state, with 472 in 1998. A day after the Columbine High School shootings, Mr. Bush said that a popular culture that romanticizes violence had been partly to blame. But in remarks to reporters, Mr. Bush endorsed the idea of background checks at gun shows. This stunned Ms. Danburg. Just hours before the governor's comments, Ms. Danburg's bill had died in a House committee. Mr. Bush had done nothing to get the bill passed. Mr. Bush's aides and pro-gun lobbyists say the Danburg bill was flawed and would have essentially closed down all gun shows. Ms. Danburg said she would have amended the bill and could have passed it, if Mr. Bush had helped.
 Unlike the tame and carefully planned Republican convention that anointed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Thursday, the four-day meeting of Reform Party members promises some sharp skirmishes as the delegates choose between Patrick J. Buchanan and John Hagelin for the party's nomination and the $12.6 million in federal campaign funds that goes with it. Unlike the tame and carefully planned Republican convention that anointed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Thursday, the four-day meeting of Reform Party members promises some sharp skirmishes as the delegates choose between Patrick J. Buchanan and John Hagelin for the party's nomination and the $12.6 million in federal campaign funds that goes with it.
 Gore Aides Laud Daley For Reviving Campaign  Six weeks after taking charge of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, William M. Daley seems to have revived the once flagging morale of the Democratic campaign. Mr. Daley has limited infighting and imposed discipline on the campaign's strategy and message. Mr. Gore's aides say they feel more optimism than at any point since the vice president swept the primaries. Cheney Thrusts and Parries  Dick Cheney, Gov. George W. Bush's running mate, repeated his promise of a ''coast to coast'' battle to evict the Democrats from the White House, but he denied any specific attacks on President Clinton. He acknowledged that House Republicans bore some responsibility for the ''partisan bickering and backbiting'' he rails against in his speeches.
 William Safire Op-Ed column appraises Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican national Convention in Philadelphia; outlines what he sees as strengths and weaknesses of address, which was generally well received around nation (M) The well-accepted acceptance speech of George W. Bush is worthy of an exegete's eye. Most moving and evocative passage: In his visit to a jail for juveniles in Marlin, Tex., when a 15-year-old inmate asked him, ''What do you think of me?'', Bush perceptively interpreted the question to mean, ''Do you, a white man in a suit, really care what happens to me?'' He drew on John Donne's no-man-is-an-island philosophy to decry the imprisoning wall of indifference separating rich and poor, ambitious and despairing. Bush had alluded earlier to the Berlin Wall that had come down ''with the leadership of Presidents Reagan and Bush.'' He then connected the metaphor of the jailed juvenile to Ronald Reagan's words in cold-war Berlin: we must ''tear down that wall.'' The well-accepted acceptance speech of George W. Bush is worthy of an exegete's eye. Most moving and evocative passage: In his visit to a jail for juveniles in Marlin, Tex., when a 15-year-old inmate asked him, ''What do you think of me?'', Bush perceptively interpreted the question to mean, ''Do you, a white man in a suit, really care what happens to me?'' He drew on John Donne's no-man-is-an-island philosophy to decry the imprisoning wall of indifference separating rich and poor, ambitious and despairing. Bush had alluded earlier to the Berlin Wall that had come down ''with the leadership of Presidents Reagan and Bush.'' He then connected the metaphor of the jailed juvenile to Ronald Reagan's words in cold-war Berlin: we must ''tear down that wall.'' Most subtle play on discomfort of many Democrats with the current president: He quoted Robert Frost, the poet older Americans remember speaking in the cold at John F. Kennedy's inauguration, of the dream of the nation's founders ''to occupy the land with character.'' That reminder set up Bush's observation that ''a president himself must be responsible,'' significantly followed by his pledge to ''uphold the honor and dignity of the office,'' which most voters believe Clinton failed to do. Most adept plays on phrases of previous presidents: Although Al Gore now leads F.D.R.'s party, ''the only thing he has to offer is fear itself.'' Bush had already improved on Clinton's phrase ''the tyranny of low expectations'' with his own ''the soft bigotry of low expectations'' and drove it home again in his acceptance. Most useful verb to deride the opposition's misuse of only-superpower status and economic boom: ''Instead of seizing this moment, the Clinton-Gore administration has squandered it.'' This word, of unknown origin but more mouth-filling than ''waste,'' should become a staple of Bush rhetoric. Running against Washington. The Yale graduate and child of privilege assumed, Jimmy Carter style, a hardscrabble pose to assert that his ''background may lack the polish of Washington.'' And then, following a focus-group distaste for controversy, he dissociated himself from all investigations into Clinton-Gore scandals, including illegal fund-raising: ''I have no stake in the bitter arguments of the last few years.'' Republicans on the unpopular ramparts of the rule of law were coolly informed he preferred ''civility and respect.'' Oversimplifying foreign and defense policy. ''When America uses force in the world, the cause must be just, the goal must be clear and the victory must be overwhelming.'' This is the old Weinberger-Powell doctrine, and had it been applied in the Balkans would have awarded Kosovo to Slobodan Milosevic. If Bush becomes president, that all-or-nothing policy sentence -- denying limited intervention -- will come back to haunt him. Feeble labeling. ''It is a time for new beginnings. . . . I believe America is ready for a new beginning.'' We are readier for new sloganeering; Bush's ''New Beginning'' will go over as thunderously as Clinton's ''New Covenant.'' Gore has put out word that he is composing his own acceptance. Welcome to the world of speechwriting, Al; the nonpartisan blades of exegesis go snicker-snack.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column examines education record of Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush; says while he has done some nice things with school system in Texas he cannot legitimately claim much of credit for gains in academic achievements documented by recent Rand Corporation study (M) Whenever George W. Bush talks about his achievements as governor of Texas, the item at the top of his list is education reform, especially the remarkable improvement in test scores by the state's public school students. Whenever George W. Bush talks about his achievements as governor of Texas, the item at the top of his list is education reform, especially the remarkable improvement in test scores by the state's public school students. Well, not exactly. George W. has done some nice work with the school system in Texas, but he can't legitimately claim much of the credit for the gains documented by the Rand study. The dramatic improvements in the public schools in Texas were the result of years of hard work and big spending that not only predated Mr. Bush, but were inspired and organized by none other than H. Ross Perot. The problem with George Bush taking credit for this achievement in the years 1990 through 1996 is that he did not become governor until 1995. And, as the authors of the report have made clear, it takes several years for students to realize the benefits from the kinds of reforms in place in Texas. Improved test scores in the fourth and eighth grades, for example, come from students who were part of the reform effort when they started school. While George W. Bush had little or nothing to do with the gains reported in the Rand study, he has maintained his state's focus on education reform. He was responsible for a reading initiative that is widely admired and he has not undermined the reforms he inherited. The problem for Mr. Bush, if he is thinking about the improvements he could bring to public schools nationwide if he becomes president, is the fact that both he and his party are opposed to federal assistance for the very programs that have meant so much in Texas -- smaller class size and prekindergarten programs. The federal government, in this era of plenty, could lend a much-needed hand to school systems across the country. To get that done, Mr. Bush and the Republicans would have to do a pretty neat philosophical shift.
 33-year-old Oliver Cruz, who has been classified as mentally retarded by psychologists at his trial, faces death by lethal injection in Texas on August 9 for rape and murder of 24-year-old Kelly Donovan, at time when there is growing opposition nationwide to execution of such individuals; has IQ of between 64 and 76 and has spent last 12 years on death row; state, which has not disputed his condition, argued at trial that fact Cruz may not be very smart makes him more dangerous and is more reason to sentence him to death; his attorney has asked Gov George Bush, who opposes laws prohibiting such executions, as well as Board of Pardons, for stay; of 38 states that permit capital punishment, 13 have laws that prohibit execution of mentally retarded; photos (L) In Florida, Gov. Jeb Bush, who like his brother George is a strong supporter of the death penalty, told reporters in April that ''people with clear mental retardation should not be executed,'' and a spokesman said last week that Jeb Bush still held that position. The chairman of the state's Republican Party has recently pledged to support legislation that would ban the execution of the mentally retarded in Florida. Here in Texas, Gov. George W. Bush has opposed laws that would prohibit the execution of the mentally retarded. [It is a position he still holds, a spokeswoman, Linda Edwards, said on Friday. ''Governor Bush believes that the jury should consider all the evidence regarding mental impairment and decide whether a death sentence is appropriate,'' Ms. Edwards said.] Mr. Cruz's lawyer, Jeffrey Pokorak, has asked Governor Bush and the Texas State Board of Pardons and Paroles for a stay of execution, and he says he hopes he can postpone a lethal injection at least until next spring, when the legislation that might save his life will be voted on. He wants a full evidentiary hearing on Mr. Cruz's mental condition. Mr. Pokorak said the defense psychologist's review of Mr. Cruz's school records showed that they had classified him as ''educable mentally retarded.'' One of George W. Bush's first acts as governor of Texas, in January  1995, was to reject a request for clemency for Mario Marquez, who suffered from severe brain damage and had an I.Q. of 60 and the skills of a 7-year-old. Mr. Marquez was executed on the evening of Mr. Bush's inauguration for the murder of his niece. Correction:  August 11, 2000, Friday  A front-page article on Monday about growing opposition to the execution of mentally retarded prisoners misstated the timing of the execution of Mario Marquez in 1995 on the day George W. Bush was inaugurated as governor of Texas. The execution occurred in the morning, before the inauguration, not in the evening. Mr. Marquez's petition for clemency was rejected by Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock after he consulted Mr. Bush's aides. A front-page article on Monday about growing opposition to the execution of mentally retarded prisoners misstated the timing of the execution of Mario Marquez in 1995 on the day George W. Bush was inaugurated as governor of Texas. The execution occurred in the morning, before the inauguration, not in the evening. Mr. Marquez's petition for clemency was rejected by Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock after he consulted Mr. Bush's aides.
