 Anthony Mancini letter seconds Sanford Levinson's Aug 4 Op-Ed article on dubious constitutionality of George W Bush's selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate Re ''2 Texans, Not 1'' (Op-Ed, Aug. 4): Sanford Levinson's thought-provoking article highlighting the dubious constitutionality of George W. Bush's selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate raises another interesting question that was not explored. Re ''2 Texans, Not 1'' (Op-Ed, Aug. 4): Sanford Levinson's thought-provoking article highlighting the dubious constitutionality of George W. Bush's selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate raises another interesting question that was not explored.
 Re ''Bush-Cheney Ticket Nominated and the Attacks on Gore Begin'' (front page, Aug. 3): While listening to Colin L. Powell, Laura Bush, Dick Cheney and others giving their speeches at the Republican National Convention, I was struck by how little their sentiments had to do with any of the substance of Republican Party policies, like being tough on crime or opposing affirmative action. I am sure that many voters feel insulted by such a cheap and transparent effort to win support. Re ''Bush-Cheney Ticket Nominated and the Attacks on Gore Begin'' (front page, Aug. 3): While listening to Colin L. Powell, Laura Bush, Dick Cheney and others giving their speeches at the Republican National Convention, I was struck by how little their sentiments had to do with any of the substance of Republican Party policies, like being tough on crime or opposing affirmative action. I am sure that many voters feel insulted by such a cheap and transparent effort to win support.
 Anthony Lewis column says that one of his greatest regrets as a newspaper columnist is how he underrated Gerald Ford when he was in the White House and says he doubts George W Bush can measure up to him (M) Remembering what Gerald Ford did as president takes us back to Philadelphia. For the convention made clear, despite its papered-over unity, what a hard time George W. Bush would have dealing with his party if he was elected president -- how much he would need the courage and independence of Gerald Ford. Mr. Bush speaks of wanting to carry on the fight against racism in this country. What would he do about the Republican senators who have refused to confirm a single black nominee to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which has more black citizens than any other circuit? Is it the Republican Party of Gen. Colin Powell? Or is it the party of Senator Trent Lott and Representative Tom DeLay? When Republicans push through environmental ripper bills drafted by polluting companies, would George W. Bush have the courage to veto them as President Clinton did? Most important, would Mr. Bush be ready to do what he has not done as governor of Texas -- think seriously about the American legal tradition and what it demands? Would he follow Gerald Ford in putting politics second to respect for law?
 Elizabeth Wrigley-Field letter comments on July 29 article on George W Bush, deploring the fact that he had his friends' wives do his laundry until he married himself ''How Bush Came to Tame His Inner Scamp'' (front page, July 29) notes that when George W. Bush married, he ''stopped bringing his laundry over for his friends' wives to wash.'' ''How Bush Came to Tame His Inner Scamp'' (front page, July 29) notes that when George W. Bush married, he ''stopped bringing his laundry over for his friends' wives to wash.'' I find it embarrassing both that Mr. Bush himself was unable to do laundry, and that, apparently, so were his (male) friends. I can't imagine that their wives were thrilled to find themselves washing the clothes of their husbands' domestically incompetent buddy.
 Voters interviewed in New York, Milwaukee, Atlanta and Los Angeles have wide array of reactions to Republican National Convention; some find things to approve of, like the gathering's patriotic fervor or what they saw as Gov George W Bush's 'presidential stature,' but the one theme that runs consistently through many of their observations is that they do not necessarily accept at face value the rainbow image the party is projecting; photos (L) Voters interviewed here and in New York, Milwaukee and Los Angeles had a wide array of reactions to the convention. Some found things to approve of, like the gathering's patriotic fervor or what they saw as Gov. George W. Bush's ''presidential stature.'' Here, over four days of intermittent convention viewing in their homes, Ms. Allen and two other women undecided about their votes were less than sold on Mr. Bush and were waiting to see whether the Democrats in Los Angeles would be more captivating. ''It was like a last-ditch effort, and I was kind of disappointed that he would be a part of that,'' said Ms. Jackson, who, like General Powell, is black.  She also did not appreciate what she described as Mr. Bush's rude remarks about Vice President Al Gore's personality and character: ''He kind of made personal jabs at him. I think he did that to kind of get away from the issues.'' Mr. Bush's vow to prohibit the kind of late-term procedure that opponents call partial-birth abortion left Ms. Jackson feeling his stance had been watered down. ''In reality, we know he thinks all abortion is wrong,'' she said. (Mr. Bush has said he is not against abortion in cases of rape or incest or when a woman's life is in danger.) While she believed Mr. Bush appeared presidential, if she had to vote tomorrow, Ms. Jackson would select Mr. Gore for what she saw as his sincerity and his drive to try to do what he thinks is best. ''The environment, gun control and campaign finance are certainly not being answered in these three days, but I'm impressed with the types of people promoting Governor Bush,'' Ms. Kruzan said. She felt the same after hearing Mr. Bush's acceptance speech, which she found comprehensive and impressive. In all, she said, her opinion of the candidate rose during the convention, particularly after she saw people who might serve in a Bush cabinet. On Thursday, when Mr. Bush vowed to support a ban on the abortion procedure, Ms. Allen, who is in her mid-30's, said he lost her vote. ''I guess I'll wait and I'll see what Gore has to say,'' Ms. Allen said Thursday. ''He better be honest. I mean just real stuff, not all of this kind of 'rockets' red glare,' lyrics from the anthem, fields of waving grass and grain.''
 In the meantime, we now have Jedediahs and Daves all around us -- in art, in business, even in politics: Anselm Kiefer and Jeff Koons; Bill Gates and Paul Allen; Al Gore and George W. Bush. One set of these prophets is telling us to please, get serious; the other to lighten up, dude. They would never admit it, but they probably need each other.
 Gov George W Bush uses his acceptance speech at Republican National Convention to create a synthesis new to Republican politics: conservative policies described in ways that his campaign believes swing voters will love; must hold conservative base though his policy proposals and then pick up the moderate middle through conciliatory language and willingness to speak about issues that Democrats have long dominated (M) With his convention speech, Gov. George W. Bush created a synthesis new to Republican politics: conservative policies described in ways that his campaign believes swing voters will love. With his convention speech, Gov. George W. Bush created a synthesis new to Republican politics: conservative policies described in ways that his campaign believes swing voters will love. The language was positively Clintonian, but as many conservatives were quick to note, Mr. Bush had not actually changed any of the Republican Party's core principles -- from its opposition to abortion, to its support for large tax cuts, to its backing of a vast missile defense system, to its search for conservative Supreme Court justices. This synthesis is central to Mr. Bush's effort to assemble a winning coalition. The Bush campaign wants to hold its conservative base through its policy proposals, and then pick up the moderate middle through Mr. Bush's conciliatory language and willingness to speak about issues that Democrats long dominated. The question for the fall campaign is whether Mr. Bush can convincingly keep up his balancing act as the Democrats try to home in on the details of policy proposals and his record back in Texas. Where Mr. Bush describes a tax cut that helps people at the bottom of the economic ladder, the Democrats see a tax cut that helps the rich. While Mr. Bush promises to strengthen Social Security, the Democrats say he could reduce retirement benefits. For all the time Mr. Bush spent delivering policy addresses this spring, a number of his proposals lack specifics. And Mr. Bush's record does not always square with his rhetoric. The man who showcased minorities all across his convention is, after all, the same candidate who, when he needed to recover from a defeat in the New Hampshire primaries, began his comeback campaign at a South Carolina university that banned interracial dating. ''An informed voter is their worst nightmare,'' Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman, said of the Bush campaign. The Democrats have already begun a barrage of ads trying to challenge Mr. Bush's commitment on issues like the environment. With the Democrats running against the high cost of prescription drugs, Mr. Bush's aides say they are already debating, for example, whether the Texas governor needs to draw up a plan to show how he would pay for prescription drug coverage. In his nomination speech, Mr. Bush said he would ''make prescription drugs available and affordable for every senior who needs them.'' But he has never said how he would do that and has never devoted a major address to the issue. All he has done is speak approvingly of one bipartisan plan floated in Congress that would allow Medicare recipients to choose a plan with a prescription drug benefit. And when House Republicans passed their own prescription drug plan, Mr. Bush avoided taking a position on it. Or what about Social Security? On Thursday night, Mr. Bush sought credit for his willingness to take a stand on the issue. And he promised that he would strengthen the program ''for the greatest generation and generations to come.'' One group of experts at the New Century Foundation, in a study disputed by the Bush campaign, has said that a plan like Mr. Bush's could result in future retirement incomes 20 percent lower than the levels projected under the current Social Security law. Mr. Bush's tax cut can also be portrayed in different ways. As he always does, Mr. Bush focused on how he would help the people at the bottom of the economic ladder. ''On principle, those in the greatest need should receive the greatest help,'' he said Thursday night. ''So we will lower the bottom rate from 15 percent to 10 percent and double the child tax credit.'' What he did not say, but the Democrats do, is that like all tax cuts that sweeping, Mr. Bush's plan helps people at the top of the economic ladder the most. The Gore campaign, in a statement, calls Mr. Bush ''compassionate for the rich and conservative for everyone else.'' In one case on Thursday night, Mr. Bush's language was designed to keep conservatives from becoming alarmed over one area of policy where he is directly breaking with his party's past. ''One size does not fit all when it comes to educating our children,'' Mr. Bush said, ''so local people should control local schools.'' That was a version of one of his biggest applause lines on the campaign trail -- his insistence that he does not want to be the federal superintendent of education. In this period of economic prosperity, the voters may never pay that much attention to the issues and may simply hear Mr. Bush's inclusive rhetoric and make judgments about whether they like the man. Indeed, Mr. Bush's advisers acknowledge that to some extent he is using issues simply to create the impression that he is a bold leader. The very fact, they say, that he has been willing to take stands that challenge the status quo makes voters think he is up to the job of president. ''The issues form a composite of the candidate that's bigger than the issues themselves,'' said one senior adviser to Mr. Bush. ''We have and want to be seen as confronting the hard issues, not avoiding them, and doing so in ways that are innovative for a Republican to do.'' For now, at least, the Republicans are confident that Mr. Bush has made conservatism attractive. ''I don't think that Al Gore can win this election,'' said Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin. ''I think George Bush can lose it.''
 Dick Cheney, in his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention, assured America that four years of a Gore administration would be a continuation of the eight years of the Clinton administration (front page, Aug. 3). Dick Cheney, in his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention, assured America that four years of a Gore administration would be a continuation of the eight years of the Clinton administration (front page, Aug. 3).
 Gore Returns G.O.P. Fire, Citing Years of Prosperity  Vice President Al Gore, campaigning in Chicago, accused the Republicans of running a showy but insubstantial convention, and he strongly claimed credit for having helped create the nation's roaring economy. Mr. Gore is drafting his own acceptance speech for the Democratic National Convention this month, though supporters close to him want him to involve professional writers. Bush Seeks to Build Momentum  Gov. George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, campaigned by plane, train and automobile in Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan, swing states the Democrats carried in the last two presidential elections. Mr. Bush got a clear bump upward from his acceptance speech and the Republican convention generally, but its dimensions and duration were uncertain. One overnight poll, conducted for NBC News, indicated that Mr. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore had gone from 6 percentage points to 11, but some pollsters said attacks on Mr. Gore had played badly among independent voters.
 If the opposition does contest the election and Mr. Milosevic wins, countries such as Russia, Greece and Italy should not use his ''victory'' as a pretext to improve their relations with Serbia. They well know he keeps power through repression. Nor should Mr. Milosevic look forward to a change in American policy if Gov. George W. Bush becomes president. The Republican platform says there should be no negotiations with indicted war criminals such as Mr. Milosevic, and that Washington should seek their arrest, trial and imprisonment.
 Maurice Vanegas is precisely the kind of person Gov. George W. Bush has been straining to speak to this past week. He is Latino and a small-business owner, he hews to the political center, and he is undecided about his vote this November. But after watching the Republican convention, Mr. Vanegas is also a skeptic. ''I think Mr. Bush is very noble and he wants to do the right thing,'' said Mr. Vanegas, who is 31 and operates transportation and real estate businesses. ''But as far as making me want to vote for him, I'm still not there. As a Latino immigrant, being a bigger superpower isn't something that appeals to me, and I don't mind paying taxes or worry about a big tax cut. We just want opportunity and a country with a big heart.'' Maurice Vanegas is precisely the kind of person Gov. George W. Bush has been straining to speak to this past week. He is Latino and a small-business owner, he hews to the political center, and he is undecided about his vote this November. But after watching the Republican convention, Mr. Vanegas is also a skeptic. ''I think Mr. Bush is very noble and he wants to do the right thing,'' said Mr. Vanegas, who is 31 and operates transportation and real estate businesses. ''But as far as making me want to vote for him, I'm still not there. As a Latino immigrant, being a bigger superpower isn't something that appeals to me, and I don't mind paying taxes or worry about a big tax cut. We just want opportunity and a country with a big heart.'' Another immigrant, Mario Matute, 40, who is voting in his first presidential election, said he was impressed that Mr. Bush spoke some Spanish and was at least interested in wooing Latinos. Mr. Matute emigrated from El Salvador and runs a job development program. With its white majority long gone, a soaring immigrant population and a heavy reliance on small businesses, Los Angeles is the kind of nascent metropolis of the future that both parties need to capture to win the White House. Conversations with a handful of residents found that most of them, even ardent Democrats, had been impressed by Mr. Bush's sense of optimism. But there were also questions about how new the party could be with its conservative core intact -- a core that is still perceived by many people here to be less sympathetic than the Democrats to immigrants and the poor. ''Politics shouldn't be so polarized,'' Ms. Inouye said. ''Bush was confident and optimistic, not negative. That may be his edge.'' By week's end, however, Mr. O'Doherty expressed enthusiasm for the convention as a successful show. He said he felt that Mr. Cheney's speech had energized the convention for the first time. He applauded Mr. Bush as a leader with good ideas in his speech, and he said the party had focused on the positive with a high moral tone. ''He did exactly what his mission was,'' Mr. O'Doherty said of Mr. Bush's speech on Thursday night. ''He had to convince the swing voters to come over, and that's what he did.''
 Gov George W Bush comes roaring out of Republican National Convention by plane, train and automobile, intent on sustaining whatever momentum he has seized from Republican National Convention in Philadelphia; reiterates his vow to bring a new harmony and integrity to Washington; photo at start of whistle-stop tour in Pittsburgh; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush came roaring out of the Republican National Convention today by plane, train and automobile, intent on sustaining whatever momentum he had seized from the four-day extravaganza in Philadelphia, and focused on a group of swing states the Democrats won in the last two presidential elections. Mr. Bush, now officially the Republican presidential nominee, traveled from Pennsylvania to Michigan, with several stops in Ohio in between, to reiterate his vow to bring a new harmony and integrity to Washington, rejoice in the unity that he said the Republican Party had achieved and just plain grin. It was clear he was pleased with the convention, and with his own performance there. Gov. George W. Bush came roaring out of the Republican National Convention today by plane, train and automobile, intent on sustaining whatever momentum he had seized from the four-day extravaganza in Philadelphia, and focused on a group of swing states the Democrats won in the last two presidential elections. Mr. Bush, now officially the Republican presidential nominee, traveled from Pennsylvania to Michigan, with several stops in Ohio in between, to reiterate his vow to bring a new harmony and integrity to Washington, rejoice in the unity that he said the Republican Party had achieved and just plain grin. It was clear he was pleased with the convention, and with his own performance there. ''It won't be long now,'' Mr. Bush said, repeating a line from his convention speech that forecast the ouster of the Clinton-Gore team and the arrival of a Republican administration in its stead. ''Give us a chance to change America for the better, and it won't be long now.'' For this post-convention tour, Mr. Bush introduced a new slogan, ''Change the Tone,'' reflecting his pledge to purge Washington of its partisan acrimony. ''We've all gotten a little tired of the Clinton-Gore operation,'' Mr. Cheney said. Then, taking a line from his convention speech, he added, ''Help is on the way.'' And at the earlier stop in Pittsburgh, the crowd chanted: ''No more Gore! No more Gore!'' The dissonance in Mr. Bush's day extended not just to tone in general but also to the specific topic of inclusion. At a prayer breakfast this morning in Philadelphia, he made a point of saying that ''the gateway to heaven has many different paths.''  But one of the invited guests, Cardinal Anthony Bevilacqua, archbishop of Philadelphia, explicitly condemned abortion and implicitly indicted marriage between homosexuals. The cardinal said that ''millions of children have been slaughtered'' and, in the context of what he saw as a trend toward redefining marriage, maintained that society was plagued by ''sexually unbridled permissiveness.'' On his campaign plane today, Mr. Bush said he was not indulging in negative campaigning, against either President Clinton or Vice President Al Gore. ''When I say I'm going to bring honor and dignity to the White House,'' Mr. Bush said, ''that's what I'm going to do. And if people draw conclusions other than that, so be it.'' Referring to some pointed jokes he made about Mr. Gore in his convention speech, he added: ''The idea of needling the opponent with good humor, that's what American politics should be about, as opposed to trying to tear people down and distort. And I'm going to continue pointing up differences, and I will do so in a respectful way and occasionally put a needle out there.'' Several polls taken toward the end of the convention suggested that Mr. Bush was getting a good ''bounce'' from the event. For instance, a survey conducted by Voter.com found a 10-point bounce for the new nominee,  leaving him with 49 percent and Mr.  Gore with 31 percent. Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, had 6 percent, and Patrick J. Buchanan, the likely Reform Party nominee,  had 2 percent. Perhaps because those polls seemed so promising, the Bush campaign soft-pedaled them, so that Republicans would not be lulled into an outsized optimism about the governor's prospects, and to try to keep the inevitable tightening of the race from being portrayed as a downturn for him. ''Listen,'' Mr. Bush said, ''there's going to be all kinds of polls and speculation between now and Election Day. And I understand that, and that's why I think it's so important for us to be patient and keep our eye on the finish line.'' To help hold on to the sense of moment leading from the convention, Mr. Bush traveled today with his wife, Laura; Mr. Cheney; Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne, and a larger group of his senior advisers than is typical. And he hit more than half a dozen cities on the train, whose route started in Pittsburgh and ended in Akron. The stops came as frequently as every 15 or 20 minutes, and Mr. Bush kept his remarks extremely brief, choosing general expressions of emotion rather than specific references to policy. Time and again, he said his favorite part of the convention was the speech by Laura Bush on Monday night, and he remarked on what a beautiful smile she had.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column says Republican National Convention showed that Gov George W Bush has the iron-fist skills, the team and the imagination to persuade his fractious party to try to project itself as a haven for minorities Though George W. Bush was able to soften or remove the traditional hard-line G.O.P. platform boilerplate on almost every issue -- he even got rid of the plank calling for the abolition of the National Endowment for the Arts -- he let stand the party's draconian positions on both gay civil rights and abortion rights. Had he really wanted those stances altered, they certainly would have been. Which leads to the most important story here -- the political prowess of Mr. Bush. For all the ridicule lavished on this touchy-feely, pseudo-multicultural, neo-Clintonesque convention -- exactly the lockstep exercise in political correctness the right professes to abhor -- the medium really was the message. That message is not the official one, that the G.O.P. has overnight transformed itself into a haven for minorities. It hasn't. The real message is simply that Governor Bush had the iron-fist skills, the team and the imagination to persuade his party to convey that benign image, however synthetic some of it was. Everyone from pro-choice Republican women in pearls to Pat Robertson devotees to the most rabid Clinton-haters bit their tongues rather than frighten any of those few independents or Democrats watching. There were no mentions of impeachment; no ''it takes a village'' cracks about Hillary Clinton. Republican heavies from Richard Nixon to Newt Gingrich to Henry Hyde were erased from history with Stalinist efficiency. It was all so lulling -- except for Mr. Bush's ingeniously crafted acceptance speech -- that it looked easy. But it couldn't have been. The big news here, and it's far from boring, is that the G.O.P. nominee proved, as neither his father nor Bob Dole could, that he is capable of taming, uniting and, if you will, leading what has been for a decade a notoriously unruly and obstreperous party. Democrats are kidding themselves if they deny that Mr. Bush is far closer than he was a week ago to making the sale that he can govern the country as well.
 It was Laura Bush, the wife of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who set the tone. ''She has a softer way,'' Mr. Greer said. ''She's really a plus.'' It was Laura Bush, the wife of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who set the tone. ''She has a softer way,'' Mr. Greer said. ''She's really a plus.'' On the convention's second night, Mr. Greer offered praise as he listened to speeches by Senator John McCain of Arizona and Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief international affairs adviser. But others were not convinced that Mr. McCain was speaking from his heart. ''McCain gives a very good speech,'' Ms. Wyman said, ''but I would bet that in his heart of hearts, he doesn't believe what he says about Bush.'' The Milwaukee residents paid most attention, not surprisingly, to the speech by Mr. Bush on Thursday night. Most considered the speech a success. Mr. Bush ''looked presidential,'' Ms. Wyman said, and he ''comes across better than his father ever did.'' Mr. Greer noted that Mr. Bush ''didn't have his smirk,'' and said the candidate scored points by presenting himself ''as a human,'' especially when making references to his mother. Ms. Lee remarked at Mr. Bush's ''charisma, the friend-next-door appeal,'' and applauded his plans on education. For Ms. Castore, the praise was grudging. ''As a speech it was O.K., but I thought his attacks on Gore fell flat,'' she said, referring to Vice President Al Gore. ''A lot of what he said, it sounded good. But I don't know what it means. It lacked so many specifics.'' But for Mr. Colon, who had started the week not certain whether he would vote for Mr. Bush or not, the speech was a clincher.
 A report in the Philadelphia Diary column about a speech by Jeb Bush's son, George P. Bush, misstated his age. It is 24, not 23. A report in the Philadelphia Diary column about a speech by Jeb Bush's son, George P. Bush, misstated his age. It is 24, not 23.
 Vice Pres Al Gore spends part of his beach vacation in North Carolina writing his own speech accepting Democratic presidential nomination; for a candidate to write a speech of this importance by himself is virtually unheard of (M) With the Democratic National Convention just a few days off, Vice President Al Gore spent part of his beach vacation in North Carolina writing his own speech accepting the presidential nomination. Mr. Gore told reporters on Thursday that he had spent several hours a day writing the address. With the Democratic National Convention just a few days off, Vice President Al Gore spent part of his beach vacation in North Carolina writing his own speech accepting the presidential nomination. Mr. Gore told reporters on Thursday that he had spent several hours a day writing the address. ''I've been drafted to tell him he should show it to other people sooner rather than later,'' said Martin Peretz, Mr. Gore's onetime Harvard professor and longtime friend. ''And I dread saying it because I dread his response.'' Mr. Peretz, who is better known as the editor in chief of The New Republic, declined to say who had drafted him for the job, though he hinted it was Karenna Gore Schiff, Mr. Gore's oldest daughter and one of his closest advisers. For a candidate to write a speech of this importance by himself is virtually unheard of in presidential politics. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, put his speechwriters through a number of drafts, but like most candidates did not do any writing himself. Mr. Gore, though, is a former newspaper reporter who by all accounts wrote every word of his 1992 book, ''Earth in the Balance.'' The eulogy he wrote for his father's funeral in 1998 was widely considered the best speech he ever gave. And it is hardly out of character for Mr. Gore, who has been known to totally rework the speeches written by his staff, to have taken on the speechwriting duties. He was heavily involved in the writing of his addresses to the 1992 and 1996 Democratic conventions. He also often does things on his own; this is the candidate, after all, who designed his own ''Gore 2000'' campaign logo. Because this speech is considered crucial for Mr. Gore's election effort, it is not surprising, either, that there might be concern about making sure the vice president hears from the professionals. But, even if the pros have not seen a draft of Mr. Gore's speech, he has at least talked to them about it. Last Saturday, Bob Shrum and Carter Eskew, his top consultants, met Mr. Gore in North Carolina to discuss the address.
 In some copies, a picture of Jeb Bush with the Florida delegation carried an incorrect credit. The photographer was Andrea Mohin of The New York Times. In some copies, a picture of Jeb Bush with the Florida delegation carried an incorrect credit. The photographer was Andrea Mohin of The New York Times.
 A picture caption yesterday about Bush family members at the Republican National Convention misidentified a sister-in-law of George W. Bush. She was Margaret Bush, the wife of Marvin Bush -- not Columba Bush, the wife of Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida. A picture caption yesterday about Bush family members at the Republican National Convention misidentified a sister-in-law of George W. Bush. She was Margaret Bush, the wife of Marvin Bush -- not Columba Bush, the wife of Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida.
 Black voters now make up 15 percent of the electorate, and they usually provide overwhelming support for Democrats. But Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, has been campaigning in black and Hispanic communities, in an effort to underscore his message of inclusiveness.
 Political science students at New York University recognize obscure de Toqueville quotations and argue the merits of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty vs. the Strategic Defense Initiative. So when the Republican National Convention rolled around, they were an astute audience, eager to analyze what George W. Bush set out to accomplish and how well he succeeded. Political science students at New York University recognize obscure de Toqueville quotations and argue the merits of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty vs. the Strategic Defense Initiative. So when the Republican National Convention rolled around, they were an astute audience, eager to analyze what George W. Bush set out to accomplish and how well he succeeded. Mr. Green, who said he would most likely cast his first presidential vote for Vice President Al Gore, veered between calling the tactic a ''sick Republican scheme'' and saying that the convention had ''gone extremely well'' for the party. He argued with himself about whether the Republicans were ''trying to pull the wool over my eyes'' or ''making a serious attempt to change the party's traditional ethnic and financial makeup.'' Mr. Panagopolous, also a nightly devotee, dissected the ramifications of Mr. Bush's proposed tax cuts and lamented the candidate's silence on international trade and  domestic economic trends. Mr. Green seemed to have seen virtually every speaker, Republican National Committee video and mariachi or Motown band. By contrast, Martin Wolf, 19, skipped the first night because a broken fish tank had shorted out his television set, and he considered Mr. Bush's speech, which he grudgingly watched, a ''waste of my time.'' Ms. Nadenichek, 28, said she would have ignored the Bush speech and worked on a conference paper were it not for her husband. All of the students noted, admiringly, the Republicans finesse at highlighting the improprieties, sexual and otherwise, of the Clinton White House and tarnishing Mr. Gore in the process. They also thought it deft to call attention to the nation's prosperity, the Democrat's crowning achievement in the past eight years, while characterizing it as an opportunity wasted. ''Bush tried to point out what is morally wrong with the executive administration today while pointing out what is right with the economy,'' Mr. Green said. ''Theoretically, I guess this means all Bush has to do is win the election, move into the White House, do no harm to the economy and remain faithful to his wife. Sounds like a pretty easy job.''
 A State Department spokesman said granting Mr. Chen's stopover is part of a longstanding United States policy toward Taiwan's leaders. He said Mr. Chen would not meet any American officials, although he will meet Richard Bush, chairman of the American Institute in Taiwan, which handles unofficial United States ties with the island.
 John R Byers letter says George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention (Aug 4 article) reminded him of Franklin D Roosevelt's Re ''Bush, Accepting G.O.P. Nomination, Pledges to 'Use These Good Times for Great Goals' '' (front page, Aug. 4): The tone and the tenor of George W. Bush's acceptance speech reminded me of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Both showed genuine compassion for the common man that is all too uncommon in politicians. Re ''Bush, Accepting G.O.P. Nomination, Pledges to 'Use These Good Times for Great Goals' '' (front page, Aug. 4): The tone and the tenor of George W. Bush's acceptance speech reminded me of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Both showed genuine compassion for the common man that is all too uncommon in politicians. In his speech Mr. Bush said ''we must tear down that wall,'' referring to the divide between ''wealth and technology, education and ambition'' on one side and ''poverty and prison, addiction and despair'' on the other.  F.D.R. showed the same feelings as he mingled with poor farmers and polio victims. F.D.R. was said to have had a ''first-class temperament.'' The same might be said of Mr. Bush, and this could be the personality trait  that is needed to heal our national divide and divisiveness, just as it was the right personality to heal our national discouragement in Roosevelt's  era.
 Gov George W Bush gets a clean bump upward from his acceptance speech and Republican convention generally, using them to show himself to be a serious, plausible national leader; NBC and Tarrance polls show him widening lead over Vice Pres Al Gore; Democrats say lead will disappear when voters examine the issues (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas got a clear bump upward from his acceptance speech and the Republican convention generally, but its dimensions and duration were uncertain. Politicians around the nation said Mr. Bush had succeeded in his most immediate task, using his first big-audience national appearance to begin the task of showing himself to be a serious, plausible national leader. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas got a clear bump upward from his acceptance speech and the Republican convention generally, but its dimensions and duration were uncertain. Politicians around the nation said Mr. Bush had succeeded in his most immediate task, using his first big-audience national appearance to begin the task of showing himself to be a serious, plausible national leader. One overnight poll, conducted for NBC News, indicated that Mr. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore had gone from 6 percentage points to 11. Candidates almost always gain after a convention, and Mr. Teeter, who conducted this poll with Peter Hart, a Democrat, called it ''a normal, an average bounce.'' Another poll, by the Tarrance Group, said the margin had gone from 8 points to 18. While the Tarrance poll showed an especially big gain among independents, there were indications in some focus-group studies that Mr. Bush's attacks on Mr. Gore had played badly among such voters. Frank Luntz, who conducted a conventionlong focus group of 36 uncommitted voters for MSNBC, said, ''Virtually every criticism received a negative reaction.'' That was a point hit hard for the Gore campaign by Bob Shrum, a consultant who works on major speeches and television advertisements. ''I don't think the speech will wear well,'' Mr. Shrum said, ''because he engaged in the kind of personal attacks that don't work with independent voters and don't work with undecided voters.'' Mr. Shrum also struck a major Democratic theme when he said, ''Ultimately, people are going to come to the issues.'' Then, he said, they will reject Mr. Bush's tax plan, which ''gives $50,000 a year to a millionaire and a dollar a day to the working man.'' That will be a major theme of the Democratic convention, contending that the Bush proposals on issues like Social Security, taxes, education and health will not work and will favor only the rich. Democrats will also strongly criticize his record in Texas on the environment and health. Neither poll was able to pinpoint states where the convention had most helped Mr. Bush. G. Terry Madonna, a pollster at Millersville University in Pennsylvania, said that in his state, which is a crucial swing state, ''I don't really know that it moved a lot of suburban voters, and in Pennsylvania, I am absolutely convinced that the election depends on the suburbs.'' The NBC poll gave Mr. Bush 47 percent to 36 percent for Mr. Gore, 6 percent for Ralph Nader and 1 percent for Patrick J. Buchanan. Before the convention, it had 44 percent for Mr. Bush, 38 percent for Mr. Gore, 6 percent for Mr. Nader and 2 percent for Mr. Buchanan. The Tarrance Group poll, a two-day survey completed on Thursday with only a few interviews after the governor's acceptance speech, gave Mr. Bush 49 percent, Mr. Gore 31 percent, Mr. Nader 6 percent and Mr. Buchanan 2 percent. When the convention began, the numbers were 46 percent for Mr. Bush, 38 percent for Mr. Gore, 3 percent for Mr. Nader and 2 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Ed Goeas of the Tarrance Group said that Mr. Bush's gains were widespread among various demographic groups, and that Mr. Gore lost strength among Democrats. Whatever the extent of Mr. Bush's  gain, it is unclear whether it will be lasting. Andrew Kohut, a pollster and director of the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, said, ''Is it a blip or a bounce? There are as many blips in recent elections as there are booms.'' Mr. Bush's situation, Mr. Deaver said, was similar to Mr. Reagan's in 1980. Then, he said, there were ''people not wanting to vote for Carter, but not being quite sure that Reagan was up to the job.''
 WE have had Bill Clinton and Al Gore and Bill Bradley and Bob Dole and Jack Kemp and Dan Quayle and Dick Cheney, to name but a few. Did you ever see anyone who screams out Richard more than somber Dick Cheney? Or who looks more like a Malcolm Stevenson Forbes Jr. than the plutocrat who presents himself as just Steve Forbes? (Not that a Clyde is about to blame anyone for ditching a name like Malcolm.) You could argue that a name like George W. Bush is a throwback. But not really. That W. is not for ballast but rather to set the candidate apart from Papa. There seems to be no way out of this modern trend. ''The whole burden of trying to get elected,'' said the historian Michael Beschloss, ''is to make yourself seem open, accessible and friendly to the average voter. It's hard to see how that is done by calling yourself Albert Arnold Gore Jr.''
 Elma Gonzalez letter says George W Bush waxed nostalgic about growing up in West Texas in his acceptance speech at Republican National Convention (Aug 4 article), but failed to mention the discrimination blacks and Mexican-Americans faced there at that time George W. Bush waxes nostalgic about the values of the West Texas town where he grew up, declaring that ''anybody could succeed, and everybody deserved a chance'' (transcript, Aug. 4). I also remember the West Texas of the late 1950's and early 60's, when my family and many other Mexican-American families migrated to the region to pick cotton. George W. Bush waxes nostalgic about the values of the West Texas town where he grew up, declaring that ''anybody could succeed, and everybody deserved a chance'' (transcript, Aug. 4). I also remember the West Texas of the late 1950's and early 60's, when my family and many other Mexican-American families migrated to the region to pick cotton. This same region had official policies for segregated schools during the time that Mr. Bush is memorializing. So what does this say about Mr. Bush? That he didn't know these things were happening? Or that he knows but that they don't factor into his vision of the past because they didn't matter?
 Sean Wilentz letter says George W Bush got George Washington's personality all wrong in his acceptance speech at Republican National Convention (Aug 4 article) In his acceptance speech, George W. Bush joked about George Washington -- ''or, as his friends called him, George W.'' (transcript, Aug. 4). For a self-declared patriot and would-be president, Governor Bush had better bone up on his American history. In his acceptance speech, George W. Bush joked about George Washington -- ''or, as his friends called him, George W.'' (transcript, Aug. 4). For a self-declared patriot and would-be president, Governor Bush had better bone up on his American history.
 Nearly 18 million people watch television coverage of George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention; photo of workers rolling up a red carpet at convention (S) Nearly 18 million people watched the coverage of George W. Bush's acceptance speech on ABC, CBS and NBC on Thursday night, compared with the 17.8 million who watched the coverage of Bob Dole's on the major networks on the final night of the 1996 Republican convention, according to Nielsen Media Research data. Nearly 18 million people watched the coverage of George W. Bush's acceptance speech on ABC, CBS and NBC on Thursday night, compared with the 17.8 million who watched the coverage of Bob Dole's on the major networks on the final night of the 1996 Republican convention, according to Nielsen Media Research data.
 Vice Pres Al Gore roars back into presidential campaign after a week's vacation, giving speech to International Association of Fire Fighters in Chicago in which defends himself against the barbs hurled at him at National Republican Convention and delivers a few of his own; accuses Republicans of running a showy, but insubstantial, convention; claims credit for helping create the nation's roaring economy when he cast a tie-breaking vote in Senate for president's 1993 economic stimulus package; photo (M) After suffering days of Republican barbs in silence, Vice President Al Gore returned from vacation today swinging back hard, accusing the Republicans of running a showy, but insubstantial convention and strongly claiming credit for having helped create the nation's roaring economy. Mr. Gore had spent the week with his family on a North Carolina beach while the newly minted Republican ticket of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney used the stage in Philadelphia to portray the Clinton administration as timid, ineffectual and lacking vision. After suffering days of Republican barbs in silence, Vice President Al Gore returned from vacation today swinging back hard, accusing the Republicans of running a showy, but insubstantial convention and strongly claiming credit for having helped create the nation's roaring economy. Mr. Gore had spent the week with his family on a North Carolina beach while the newly minted Republican ticket of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney used the stage in Philadelphia to portray the Clinton administration as timid, ineffectual and lacking vision. The Republican nominees left Philadelphia today for a day filled with campaign stops in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Ohio. Mr. Bush  showed a post-convention lift of his own while speaking to a crowd of  hundreds along downtown train tracks in Pittsburgh. ''I can't tell you how energized I am,'' he said. In Chicago, Mr. Gore answered the Republican criticisms today by slinging arrows of his own. Without mentioning Mr. Bush or Mr. Cheney by name, he accused the Republicans of trying to paper over empty promises and harsh policies with a feel-good, slickly choreographed convention that offered little more than ''confetti and klieg lights.'' ''When it comes to political pageantry, I've got to hand it to the other side,'' Mr. Gore told more than 3,000 members of the International Association of Fire Fighters. ''But you and I both know that a slogan never put out a raging fire. A sound bite never saved a child from a burning building. And political positioning will never heal sick children who don't have health care.'' Playing the role he seems most comfortable with, the counterpuncher, Mr. Gore appeared to relish reusing one of his own lines from the 1992 campaign that Mr. Cheney had appropriated in Philadelphia: ''It's time for them to go.'' ''Two nights ago at the convention, we heard their view of what time it is,'' Mr. Gore told the firefighters. ''That was a familiar line wasn't it? I remember that one. Well let me tell you what time it's not. It's not time to give in to the big drug companies. It is not time to give in to big insurance companies.'' Mr. Gore entered a Chicago hotel this morning looking like a gladiator on an adrenaline high, pumping his fists as he led a group of chanting firefighters dressed in yellow T-shirts emblazoned with the words, ''Fire Fighters for Gore.'' Mr. Gore's advisers are hoping to fill the next 10 days with events like the one today, first to dampen any post-convention bounce in the polls that the Republicans are likely to receive, and then to build enthusiasm for Mr. Gore's own triumphal entrance into the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles on Aug. 16. Later today, Mr. Gore spoke here before more than 8,000 letter carriers, and on Saturday he will address a convention of the National Association of Police Organizations in Washington. Today's speeches offered a preview of the themes Mr. Gore will emphasize in the coming week and at the convention. He then dwelt heavily on his time in Vietnam as an journalist in the Army, offering an implicit contrast to Mr. Bush, who served in the Texas Air National Guard, never leaving the country. ''When I was in Vietnam, I didn't do the most or run the greatest danger,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But I volunteered and enlisted because I loved my country, and I knew that if I didn't go, I knew that someone else from my home town of Carthage, Tenn., would have to go in my place.'' Responding to one of Mr. Bush's harsher attacks -- that the Clinton administration had coasted through eight years of prosperity, choosing ''the path of least resistance'' -- Mr. Gore said: ''What planet have they been on?''
 Pentagon officials rebut Gov George W Bush's assertion that 2 of Army's 10 active divisions are not able to report for duty (S) Pentagon officials today rebutted Gov. George W. Bush's assertion that 2 of the Army's 10 active divisions were not able to report for duty. In accepting the Republican presidential nomination in Philadelphia on Thursday, Mr. Bush sharply criticized the Clinton administration's stewardship of the military and specifically cited the inability of two Army divisions to be ready for war if needed. Pentagon officials today rebutted Gov. George W. Bush's assertion that 2 of the Army's 10 active divisions were not able to report for duty. In accepting the Republican presidential nomination in Philadelphia on Thursday, Mr. Bush sharply criticized the Clinton administration's stewardship of the military and specifically cited the inability of two Army divisions to be ready for war if needed. ''If called on by the commander in chief today, two entire divisions of the Army would have to report, 'Not ready for duty, sir,' '' Mr. Bush said. In Los Angeles, Gen. Henry H. Shelton, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also disputed Mr. Bush's assertion. But he said the armed services still faced budget shortages in some areas even after the Clinton administration approved a $112 billion increase in defense spending over six years.
