 Correction of Aug 3 Man in the News article about George W Bush; Bush is not direct descendant of Pres Franklin Pierce The front-page Man in the News article yesterday about George W. Bush misstated his family relationship to President Franklin Pierce. The relationship is through Mr. Bush's great-grandfather Scott Pierce, but Mr. Bush is not a direct descendant. None of Pierce's children survived to adulthood. The front-page Man in the News article yesterday about George W. Bush misstated his family relationship to President Franklin Pierce. The relationship is through Mr. Bush's great-grandfather Scott Pierce, but Mr. Bush is not a direct descendant. None of Pierce's children survived to adulthood.
 Prof Peter Brooks Op-Ed article speculates on messages Republicans could find in Grand Inquisitor section of Dostoyevsky's The Brothers Karamazov, which Laura Bush cited as favorite book; says as political parable, Grand Inquisitor suggests that truth lies only in open-ended dialogue while rhetoric of 'compassionate conservatism' is belied by a smug claim to truth on a host of social issues (M) Though George W. Bush admits he is not an avid reader, his wife is a serious lover of literature. Laura Bush has read widely, from Greek tragedy to William Faulkner to Truman Capote. When asked to name her favorite book, on the long list she has read, she selected the ''The Grand Inquisitor'' section of Dostoyevsky's ''The Brothers Karamazov.'' This is an interesting and suggestive choice, of a chilling and troubling chapter in a challenging novel. Of course Mrs. Bush's choice of reading has nothing to do with Republican philosophy. But since her husband is the party's nominee for president, one might speculate about the messages the Republicans could find in this literary work. Though George W. Bush admits he is not an avid reader, his wife is a serious lover of literature. Laura Bush has read widely, from Greek tragedy to William Faulkner to Truman Capote. When asked to name her favorite book, on the long list she has read, she selected the ''The Grand Inquisitor'' section of Dostoyevsky's ''The Brothers Karamazov.'' This is an interesting and suggestive choice, of a chilling and troubling chapter in a challenging novel. Of course Mrs. Bush's choice of reading has nothing to do with Republican philosophy. But since her husband is the party's nominee for president, one might speculate about the messages the Republicans could find in this literary work.
 He decided not to run for the Senate that year, saying he did not feel committed to the race, and has otherwise kept a low political profile. In 1987, he was named NATO's assistant secretary general for defense support, and in 1992 President George Bush appointed him to be ambassador to the Republic of Seychelles. Last summer, he became a paid lobbyist for the defense contractor Lockheed Martin, urging former colleagues in the Senate to help preserve the company's $65 billion F-22 stealth fighter.
 After the nominees had spoken and the themes of the Republican National Convention had coalesced on its final day -- we're not your grandma's Republican Party, let's wash the Clinton-Gore stain out of the White House, the sky's the limit -- the cable television pundits and Internet commentators seemed visibly relieved that they finally had a firm idea of the agenda they will be bickering about for the next three months. After the nominees had spoken and the themes of the Republican National Convention had coalesced on its final day -- we're not your grandma's Republican Party, let's wash the Clinton-Gore stain out of the White House, the sky's the limit -- the cable television pundits and Internet commentators seemed visibly relieved that they finally had a firm idea of the agenda they will be bickering about for the next three months. As the time approached last night for the acceptance speech of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and the twisting rivers of people on the convention floor began to slow and then build up -- ''It's kind of scary for the elderly people here in the Kansas delegation,'' one Fox floor reporter said -- the television cameras began to spend more time watching the stage and scanning the crowd. It was time for the big dog to sing. ''George W. Bush, that's my final answer,'' a placard read. ''Look, the Democrats are going to say something about us,'' the Bush strategist Karl Rove told CNN. ''If we'd delivered a four-day economics lecture from the lectern, the Democrats would have said we're not fun.'' ''The cause of the failure is currently under investigation,'' it added, ominously, before concluding with a more upbeat, ''However, full service has been restored and new results will be posted immediately following George W. Bush's speech on Thursday.''
 Caryn James Critic's Notebook article evaluates television coverage of final night of Republican National Convention and Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech as television performance; photo (M) George W. Bush had an on-screen audition for the role of president last night, commandeering a chunk of prime time, as presidents do, to deliver an extended speech. In the surprise-free zone of this convention, the only question was how convincing a performance would he give. That is not a frivolous issue in a television-driven campaign, when a candidate's ability to act like a president on camera may go further than any number of issue-oriented appearances on ''Meet the Press'' (and reach a far larger audience). In those terms, Mr. Bush resembled an actor who had studied hard, learned his lines and was determined to give the best reading he could under circumstances that did not play to his strengths. George W. Bush had an on-screen audition for the role of president last night, commandeering a chunk of prime time, as presidents do, to deliver an extended speech. In the surprise-free zone of this convention, the only question was how convincing a performance would he give. That is not a frivolous issue in a television-driven campaign, when a candidate's ability to act like a president on camera may go further than any number of issue-oriented appearances on ''Meet the Press'' (and reach a far larger audience). In those terms, Mr. Bush resembled an actor who had studied hard, learned his lines and was determined to give the best reading he could under circumstances that did not play to his strengths. Mr. Bush has always been and still is better in situations of casual intimacy, chatting with a friendly interviewer like Larry King. Last night, his brow was perpetually furrowed and he seemed to squint into the camera (blinding lights or an effort to read the Teleprompter seemed like plausible reasons), which made him look as if he were trying exceptionally hard to be taken seriously. Mr. Bush was stiffest in his delivery when reciting lines that were all too conspicuously written to become sound bites, especially in the refrain, repeated three times: ''This administration had its chance. They have not led; we will.'' He seemed far more comfortable and convincing when he spoke emotionally, notably when acknowledging his parents. At that moment the emotion translated through the television screen; it didn't hurt that the camera went to the obviously moved George and Barbara Bush, beaming with the most universal sort of parental pride, sitting there as icons to nudge the emotion along. Anyone would have needed that visual aid, because speeches rarely make good television. That can be overcome if a candidate's delivery is dynamic enough to leap off the screen. Mr. Bush's wasn't. But at times he showed the flicker of a connection with the camera that suggested he was just beginning to master this part of the game. The networks and cable channels led up to the speech in different, and telling, ways. NBC and its cable channel, MSNBC, along with CNN and the Fox News Channel, ran the treacly video biography of Mr. Bush made for the Republican National Committee. In this gushy film, his Mom and Dad say he's great. He is seen as governor surrounded by schoolchildren. The film has the tone and picture-perfect quality of a storybook. ''Family, freedom, such a powerful part of the American spirit,'' Mr. Bush says in this hagiography of himself. But ABC and CBS created a far more intelligent context, presenting their own more balanced biographical features while the RNC's video was running elsewhere. These reports gave Mr. Bush full credit for his quick rise to political success, but also raised the tougher questions about him. As the CBS report put it, ''Is George W. Bush prepared to lead the most powerful nation on earth?'' While the Republican National Committee video had him extolling the virtues of freedom, the CBS and ABC reports included tape of the pop quiz in which he was unable to name world leaders.
 Vice Pres Al Gore says he has narrowed his list of potential running mates to six plus one 'wild card'; Democratic officials say six are Sens John Kerry, Joseph I Lieberman, John Edwards and Evan Bayh, Repr Richard A Gephardt and Gov Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire (M) Winding up a weeklong vacation by the sea, Vice President Al Gore said today that he had narrowed his list of potential running mates to six plus one ''wild card.'' Winding up a weeklong vacation by the sea, Vice President Al Gore said today that he had narrowed his list of potential running mates to six plus one ''wild card.'' ''It's down to six, with one wild card that I haven't completely eliminated,'' Mr. Gore told reporters on the beach here, with his wife, Tipper. Some of the six are believed to be on the list for strategic purposes -- that is, to suggest that Mr. Gore is looking at a woman, for example, when in fact he is not. Both Governor Shaheen and Mr. Gephardt have said they are not interested in the job. Officials close to the campaign said that all six had spoken with Warren Christopher, who is heading Mr. Gore's search process, and had been vetted. Mr. Gore has been hashing over his possibilities and looking for political feedback from his family, Mr. Christopher, Bill Daley, his new campaign chairman, and Alexis M. Herman, the secretary of labor. It is not clear how much actual winnowing he has done while on vacation, since he said on the way here that his list had fewer than 10 people. Another Democratic official suggested that the purpose of mentioning a wild card was to allow Mr. Gore to ''keep his options open.'' Mr. Daley said he expected Mr. Gore, who is to leave North Carolina on Friday morning for a campaign stop in Chicago before heading back to Washington, was close to making up his mind. ''They're not based upon anything that's coming from Gore, O.K.?'' Mr. Daley said. ''Those of us who are involved in this sort of suck it in and analyze it and pass it on to him and say, 'Here are three people who called saying they really think the Bob Kerrey idea is a great idea, here's why, so if you're still open to people, figure this in.' One of those with an edge in the lobbying department is Senator Edwards. A number of his advisers in his 1998 Senate race, in which he ousted the incumbent Republican, Lauch Faircloth, are among Mr. Gore's top campaign officials. The Edwards supporters say that the senator, a 47-year-old trial lawyer, is the candidate who would most reinforce Mr. Gore's message against the Republican ''old guard.'' Mr. Edwards also happens to come from a state with a Democratic governor. The major drawback to selecting  Mr. Edwards is his relative inexperience. He has been in the Senate only two years, and his selection could undermine Mr. Gore's repeated assertion that the most important criterion in a running mate is that the person be ready to take over from day one. Still, Gore operatives are working on a way to sell Mr. Edwards instantly to voters as someone who is capable of becoming president. One suggestion is that immediately upon the announcement, several long-time Democratic senators make testimonials to Mr. Edwards's brilliance and how he represents a once-in-a-generation talent.
 Gov George W Bush pledges in speech accepting Republican presidential nomination to confront the 'hard issues' that he says Clinton administration has consistently ducked; at jubilant final session of Republican National Convention, Bush argues that Pres Clinton and Vice Pres Gore have had chance to solve major problems but 'have not led'; underlines theme, promoted during entire convention, that Republican Party is one of inclusiveness and 'compassionate conservatism'; proposes major reforms in public schools, Social Security and federal tax code, and promises to create Medicare prescription drug benefit and to rebuild nation's military strength; photos (M) Introducing himself to a nation that barely knows him, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas pledged tonight to ''confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security'' that he said the Clinton administration had consistently ducked. At a jubilant final session of the Republican National Convention, Mr. Bush argued that ''times of plenty'' were times to solve major problems, not to relax. With that, he sought to cut the ground from beneath his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, whose strongest electoral argument is his association with the prosperity of the last eight years. Introducing himself to a nation that barely knows him, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas pledged tonight to ''confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security'' that he said the Clinton administration had consistently ducked. At a jubilant final session of the Republican National Convention, Mr. Bush argued that ''times of plenty'' were times to solve major problems, not to relax. With that, he sought to cut the ground from beneath his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, whose strongest electoral argument is his association with the prosperity of the last eight years. His parents and many other members of his large family were in the V.I.P. seats to hear Mr. Bush offer this curt verdict on Bill Clinton's and Al Gore's time in the White House: Mr. Bush accused the vice president of indulging in ''the politics of the roadblock, the philosophy of the stop sign.'' He turned Franklin D. Roosevelt's famous first inaugural address around and aimed it squarely at Mr. Gore, charging that ''the only thing he has to offer is fear itself.'' [Transcript, Page A24.] He mocked Mr. Gore by saying, ''I do not need to take your pulse before I know my own mind. I do not reinvent myself at every turn. I am not running in borrowed clothes.'' Yet Mr. Bush has been successively moderate, conservative and moderate again, as the imperatives of the nominating campaign dictated. ''This administration had its chance,'' Governor Bush asserted. ''They have not led. We will.'' But as he had pledged, many of Mr. Bush's words were upbeat. ''Tonight we vow to our nation: We will seize this moment of American promise,'' he said. ''We will use these good times for great goals.'' Except for tonight's gibes and Wednesday night's hard-edged speech by Dick Cheney, his running mate, Mr. Bush and his party have tried all week to avoid the kind of sniping -- to say nothing of the internal bickering -- they know the American electorate detests. Mr. Bush proposed major reforms in the public schools, in the Social Security system and in the federal tax code. He promised to abolish the inheritance tax and guaranteed that on his watch no one would have to pay more than a third of his income to the federal government -- considerably less than the 39 percent-plus some now pay. His remarks on Social Security, for instance, were unqualified; he said that ''President George W. Bush will keep the promise of Social Security -- no changes, no reductions, no way.'' It was eerily reminiscent of his father's pledge -- ''Read my lips, no new taxes'' -- which plunged then-President Bush into political trouble when he agreed to a tax increase. Governor Bush pledged to modernize Medicare, with prescription drugs ''for every senior who needs them,'' stressing the last item more than he had before. He vowed to rebuild the nation's military strength. He said the moment had come ''to make Head Start an early learning program, teach all of our children to read and renew the promise of America's public schools.'' Far too many in the United States, Mr. Bush said, felt left out and left behind; he called that a challenge ''to the very heart of America.'' Speaking in much the same vein as Gen. Colin L. Powell had on the convention's opening night, and implicitly reminding his audience of his own doctrine of ''compassionate conservatism,'' Mr. Bush declared, ''We are their country, too, and each of us must share in its promise or that promise is diminished for us all.'' The point was underlined in a video that depicted Mr. Bush as a longtime friend of Hispanics and African-Americans in his home state. At 54, Mr. Bush has succeeded where many others have failed. He is only the second son of a former president ever nominated for president by a major party; the other was John Quincy Adams in 1824. Robert Todd Lincoln fell short twice and Robert A. Taft did so three times. Tonight's campaign-launching speech was a crucial moment for Mr. Bush, the speech of a lifetime for a politician whose time in elective office has been confined to a bare six years as governor of Texas. Not since Dwight D. Eisenhower, war hero and political neophyte, has a presidential nominee offered so sketchy a political resume. Mr. Bush dealt candidly with that problem, as well as Mr. Gore's extensive experience on Capitol Hill and in the White House, and sought to turn his inexperience into an asset. It was a strong signal that Mr. Bush intends to run as an outsider -- a political tactic dating to Andrew Jackson, but one surprising in a man whose father was president and whose grandfather was a senator. Mr. Bush's acceptance speech was shorter and leaner than many in the past -- 52 minutes long. It had touches of humor -- he took the blame for his mother's white hair -- and a few emotional appeals, like a tribute to his father and other members of the World War II generation. But the nominee's delivery was mostly deadpan, with his lips compressed, with only a few smiles and almost no gestures. Greg Cox, an alternate delegate from San Diego, acknowledged that Mr. Bush had taken ''a few swipes at Al Gore but that was to let people know it would be a down to the wire campaign.'' As for the impact of the speech on independents and other swing voters, on whom the outcome in November will probably depend, that remains to be seen -- not only whether they give him the customary ''bump'' in the polls but how much of it lasts once Mr. Gore gets his four days in the convention sun in Los Angeles later this month. Still, Mr. Bush, who would never claim to be in the same league as an orator with Mr. Clinton or with Ronald Reagan, gave a credible account of himself and made a start at convincing the country that his legs are long enough to reach the stirrups of leadership at home and abroad. In addition to George W. Bush, the only prominent politicians to speak were Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee and Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, both of whom Mr. Bush briefly considered as running mates. At 8:41 p.m., Representative Henry Bonilla of Texas proclaimed an end to the roll call, which had been spread over several nights, saying, ''The chair proudly announces the unanimous choice for president of United States: George W. Bush of Texas.'' Delegates who by this point were not already standing -- a very small number indeed -- rose to their feet as the band broke into its rendition of ''Rock This House.'' Many of those on the floor turned to watch former President George Bush, in the house for a fourth night in a row, as he enjoyed his son's moment. Unlike most in the crowd, the former president stayed seated when his son stated his opposition to abortion, a section of the speech that seemed to draw the some of the heartiest applause of the night. And unlike others in the Bush and Cheney families, he stayed off the crowded stage at the evening's close, as if to avoid any chance of upstaging the night's star performer. Governor Bush came onstage at 10:04 p.m.; the delegates started clapping and shouting and waving their big red foam-rubber batons, but he ended the demonstration after two minutes. At the very end of his speech, Mr. Bush had reassuring words for the Republican faithful and others listening: ''The night is passing, and we are ready for the day to come.''
 And so it went today, with Mrs. Clinton touching on everything from the construction of a water filtration plant in the Bronx, which she opposes, to requiring municipalities to report water quality standards online, which she supports. She pointed to her own advocacy for financing breast cancer research. She lauded the vice president, Al Gore, for ''his foresight on the environment.'' And she attacked Mr. Lazio's environmental record.
 Bush Accepts Nomination Promising 'Great Goals'  Gov. George W. Bush pledged to ''confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security'' that he said the Clinton administration ducked, and he spelled out his agenda. Though much of his text was upbeat, he also jabbed at the President and Vice President Al Gore.
 Richard L Berke analysis: Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention sought to reorient his party to the center with passages that were strikingly similar to Bill Clinton's speech at 1992 Democratic convention; address capped four-day political production in which Bush pushed aside ardent conservatives in effort to convince America that his party is inclusive and open and that he is candidate who can be trusted to safely lead the nation; Bush has mounted impressive start in setting out a general election campaign that excises the demons that have haunted Republicans by offering a nominee who sounds very much like his foes; this approach may force Vice Pres Gore to aggressively fire back and depict convention as masquerade that obscured Republican platform and rigidly rightward voting records (M) Close your eyes and Gov. George W. Bush tonight could have been Bill Clinton without the punch -- or Al Gore without the precision. Close your eyes and Gov. George W. Bush tonight could have been Bill Clinton without the punch -- or Al Gore without the precision. His address tonight capped a four-day political production in which Mr. Bush deftly elbowed aside ardent conservatives in an effort to convince America that his party was much like himself -- approachable and open -- and that he is a candidate who can be trusted to safely lead the nation. By stressing ''idealism and inclusion'' and the ''forgotten,'' Mr. Bush sought to give a gracious new twist to the Grand Old Party, moving beyond the battles over impeachment, abortion and culture that had given his party such a harsh face. Rather than invoke Newt Gingrich, Mr. Bush spoke of ''a bipartisan approach to governing.'' Even Democrats conceded that Mr. Bush had mounted an impressive start in setting out a general election campaign that excises the demons that have haunted Republicans by offering a nominee who often sounds very much like his foes. And already, many Democrats expressed fear that the display here will force Vice President Gore -- whose campaign is entering a crucial phase with the selection of a running mate and then his own convention in Los Angeles -- to aggressively fire back and depict the convention as a masquerade that obscured the party's platform and rigidly rightward voting records. That may be exactly what the Bush campaign wants. The calculation -- or at least the hope -- among Republicans is that they will box Mr. Gore in: The more he tries to portray his opponents as insincere the more the vice president risks appearing mean-spirited and political. That is an important reason that Mr. Gore foundered when he tried to lambasteMr. Bush after the primaries. And that helps explain why a relentlessly upbeat Mr. Bush managed to topple a popular -- and increasingly defensive -- Gov. Ann Richards in 1994. ''The axis upon which a lot of this turns is Bush's experience against Ann Richards,'' said Richard N. Bond, a former chairman of the Republican Party. ''She got shriller and shriller and shriller -- and less believable. That's the experience in which Bush has based his strategy for this campaign and this convention. In this most formal moment for a determinedly informal man, Mr. Bush allowed as to how he possessed the qualities to reach beyond his own party and unite the nation. He tried to make this most political of speeches appear decidedly apolitical. ''Now is the time,'' Mr. Bush said, ''for Republicans and Democrats to end the politics of fear and save Social Security, together.'' Beyond echoing Mr. Clinton, Mr. Bush went so far as to laud the president -- even as he was skewering him. ''Our current president embodied the potential of a generation,'' he said. ''So many talents. So much charm. Such great skill. But in the end, to what end?'' As did Mr. Clinton in his acceptance speech eight years ago, Mr. Bush trumpeted themes of compassion and inclusion as he sought to appeal well beyond the Republicans in the hall. Tonight, Mr. Bush said that when he was growing up in Midland, Tex., ''our sense of community was just as strong as that sense of promise.'' It was from the playbook of Mr. Clinton, who said in 1992, ''We can restore our sense of unity and community.'' And tonight, Mr. Bush said, ''Each of us is responsible to love and guide our children, and help a neighbor in need.'' It was an echo of Mr. Clinton, who implored his audience eight years ago, ''take responsibility for your children.'' Beyond that his opponent sounds like a Democrat, there are other complications for Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush had the enviable luxury of neglecting conservatives -- and reaching out to independents and even Democrats -- because Republicans of all stripes have eagerly embraced his candidacy. But in addition to competing with Mr. Bush for the swing voters, Mr. Gore at his convention will have to tend to restive Democrats who are not altogether content with their candidate. Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, said Mr. Gore faces a more perilous balancing act than Mr. Bush. ''He's got a more difficult line to walk,'' Mr. Breaux said. ''Our job is to make sure the base is comfortable and secure -- but be very aggressive in speaking to the moderate middle.'' Mr. Gore also has to contend with the shadow of Bill Clinton. In an interview on the eve of the convention, Mr. Bush went out of his way to say that there was little need to demonize Mr. Clinton. ''The opponent is not President Clinton,'' he said. ''The opponent is Vice President Gore.'' Yet Mr. Clinton has been a subtext here all week. It started when Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, voiced the need for people ''to respect the president of the United States of America.'' And tonight, Mr. Bush, by underscoring that ''times of plenty'' are ''tests of American character,'' the governor left no doubt that he regards Mr. Clinton as a tantalizing villain -- and will truly (albeit subtly) try to make him an issue in this campaign. To further complicate matters, Mr. Gore also has an interest in seeing Mr. Clinton hover over this campaign. While Mr. Bush's loyalists will try to remind voters of Monica S. Lewinsky, Mr. Gore's will trot out Robert E. Rubin, the former Treasury secretary who helped the Clinton-Gore administration preside over the most sustained economic recovery in American history. While there was a dash of Mr. Clinton in Mr. Bush's address tonight, the Texas governor also capitalized on his opportunity to reach the largest audience that will likely hear him give a speech in this campaign to ply his charm on the public. Mr. Bush's objective tonight was not entirely different from that of Ronald Reagan, who at his convention in Detroit in 1980 sought to convince Americans that beyond his affability, he was up to being commander in chief. Tonight, Mr. Bush remembered ''Ronald Reagan's optimism'' and -- not to neglect Democrats -- ''Harry Truman's integrity.'' The thinking of Bush operatives is that if Mr. Bush, like Mr. Reagan, puts to rest worries about his capacity to be president, and reassures moderates that he feels their pain, he can gain the edge by trumping Mr. Gore in the likability category. ''This is all about George Bush being, in essence, not a bad person and a well-meaning person,'' said William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman. ''Therefore he will do what's right and trust me. There's got to be more to it than that.''
 Republicans have chosen a ticket that seems certain to win one state -- Texas -- almost effortlessly. But at the December balloting of the Electoral College, could the Texas electors really vote for both George W. Bush and Dick Cheney? They will have to ask themselves where Mr. Cheney is an ''inhabitant.'' Republicans have chosen a ticket that seems certain to win one state -- Texas -- almost effortlessly. But at the December balloting of the Electoral College, could the Texas electors really vote for both George W. Bush and Dick Cheney? They will have to ask themselves where Mr. Cheney is an ''inhabitant.'' For the past several years Mr. Cheney has lived in Dallas, where he became chief executive of an oil services company in 1995. Though two weeks ago he transferred his voter registration back to Wyoming, this scarcely seems sufficient to change his habitation. Could the electors vote for both Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney? Governor Bush appears to be confident in the assurances of his lawyers that the 12th Amendment will not be a problem. But if it is a mere technicality to be overcome by clever legal manipulation, then constitutional interpretation is a more complex exercise than the simpleminded reading of the text -- or dubious historical forays into recapturing the intentions of the founding fathers -- favored by two Supreme Court justices whom Mr. Bush says he admires: Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas.
 Republican National Convention is also family reunion for Bush family, and scores of the extended clan are on hand as George W Bush gives his acceptance speech; Bushes have been at all Republican conventions since 1980, cheering on of their own at each one except for 1996; photo (M) ''It is a family reunion,'' Laura Bush explained last month. ''It is a family reunion,'' Laura Bush explained last month. Indeed, one of the conveniences of having a family active in presidential politics is that it offers a unique opportunity for quadrennial reunions with lots of balloons and confetti. Throngs of Bushes have been at all the Republican conventions since 1980, cheering one of their own at each one except for 1996, when they took a brief break. This time as well, scores of the extended Bush clan are on hand, and as George W. Bush gave his acceptance speech tonight, a spotlight illuminated his family: his parents, his twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna, as well as his sister and three brothers and all of their children. Most members of the extended family are staying at the Wyndham Hotel, along with the candidate himself. Security keeps the paparazzi away, but Karen P. Hughes, the candidate's chief spokeswoman, said the hall near her room was full of little Bushes charging up and down. The Bushes are, of course, less harassed by paparazzi than other prominent political families, like the Kennedys, but they are also more reticent, and George W.'s four siblings have mostly refused to give interviews about him this year. Still, perhaps sensing the friendly atmosphere, a few have emerged from the cocoon and one -- George P. Bush, the son of younger brother Jeb -- has become a hot media property, perhaps the most sought-after member of the clan among television producers after George W. himself. Jeb and George P. together addressed a fund-raising luncheon on Wednesday for 3,000 people, offering a ''10-best'' list of reasons George W. should be elected president. These included ''will cut federal spending by using left-over 'From the desk of President Bush' note pads'' and ''I left a carry-on bag on Air Force One back in 1992, and I want it back.'' The convention has seemed wary of giving too large a role to former President Bush, for fear of reinforcing public doubts about whether his son is his own man. But Barbara Bush was given the podium to introduce her son on Monday night when the candidate spoke briefly by satellite from Gettysburg, Pa., and the potential first lady, Laura, was given the chance to make a major speech on Monday. Barbara Bush sits in the center, regularly leaping up to hug one relative or another straggling in to join the reunion, and is usually near her twin granddaughters. The girls have have resolutely stayed away from the mobs with microphones and notebooks, reflecting George and Laura Bush's efforts throughout their years in the Texas governor's mansion and on the campaign trail to retain their daughters' privacy. Early on, one of the girls was mortified when a television crew happened to be in the mansion and caught her father teasing her about a boy who was telephoning for her; ever since, the Bushes have generally kept the girls away from the cameras. One child who has been more public is Pierce Bush, the 14-year-old son of George W.'s younger brother Neil. This is already Pierce's third convention, and he appeared twice on CNN, praising his uncle the presidential candidate -- while disavowing his own interest in the job. Neil Bush, one of George W.'s younger brothers, has generally been the least inclined to talk to reporters in recent years, perhaps because of a general feeling in the clan that the news media treated him harshly when he was caught up in a savings-and-loan scandal in his father's administration. But he appeared briefly on Larry King Live on Wednesday. His younger brother Marvin, a management consultant in Texas, also gave a brief television interview. George W.'s sister, Dorothy, the youngest in the family, is here and, as a Maryland resident, cast her delegation's votes for her brother. And Jeb Bush tonight cast Florida's votes for his brother, as well. The family members declined to be interviewed and have generally been wary of the press, partly because of a feeling that reporters mistreated President Bush in 1992 and tend to be mocking George W. today. But the Bushes all have plenty of training and practice in looking like a loving, model family when the cameras are focused on the V.I.P. box (and probably when they are not, as well). In 1988, when President Bush was running for the White House, his advisers were worried that his Democratic rival, Michael S. Dukakis, came across as more lovey-dovey with his wife than President Bush did with his. ''I'm being advised to do that, reach out, hold Bar's hand,'' President Bush grumbled in a diary entry quoted in his memoirs, and he included a note that he wrote to his wife: THE REPUBLICANS: THE FAMILY  Correction:  August 5, 2000, Saturday  In some copies, a picture of Jeb Bush with the Florida delegation carried an incorrect credit. The photographer was Andrea Mohin of The New York Times. In some copies, a picture of Jeb Bush with the Florida delegation carried an incorrect credit. The photographer was Andrea Mohin of The New York Times.
 Apart from her commercial work, she began to chronicle the vanishing ethnic cultures of Bushmen, Transkei peoples and others in the region. Her exhibitions drew national attention and led to her appointment as a war photographer.
 CBS's prime-time coverage on Monday was confined to a portion of ''48 Hours,'' from 10 to 11 p.m. The news division was taken to task by, among others, the anchor Dan Rather, for running a repeat of a piece on medical news that night, and for not covering the speech of Laura Bush, the wife of the presidential candidate, in its entirety.
 In the midst of the 1992 presidential campaign, President Bush decided to sell Taiwan 150 advanced F-16 fighter aircraft after it became clear that China had bought advanced Sukhoi-27 fighters from Russia. The F-16 sale, the last major American arms sale to Taiwan, infuriated Beijing and complicated already difficult relations between the United States and China.
 Rick Lazio campaigns for Senate in New York even as Republican colleagues convene in Philadelphia to nominate George W Bush for president (S) Around 10 p.m. (''hopefully back home by that time,'' he said) he expected to click on the television and watch Gov. George W. Bush of Texas accept the Republican presidential nomination. Around 10 p.m. (''hopefully back home by that time,'' he said) he expected to click on the television and watch Gov. George W. Bush of Texas accept the Republican presidential nomination. Today, however, he makes a bid for a news media splash with his first campaign appearance with John McCain, the senator from Arizona who challenged Mr. Bush for the nomination. Some members of Mr. McCain's former staff, including Mike Murphy, now work for Mr. Lazio.
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore is not going to be able to use Gov George W Bush's lack of knowledge about world affairs against him in this election since Bush has surrounded himself with team of foreign policy wise men and wisely separated himself from the true isolationists among Congressional Republicans (M) unilateralism and by playing on fact that Bush wise men are all wise in ways of a world gone by, but there are probably few voters who care (M) Give George W. Bush credit. He may still believe that the Greeks are Grecians. He may still leave the impression that he has not read the World section of the newspaper for the last 20 years. But it doesn't matter, and Al Gore is not going to be able to use W.'s global gap against him in this election. That's over. Because if the Bush team has been good at disguising the true, merciless underbelly of the Republican Party's domestic policies, it has been absolutely brilliant at disguising the fact that your average T.W.A. pilot knows more about the world than the Republican nominee for president. Give George W. Bush credit. He may still believe that the Greeks are Grecians. He may still leave the impression that he has not read the World section of the newspaper for the last 20 years. But it doesn't matter, and Al Gore is not going to be able to use W.'s global gap against him in this election. That's over. Because if the Bush team has been good at disguising the true, merciless underbelly of the Republican Party's domestic policies, it has been absolutely brilliant at disguising the fact that your average T.W.A. pilot knows more about the world than the Republican nominee for president. Mr. Bush has overcome his global gap through two strategies. First, by cloaking himself in the A-team of Republican foreign policy wise men. It's hard for Mr. Gore to keep asking  ''Would you turn the nation's car keys over to this kid?'' when Mr. Bush has Dick Cheney as his nanny, Colin Powell riding shotgun and Brent Scowcroft, George Shultz and Henry Kissinger all advising from the back seat. True, Mr. Bush's likely national security adviser, Condi Rice, gave a cliche-ridden speech to the convention that declared, in the same breath, that America under Mr. Bush would not be the world's 911 or global cop and that America under Mr. Bush would lead the world in a way Bill Clinton did not. But hey, the A-team will sort that out by November. Mr. Bush has also deftly blunted Mr. Gore's attacks by separating himself from the true isolationists among Congressional Republicans. There is a hard core of Republicans in Congress whose motto on foreign policy could be summed up as ''Stupid and proud of it'' or ''Dumb as we wanna be.'' This is the crowd that favors everything from nonpayment of U.N. dues to further cuts in foreign aid to outright isolationism. But when Mr. Bush forcefully repudiated Republican Congressional efforts to fix a September 2001 deadline for the withdrawal of U.S. troops in Kosovo, it was the sort of adult, commander-in-chief-style move that nullifies Mr. Gore's charge that Mr. Bush's global gaps will be filled by ''the right-wing, partisan isolationism of the Republican Congressional leadership.'' So is there any path left for Mr. Gore to gain traction on foreign policy? Well, if you assume that the public still cares a whit about foreign policy in this age of prosperity, then the most fruitful attack Mr. Gore might make on Mr. Bush would not be for his isolationism, but for his unilateralism. For instance, to listen to the Bush advisers, they are going to just tell Russia, China and the NATO allies they have to accept a scrapping of the ABM treaty and U.S. missile defense plans. Like it or lump it. Such unilateralism is either going to blow up the alliance, and trigger an arms race with Russia and China, or it is going to lead to an embarrassing backdown by the Bushies, if they get in office. Mr. Gore could also play on the fact that the Bush wise men are all wise in the ways of a world gone by. The Republicans like to stress that they are into power geopolitics -- issues with hair on them -- while Democrats are caught up in the soft stuff, the stuff that the first Bush administration labeled ''globaloney,'' such as the environment, AIDS, debt relief, population control. The truth is, this globaloney will probably kill us long before a North Korean missile does, but there isn't a single senior Bush adviser who has written anything interesting on the subject. But there probably aren't two voters who care. In which case, Mr. Gore might have to acknowledge that we live in an era when Americans are obsessed with personal opportunity, not national security. And the key to enhancing personal opportunity is keeping the Clinton economic expansion going, and stressing the biggest national security issue for people today -- which is education. Mr. Bush has smartly pressed the education button, but he's vulnerable on the economy. He has no reassuring economic wise men, and his tax-cut numbers don't add up. Maybe Mr. Gore should counter Bush-Cheney-Powell with his own triumvirate: Al Gore, Bob Rubin and whomever Mr. Gore chooses for V.P. In an age when people are more worried about the Nasdaq than NATO, one Rubin equals two Powells. If Mr. Gore has any hope, it's by projecting Mr. Bush as a man who hasn't been reading the business section of the paper, not the World section. That World section thing won't work anymore -- not when most Americans haven't been reading it either.
 Monday night, a group of children sat at school desks on the convention-hall podium behind Laura Bush as she addressed the delegates. Yesterday, at a ''Tribute to Laura Bush'' luncheon, young performers from Philadelphia's Rainbow Company were Mrs. Bush's backdrop in a packed hotel ballroom. Monday night, a group of children sat at school desks on the convention-hall podium behind Laura Bush as she addressed the delegates. Yesterday, at a ''Tribute to Laura Bush'' luncheon, young performers from Philadelphia's Rainbow Company were Mrs. Bush's backdrop in a packed hotel ballroom. ''I don't understand how male presidents can understand about abortion and pregnancy,'' said Katie Gould, 15, before the company performed for the Bushes, who oppose abortion. ''Like they say they're not for welfare and they're not for abortion. They've never experienced it -- not that I have,'' Katie said. Some on stage were more coy. Asked if she supported Mr. Bush, Lauren Brown, who just turned 18, smiled politely and said ''I know who I'm voting for, but it's a secret.'' Rachel Brooks left the stage thrilled that Governor Bush had spoken to her, and she said ''I tend to favor Republicans.'' As the performers ended their program with a rousing ''God Bless America,'' the Bushes moved to the middle of the group so they were surrounded by the children. Dan Quayle, the once-youthful vice president and surrogate son of President George Bush-turned national amusement-turned political orphan when a real Bush son emerged, is home in Arizona. Robert F. Kennedy's performance in 1964 in Atlantic City was a hallmark, and his nephew John F. Kennedy Jr. got rave reviews in 1988. This year's star turn went to George P. Bush -- grandson of a president, son of a governor and nephew of a presidential nominee. After being interviewed on seemingly every talk show, he was rolled out last night in prime-time to celebrate Uncle George. Surprising no one who had watched more than five minutes of this Benetton ad convention, he mixed English and Spanish and highlighted his Mexican-American heritage. Mr. Bush, a 23-year-old pre-law student, displayed not a flicker of nervousness as he strolled across the stage to a wave of excited applause. The bestowing of the slot on the young Mr. Bush, one of three children of Jeb Bush, the governor of Florida, and his Mexican wife, Columba, suggested that the Bush family had some distinct ideas about the way it would like its political legacy to proceed. But on a more immediate level, the presence of the young Mr. Bush on the stage tonight served two very current needs of his uncle's campaign for president: his appeal to Hispanic voters and his effort, which has been recurrent this week, to present the Republican Party as more ethnically diverse than the delegates here might suggest. PHILADELPHIA DIARY  Correction:  August 5, 2000, Saturday  A report in the Philadelphia Diary column about a speech by Jeb Bush's son, George P. Bush, misstated his age. It is 24, not 23. A report in the Philadelphia Diary column about a speech by Jeb Bush's son, George P. Bush, misstated his age. It is 24, not 23.
 Transcript of Gov George W Bush's speech accepting Republican presidential nomination; photo (M) Following is a transcript of Gov. George W. Bush's speech accepting the Republican presidential nomination last night in Philadelphia, as recorded by The New York Times: Following is a transcript of Gov. George W. Bush's speech accepting the Republican presidential nomination last night in Philadelphia, as recorded by The New York Times: I am proud to have Dick Cheney by my side. He is a man of integrity and sound judgment, who has proven that public service can be noble service. America will be proud to have a leader of such character to succeed Al Gore as vice president of the United States. For eight years, the Clinton-Gore administration has coasted through prosperity. The path of least resistance is always downhill. But America's way is the rising road. Little more than a decade ago, the cold war thawed and, with the leadership of Presidents Reagan and Bush, that wall came down. But instead of seizing this moment, the Clinton-Gore administration has squandered it. We have seen a steady erosion of American power and an unsteady exercise of American influence. Our military is low on parts, pay and morale. To seniors in this country, you earned your benefits, you made your plans, and President George W. Bush will keep the promise of Social Security. No changes, no reductions, no way.
 Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention went through 17 drafts and condensation to less than 4,000 words; speech is in many ways a glimpse into way Bush thinks and feels; chief speechwriter, Michael Gerson, and other aides say Bush tended to elect simple, clear statements with which he felt comfortable and only campaign insiders helped write speech or listen to practice readings; convention photo (M) If it had been up to his speechwriter, Gov. George W. Bush would have opened his remarks tonight by thanking the delegates here for ''the honor of this hour.'' But that felt too lofty to the Texas governor, too fancy and formal. And so, as he scribbled in margins, sounded out sentences and ushered the most important address of his political career through 17 drafts, Mr. Bush deleted the last three words of that phrase, ending the sentence with ''honor.'' It was closer to the way he normally spoke, and closer to the way he felt. If it had been up to his speechwriter, Gov. George W. Bush would have opened his remarks tonight by thanking the delegates here for ''the honor of this hour.'' But that felt too lofty to the Texas governor, too fancy and formal. And so, as he scribbled in margins, sounded out sentences and ushered the most important address of his political career through 17 drafts, Mr. Bush deleted the last three words of that phrase, ending the sentence with ''honor.'' It was closer to the way he normally spoke, and closer to the way he felt. He used the last few weeks before his big moment to nip, tuck and condense the speech from about 4,300 words to about 3,900, even though the former length was well within the range of convention tradition. Mr. Bush believed that shorter was better, and truer to who he was. He also exhibited a bit of prescience, because his methodical delivery and the frequent applause extended his appearance on stage beyond what he and his aides had originally estimated. Beyond the generally worded proposals and beneath the emphatically stated priorities, Mr. Bush's speech tonight was in many ways a glimpse into the way he thinks and feels. According to the campaign's chief speechwriter, Michael Gerson, and other aides who worked with Mr. Bush on the remarks, he tended to elect simple statements over ornate locutions, the epigrammatic over the elongated, words he felt comfortable saying over words that challenged him, clarity over ambiguity. ''He wanted images, he wanted things shorter, he wanted things more concrete,'' said Mr. Gerson, who has been writing Mr. Bush's biggest speeches for nearly a year and a half. The campaign did not, as is sometimes the case, recruit outside help for this address. Like most endeavors in Mr. Bush's political world, this process was kept close to home, among the tried and trusted. Mr. Bush did not practice the speech in front of focus groups or strangers, advisers said, although he did practice it often over the last two weeks. Tonight's speech may well be a hallmark of Mr. Bush's maturation as a candidate, in that it reflects a degree of diligence and level of preparation not always evident on the campaign trail over the last year. ''Thirteen is just spelling errors and punctuation,'' Mr. Gerson told Mr. Bush, explaining what had been corrected and amended since the 12th draft. ''We'll make sure that we get 14 ready for the teleprompter.'' After hanging up, Mr. Gerson said Mr. Bush, who had called from his Texas ranch, wanted the reporter to know that ''he's been thinking so hard, the deer have started talking to him.'' They apparently were urging concision, simplicity, ''making our eloquence more direct,'' as Mr. Gerson said. What Mr. Bush and his campaign strategists wanted was something that balanced the formality of the occasion with the informality of his personal style, and the difficulty of that task was made apparent in Mr. Bush's delivery tonight, which was not as natural as he undoubtedly wanted it to be, and which tested the limits of his abilities as an orator. And Mr. Bush was very much a part of the production. He pruned an array of phrases near the top. At the end of a sentence that began ''together, we will,'' Mr. Gerson attached a lengthy litany of goals. Mr. Bush distilled them into a single phrase ''renew America's purpose'' that echoed existing slogans from his campaign. Mr. Gerson offered several paragraphs of examples of the sacrifices of the World War II generation, which Mr. Bush had wanted to honor. Mr. Bush was not content until the tribute had been boiled down to a few sentences and a central sentiment: that these brave men had ''stormed beaches, liberated concentration camps and delivered us from evil.'' Mr. Gerson, trying to make the case that good times are as crucial as bad, wrote that ''a time of crisis is a test of strength, a time of prosperity is a test of vision.'' But that was neither active nor specific enough for Mr. Bush, who kept pressing and pressing until Mr. Gerson came up with this: ''Prosperity can be a tool in our hands, used to build and better our country, or it can be a drug in our system, dulling our sense of urgency, of empathy, of duty.'' Although the theme that the baby boom generation had squandered some of its opportunities and surrendered to irresponsible impulses was present from the first draft, Mr. Bush wanted that notion turned into a motif, with recurring allusions to a privileged generation's unrealized obligation to give something back. Inasmuch as Mr. Bush can be said to have intellectual obsessions, this had always been one, but there was another reason to hammer home this argument. It represented an implicit indictment of President Clinton, and an implicit pitch to start anew in the White House. Although tonight's speech was much more than a culling and cobbling together of Mr. Bush's stump speeches to date, the candidate did revert to familiar phrases. An early draft by Mr. Gerson included the sentiment that ''congregations are responsible not only to worship, but to serve.'' Mr. Bush was not accustomed to using that first word, and one of the first times he read a version of the speech aloud he spontaneously changed it to ''synagogues, churches and mosques,'' words he had used in dozens of previous remarks. Aides duly inserted the change. ''He needs to be able to say the words in a comfortable way,'' said Ms. Hughes, who provided extensive help with the editing. Ms. Hughes, who has worked with Mr. Bush since 1994, knew his voice as well as he did, and often came to Mr. Gerson to single out the same passage the governor had as something that did not sound like him. Early this afternoon, when reporters asked about Mr. Bush's latest thoughts on the speech, he said he had given a more important speech ''when I asked my wife to marry me.'' And Mr. Gerson, who is short, bookish, given to conversing in finely rendered sentences and self-effacing to a fault, has a seriousness that makes him a ripe target for Mr. Bush's kidding. One of the governor's advisers said that Mr. Bush, in reviewing those drafts of Mr. Gerson's speeches over time, would try to guess what Mr. Gerson's favorite line was, instantly point it out and say that it had to go. Only after Mr. Gerson's face had lost all color would the governor let him know that it was all a joke. In the Bush campaign, he plays an unusual dual role, sitting in on not just the communications staff's meetings but also on the policy staff's as well.
 URBAN BUSH WOMEN. Jawole Willa Jo Zollar and the Urban Bush Women in two dances that celebrate everything from a woman's bottom to her psyche. Aug. 18 at 7 p.m.; food is served from 6 to 7 p.m. Free. La Plaza Cultural community garden, Avenue C at Ninth Street, East Village; (212) 674-8194.
 In his acceptance speech on Wednesday night at the Republican National Convention, Dick Cheney, the vice-presidential nominee, said,  ''As the man from Hope goes home to New York, Mr. Gore will try to separate himself from his leader's shadow, but somehow we will never see one without thinking of the other'' (transcript, Aug. 3). In his acceptance speech on Wednesday night at the Republican National Convention, Dick Cheney, the vice-presidential nominee, said,  ''As the man from Hope goes home to New York, Mr. Gore will try to separate himself from his leader's shadow, but somehow we will never see one without thinking of the other'' (transcript, Aug. 3).
 Editorial holds that Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech, in which he introduced himself to American people by fleshing out 'compassionate conservatism' and promoting his convictions and character, is challenge that Gore campaign should not underestimate It will be 96 days before Republicans know if Gov. George W. Bush was right to bypass standard G.O.P. ideological fare and center this convention on the twin themes of inclusion and personal testimony. But in his well-crafted, highly autobiographical acceptance speech last night, Mr. Bush sought to incite a public appetite for change based on a claim of bringing a new style of leadership to the White House. With flashes of wit and biting ridicule, Mr. Bush derided Vice President Al Gore as the risk-averse partner in an administration that ''has coasted through prosperity.'' Ending his embargo on direct attacks, he said: ''They had their chance. They have not led. We will.'' The underlying invitation was for voters to take a leap of faith on the promise that Mr. Bush will develop into a more effective, resolute and likable leader and role model than Mr. Gore. It will be 96 days before Republicans know if Gov. George W. Bush was right to bypass standard G.O.P. ideological fare and center this convention on the twin themes of inclusion and personal testimony. But in his well-crafted, highly autobiographical acceptance speech last night, Mr. Bush sought to incite a public appetite for change based on a claim of bringing a new style of leadership to the White House. With flashes of wit and biting ridicule, Mr. Bush derided Vice President Al Gore as the risk-averse partner in an administration that ''has coasted through prosperity.'' Ending his embargo on direct attacks, he said: ''They had their chance. They have not led. We will.'' The underlying invitation was for voters to take a leap of faith on the promise that Mr. Bush will develop into a more effective, resolute and likable leader and role model than Mr. Gore. The irony of Mr. Bush's situation right now is that, despite the renowned father saluted in the speech, he is actually not very well known even to many supporters. He characterized his six-year stint as governor of Texas as one in which he learned to make tough decisions and work with Democrats. But serving in Austin and having many of his father's advisers around him now will probably have less meaning to the voters than Mr. Bush's attempt to define himself as a man from a different political culture than the one he said was epitomized by Mr. Gore and President Clinton. Running a campaign for change is complicated by the fact that Americans are satisfied with the economy, and the polls show them broadly supporting the Democrats' approach on budget issues, as well as education, health care and Social Security. The oratorical doorway for Mr. Bush has been to speak from, and about, his heart as a way of suggesting a more expansive governance without really altering the ideological straitjacket that his party requires its nominees to wear. The glue that is supposed to hold all this together is his promise of personality suited to the office, yet free of historical baggage. In service of that theme, Mr. Bush invoked the values of Midland and boasted that he would come to Washington without inherited enemies and with ''no stake in the bitter arguments of the last few years.'' He asserted that his would be an administration guided by convictions and character rather than polls and focus groups. A world of difference lies between Mr. Bush and Ronald Reagan, the last G.O.P. nominee to stir the kind of hope among Republicans that could be heard last night. But like Mr. Reagan, Mr. Bush promised that if given a chance he would rise above expectations, and like Mr. Reagan, he is attempting to create a market for change in the summer convention and then cash in this fall. Also like Mr. Reagan, he promised a regime of homespun values in place of the policy sophistication or taste for legislative maneuvering of Mr. Gore. In reality, this down-home emphasis is sharply at odds with the privileged educational and financial background of Mr. Bush and many of the delegates here -- a condition that has led some to say this ought to be known as the illusion convention instead of the inclusion convention. But Democrats should make no mistake about the themes laid down here or the stump performance of George W. Bush and even that of his running mate, Richard B. Cheney. They represent a considerable danger for Mr. Gore and his party this fall.
 And today, G.M. sponsored two lunch receptions at different downtown locales -- one honored the speaker of the House, J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois, and the other saluted Lawrence B. Lindsey, the chief economic adviser to the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Meanwhile, across town, G.M. and G.M.A.C. Financial Services held a brunch honoring Mr. Lindsey, the lead economic adviser to Mr. Bush who is also a consultant to G.M.A.C. and a board member of its subsidiary, Escrow Bank U.S.A. of Salt Lake City. THE REPUBLICANS: THE MONEY  Correction:  August 5, 2000, Saturday  A picture caption yesterday about Bush family members at the Republican National Convention misidentified a sister-in-law of George W. Bush. She was Margaret Bush, the wife of Marvin Bush -- not Columba Bush, the wife of Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida. Correction:  August 8, 2000, Tuesday  An article on Friday about Bush family members who attended the Republican National Convention misstated the occupation of Marvin Bush, the former president's son, and the location of his business. He is a co-founder of an investment firm in McLean, Va., not a management consultant in Texas. A picture caption yesterday about Bush family members at the Republican National Convention misidentified a sister-in-law of George W. Bush. She was Margaret Bush, the wife of Marvin Bush -- not Columba Bush, the wife of Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida. An article on Friday about Bush family members who attended the Republican National Convention misstated the occupation of Marvin Bush, the former president's son, and the location of his business. He is a co-founder of an investment firm in McLean, Va., not a management consultant in Texas.
 White House aides acknowledged that the recess appointment, which would have the effect of allowing Mr. Lee to serve through the end of Mr. Clinton's term without the need for Senate confirmation, was partly a rebuke to the Republican Party's drive for racial inclusiveness under the leadership of its presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush. Senate Republicans privately accused the White House of seeking to bolster the campaign prospects of Vice President Al Gore by driving a wedge between their party and minority voters. Nevertheless, Mr. Hatch chided the president for backing a nominee who, he said, failed to ''bring all sides together in our efforts to advance the cause of civil rights.'' Mr. Hatch added that ''the timing of this decision serves as further evidence of what we have come to know is true: The Clinton-Gore White House is intent on dividing our people rather than uniting us for the common good.''
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column says that when it comes to abortion, George W Bush's move to the center consists solely of his willingness to accept votes of people who disagree with him; says that although abortion went virtually unmentioned at convention, there has been no effort to mitigate Republican Party's sweeping declaration of war against it, and no hint that Bush ever intended to do battle with his core constituency on issue (M) Wrong message. Under George W. Bush the Republican Party is one big, huge, enormous, humongous tent. Mr. Bush is asking for the vote of every single American who supports restoring dignity to the presidency and not leaving a single child behind. Those yearning for an undignified chief executive and a pile of children stranded without transportation are just going to have to go elsewhere. Coming to grips with the Bush candidacy is tricky, since a lot goes unsaid in this campaign. Until Dick Cheney gave his red-meat speech on Wednesday night, the Republican Convention had gone for three days without ever mentioning Bill Clinton's name. We were in Harry Potter land, and the president was Lord Voldemort, the villain so villainous he can be referred to only as ''You-Know-Who.'' (Mr. Cheney was a hit with the delegates, who had been languishing on topics like ''Prosperity With a Purpose: Keeping America Prosperous.'' However, many people who saw him on TV felt the new vice-presidential candidate had all the warmth and charm of an armadillo.) The Republican Convention was full of delegates who had become party activists so they could promote their social agenda, yet Mr. Bush managed to drag them through this entire convention without one televised peep about the right to bear arms, or even about prayer in school. Every black Republican who's ever been elected to a county road commission was given a speaking role, but Alan Keyes, the black presidential candidate who's the darling of the anti-abortion movement, was nowhere in sight. Until Mr. Bush devoted a sentence to the unborn last night, the only person I heard bring up abortion was a Senate candidate from Nebraska who was distinctly off prime time. Mr. Bush's own message -- that we can all work together, and that partial birth abortion is bad -- sounded stunningly moderate compared with the diatribes from conventions of yore. In a way, this isn't much different from what Bill Clinton did in 1992, when he pulled his party to the center  while placating its left by muffling Robert Casey, the pro-life governor of Pennsylvania. But at least the Democrats didn't keep their positions secret. You'd have had to be living in a cave not to know what Mr. Clinton intended to do about abortions and gun control. Mr. Bush is less forthcoming. Watching the convention, all you might be able to deduce is that whatever he plans, it's going to be accomplished to the music of Motown. Still, it's easy enough to read his intentions. His surrogates forcefully stripped the platform of all signs of immigrant-bashing, and made an unsuccessful attempt to moderate the plank opposing gays in the military.  The convention's rainbow coalition of speakers did at least send a message that Mr. Bush is going to have blacks in his cabinet and regards immigrants as a group worthy of a well-placed pander. One of the very, very few middle-aged white men who got on stage was the Republican Party's only openly gay Congressman. But there was no effort to mitigate the party's sweeping declaration of war against all forms of abortion, and  no hint Mr. Bush ever intended to do battle with his core constituency on that issue. ''He does not want to fight,'' said Tommy Thompson, the long-suffering chairman of the platform committee, who kept demanding credit for having allowed pro-choice Republicans to speak at the hearings. ''The Republican Party is a pro-life party, but it's never been so open,'' he said repeatedly. When it comes to abortion, George W. Bush's move to the center consists solely of his willingness to accept the votes of people who disagree with him. The tent is huge, but the ringmaster is only listening to the folks who entered from the right.
 Former Pres Gerald R Ford's doctors express confidence that he will make full recovery from stroke; Gov George W Bush is permitted to make 20-minute hospital visit (S) Mr. Ford was making such good progress that hospital officials permitted Gov. George W. Bush to visit him for 20 minutes shortly before noon. ''He looked great, sounded good,'' Mr. Bush said as he left the hospital to prepare for his speech tonight accepting the presidential nomination at the Republican National Convention. ''He told me to practice.''
