 There was a time when tobacco stocks performed quite nicely for a lot of people. But only since the last presidential election has shareholder culture so decisively moved to the center of American public discourse. We have heard endlessly that half of the country has money in the markets, that Main Street and Wall Street are on the same side. By now we even seem to believe it. Consider Al Gore's efforts to villainize the ''price gouging'' pharmaceutical industry. Do drug companies not seem like prime targets for demonization? Yes, they make products that save lives, but like tobacco companies, they seem to be able to charge whatever they want, raking in profits and forcing elderly Americans (to borrow from Gore's rap) to eat macaroni and cheese to pay for vital medication. But it isn't so simple. When Gore picks on the maker of the allergy drug Claritin D for trying to muscle special patent treatment out of Congress, he is picking on Schering-Plough, whose share price has risen from about 12 to 44, adjusted for splits, in the past five years. The No. 1 mutual-fund holder of Schering-Plough is Fidelity Magellan, one of the most popular funds in the United States; the No. 3 holder is the famous Vanguard 500 Index fund. Less than a month before he began tilting at Big Pharma, Gore set out on a ''prosperity and progress'' tour to remind us of the Clinton-Gore economic boom. Plenty of those whose prosperity progressed during the last eight years are investors in Magellan and the Vanguard 500. I am, of course, as opposed to price gouging as the next guy, and I applaud anyone who can force this issue into the open. But I recently noticed that a fund I have money in is a top owner of Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer. Pfizer, the maker of Viagra, is up 500 percent in the past five years. So am I part of a nation of consumers, anxious to see corporate power checked? Or part of a nation of shareholders, anxious to finance a luxurious retirement? I suppose you can say that Al Gore has campaigned like a candidate who wants it both ways. But if so, there's no truer reflection of the current electorate.
 As his campaign train stopped at the station in Durand, Mich., Gov. George W. Bush of Texas called the veto yet another ''squandered opportunity'' of the Clinton administration, which he pointedly called the Clinton-Gore administration. ''It sends the wrong signal in America, and yet my opponent showed us where he stands,'' said Mr. Bush, who earlier in the day had urged Vice President Al Gore to intervene against the veto. ''Instead of standing on the side of families,'' Mr. Bush said, ''he stands on the side of big government. Had I been president of the United States, I would have signed that bill.'' Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore ''still peddle the shopworn slogan that correcting this injustice is just a break for the rich,'' Mr. Hayworth said. ''But Americans know better. We understand that two spouses earning $25,000 each are not wealthy by any stretch of the imagination.'' In Westhampton, N.Y., today, Mr. Gore said: ''I'm for repealing the marriage tax, but not going beyond working families and not giving tax relief to people who are in the upper brackets and people who are not even married who are benefited by the version that was passed. I do support the veto. I also support the right kind of repeal of the marriage tax.'' The two approaches over how to spend the record federal budget surplus mirror the turf staked out by the two presidential candidates. Mr. Gore has advocated a more modest tax-relief package than his Republican opponent. Mr. Gore has called Mr. Bush's plan risky. Mr. Bush dismisses Mr. Gore's stance as government as usual. Republicans took great pains at their convention in Philadelphia to portray themselves as an inclusive party that reaches out to people of all ethnic groups and income levels. But as Mr. Clinton stumps on behalf of Mr. Gore, he knocks the Republicans for favoring the wealthy and turning their backs on minorities. At a Friday night fund-raiser for Hillary Rodham Clinton's New York Senate campaign, he told a group of wealthy donors that Mr. Gore would not leave anybody behind. ''The other guys are going to give you a bigger tax cut than we are,'' Mr. Clinton told 200 guests at the seaside gathering on Nantucket. But he said the country as a whole would be better off under Mr. Gore's stewardship, helping rich and poor alike.
 THE meeting of the National Black Republican Leadership Caucus should have ranked high on the A-list of happenings at the new Party of Inclusion's convention. The featured politician was Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, a Miss Moderate from the political center, where Gov. George W. Bush of Texas supposedly wants to herd the Grand Old Elephants. THE meeting of the National Black Republican Leadership Caucus should have ranked high on the A-list of happenings at the new Party of Inclusion's convention. The featured politician was Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, a Miss Moderate from the political center, where Gov. George W. Bush of Texas supposedly wants to herd the Grand Old Elephants. ''I'm sorry she's not our vice-presidential candidate,'' said Doris Oliveira, a black delegate from Tuskegee, Ala. ''But we would have lost the South. They were going to walk out of the convention if Bush had chosen someone who supports a woman's right to choose. Our party's gotten so conservative.'' Although Governor Bush lavishly embraced the rhetoric and style of moderate Northeastern Republicans, few of those moderates made it to center stage. At the convention four years ago the region's Republican governors were leading men and ladies, helping in the fruitless task of softening the harsh image of the party's nominee, Bob Dole. This year, the candidate softened himself. It has been widely noted that Mr. Bush kept the party's conservative elements out of the glare of the convention, but he kept moderates largely out of sight as well. His own language and tone did the job the moderates did for Mr. Dole. Governor Whitman was a co-chairwoman  for Mr. Dole's convention, along with none other than Governor Bush. Gov. George E. Pataki of New York gave a speech nominating Jack Kemp as vice president, and Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut also spoke. Staten Island's Susan Molinari, then a rising Republican in the House of Representatives, gave the keynote address. This year, only Governor Pataki had a prominent role, but it was to read a scripted tribute to the three living Republican former presidents. The showcasing of moderate governors that year was a bit of a head fake. Mr. Dole had little intention of shaping the party in their image. Mr. Bush managed to hit moderate chords, even as he reassured many conservatives that he was their man, too. ''Someone said to me today, Governor Bush sounded like a George Pataki last night with the moderate message he was pushing out,'' Daniel Stewart, the mayor of Plattsburgh, N.Y., and a convention delegate, said Friday. With the theme of ''Leave No Child Behind,'' and people of all races turning the convention stage into Mr. Bush's Neighborhood, and lines like ''We Shall Overcome'' in his speech, Mr. Bush left moderates feeling as if he had unleashed the party's inner Connecticut Yankee. It was easier for them to swallow conservative platform planks and his stands against gun control and abortion rights. Mr. Stewart, New York State's first openly gay mayor, disagrees with Mr. Bush on abortion and is upset with antigay language in the party's platform. But in Mr. Bush he hears the tenor of the Republican Party he knew growing up in New England and living in New York. Governor Pataki, among the losers in the vice-presidential sweepstakes to the far more conservative Dick Cheney, said Mr. Bush replaced ''the angry face of our party'' symbolized by strident Congressional Republicans, with the ''positive, problem-solving wing of the party'' dominated by Republican governors. By prompting a blend of compassion and conservatism, said William Kristol, editor of the conservative Weekly Standard, ''Bush has balanced his own ticket.''
 White House aides grumble that Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention has been presidential--too presidential, actually, as they accuse Bush of stealing not only Pres Clinton's ideas, but his words as well (S) White House aides grumbled today that Gov. George W. Bush's acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention had been presidential -- too presidential, actually, as they accused Mr. Bush of stealing not only President Clinton's ideas, but his words as well. In a tone of pique colored with a tinge of glee, the aides said they had come up with nine examples from Mr. Bush's convention speech and other recent speeches that Mr. Clinton had uttered first. The list may be significant chiefly because it shows the Clinton camp's discomfort at Mr. Bush's infiltration of the president's rhetorical territory. White House aides grumbled today that Gov. George W. Bush's acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention had been presidential -- too presidential, actually, as they accused Mr. Bush of stealing not only President Clinton's ideas, but his words as well. In a tone of pique colored with a tinge of glee, the aides said they had come up with nine examples from Mr. Bush's convention speech and other recent speeches that Mr. Clinton had uttered first. The list may be significant chiefly because it shows the Clinton camp's discomfort at Mr. Bush's infiltration of the president's rhetorical territory. ''Medicare does more than meet the needs of the elderly; it reflects the values of our society,'' Mr. Bush told cheering delegates. ''We will use these good times for great goals,'' Mr. Bush said last week. The similar language may be coincidental, but it fits into a strategy on the part of the Bush campaign to blur some of the traditional differences between the parties. The convention reflected that approach as Republicans highlighted a racially diverse cast and studiously steered clear of divisive debate. Mr. Clinton has made the appropriation of others' ideas a hallmark of his administration, regularly seizing Republican initiatives that he deems worthy. But that was forgotten today as some of his aides groused about Mr. Bush's ''Clintonian'' text. Mr. Lockhart pointed out that Mr. Bush had said during a June 30 campaign stop, ''How a country handles its moment of prosperity and opportunity is just as stern a test of our vision, our judgment, and our character as how we handle adversity.'' ''Let me assure the president, with all due respect, he is not our model for speechmaking, fund-raising, or conduct in office,'' said Karen P. Hughes, the communications director for the Bush campaign. Another spokesman for the Bush campaign, Ray Sullivan, criticized the claim of political plagiarism as ''silly and beneath the dignity of the White House.''
 Gov George W Bush's signing four months ago of proclamation declaring June 10 to be Jesus Day, urging all Texans to 'follow Christ's example by performing good works in their communities and neighborhoods,' turns into controversy for Bush; as word of Texas's Jesus Day has spread, Bush has come under criticism for insensitivity to people of non-Christian faiths and a disregard for First Amendment; American Jewish Congress exec dir Phil Baum protests that 'the assumption is that Christianity is the norm for America' and that Jews and other minorities 'are here essentially as guests at the sufferance of our hosts' (M) Four months ago in Texas, Gov. George W. Bush signed a proclamation declaring June 10 to be Jesus Day, and urging all Texans to ''follow Christ's example by performing good works in their communities and neighborhoods.'' Four months ago in Texas, Gov. George W. Bush signed a proclamation declaring June 10 to be Jesus Day, and urging all Texans to ''follow Christ's example by performing good works in their communities and neighborhoods.'' Now what seemed purely ceremonial has turned into a controversy for Governor Bush. As word of Texas' Jesus Day has spread, the Republican presidential nominee has come under criticism for insensitivity to people of non-Christian faiths and a disregard for the First Amendment. Mr. Bush, who has put his Christian faith front and center in the campaign, has tried to project an image of inclusiveness to people of all ethnicities and religions. In the past, he has been put on the defensive for saying that the only way to heaven was through Christ, and for naming Jesus as his favorite political philosopher. Now the governor's office has been receiving letters and e-mail messages from people outraged by the  proclamation, or asking if it is true, said Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush. ''George Bush is sensitive to those concerns,'' Ms. Edwards said, ''but is also mindful of the longstanding tradition of governors in both parties to honor individuals and organizations for their good works through greetings and proclamations.'' Governor Bush has also signed proclamations supporting Bahai centenary day, Holocaust Remembrance Day, and a Hanukkah celebration, in Austin, she said.
 Friends of Vice Pres Al Gore, such as actor Tommy Lee Jones, his Harvard classmate, express irritation at what they see as hostile press coverage of Gore, contending media ignores reality that Gore is a funny, warm, thoughtful and decent person--not the 'stiff' person frequently portrayed in press (M) Mr. Jones had agreed to meet over lunch at the San Ysidro Ranch to talk about his Harvard classmate Al Gore. But like so many of Mr. Gore's intimates, Mr. Jones arrived aggrieved. And before coughing up any stories from the old days, he had some venting to do. Mr. Jones had agreed to meet over lunch at the San Ysidro Ranch to talk about his Harvard classmate Al Gore. But like so many of Mr. Gore's intimates, Mr. Jones arrived aggrieved. And before coughing up any stories from the old days, he had some venting to do. Even such a wobbly softball question as, ''So, you guys have stayed in touch?'' got this response: ''We get together when we're in the same city. Just like real people.'' Asked what Mr. Gore had been like at Harvard, Mr. Jones said: ''Funny, a real pleasure to be around. He still is.'' Mr. Jones cursed ''this stiffness thing'' and said that reporters who attributed cynical motives to his friend ''are busy writing about themselves.'' Not every friend of Mr. Gore's, of course, has been through the years of ''Hard Copy'' and paparazzi that Mr. Jones has endured as an A-list movie star. But virtually all are similarly steamed over the coverage of his presidential campaign, and just as frustrated that the public perception of him seems distorted as a result. ''You don't want to talk about this?'' Mr. Jones said, nuking an attempt to steer the conversation back to Harvard. Clearly, he and others do. In fact, their complaints have become Topic A in interviews with Mr. Gore's old friends, an assortment of mainly nonfamous and nonpolitical types he met in school, the Army and back in Tennessee. They do not recognize their Al Gore in the stories they read. Almost invariably, they want to know why a man they know to be decent, thoughtful and funny -- they always say funny -- is so often drawn as not even quite human. Yet they have answers, too. And beyond their irritation at what they see as a hostile press corps -- described in a recent article in The New Yorker as ''palpably seething'' over their lack of access to him -- these friends are probably better equipped than anyone to see Mr. Gore's own role in the way he is portrayed. Often, they point to his sensitivity and essential shyness. ''Behind closed doors he takes a lot of that stuff personal, takes it harder than he can show,'' and then further withdraws, said Steve Armistead, Mr. Gore's closest childhood friend, who runs the roads department in Wilson County, Tenn. ''He does not show his human side that well.'' But Mr. Gore's friends also suggest that there is an element of willfulness, even a certain defiance, born of an enduring ambivalence over the whole business of politics, in his unevenness on the stump. To hear them tell it, he can and does decide when to turn on the charm. In other words, Mr. Gore's charm is not only a gift he can bestow or withhold at will, but a compliment to the person who is being charmed. Put another way, those charmed by George W. Bush feel good about the encounter, but are not likely to feel it was their own special warmth or trustworthiness that made the connection possible. Whereas with Mr. Gore, friends and acquaintances typically do feel that his charm reflects well on them, and that it is to their credit to have drawn him out. When that happens, ''he'll let you into his soul,'' said Donna Armistead, Mr. Armistead's sister and a nurse living outside Nashville, who was Mr. Gore's first girlfriend. She, for one, says reporters are not solely to blame for Mr. Gore's image problems. ''He's not being himself,'' she said. ''He's going to have to take a deep breath and say, 'Look, this is me, and maybe I'm not an alpha male all the time.' He's such a human person,'' she said, and should not be afraid to show it. Friendly acquaintances like Mike Roche, who knew Mr. Gore in the Army and now does marketing for Sears in Chicago, are more apt than his closest friends to see any distortion in the way he comes across as a function of the fact that the camera just does not seem to like Mr. Gore as much as they do. ''I couldn't believe how stiff and phony he looked on television,'' Mr. Roche said. ''I never saw a phony second out of the guy.'' But his friends are convinced, too, that Mr. Gore is still getting more than his fair share of bad press, a perception backed up by a recent study by the Pew Research Center and Project for Excellence in Journalism. Their analysis of news coverage from February through June showed that most stories about Mr. Gore -- 76 percent -- focused on two negative themes: that he is tainted by scandal and that he exaggerates. In contrast, the largest share of the Bush coverage -- 40 percent -- reflected Mr. Bush's own message that he is a different kind of politician. Mr. Gore's closest friend, Frank Hunger, a lawyer from Mississippi who was married to Mr. Gore's sister Nancy, began an interview with a tour of the Gore family photos on the wall in his Washington office: ''See, there he is in earth tones'' years before he was accused of being a slave to fashion consultants, he said. In fact, until the Clinton-Gore administration's second term, Mr. Gore, who is himself a former reporter, had received overwhelmingly favorable notices, including a series of puff pieces about ''Gore chic'' in the months leading up to his 1988 presidential run. But now, Bob Somerby, a stand-up comic who roomed with Mr. Gore at Harvard, is so offended, so consumed, by what he sees as the unfairly harsh tone of the current coverage that he devotes a good bit of his time to rebutting Gore stories in a Web review he calls The Daily Howler. Lately, a number of Mr. Gore's friends have stopped talking to reporters altogether, which may have only compounded the problem, and contributed to their sense that the Al Gore they read about is nothing like the guy they know. Mr. Gore's childhood friend Gordon Thompson, a part-time farmer who works in a tire factory and has visited the vice president in Washington, said he, too, has just about given up on telling about their summers on the farm. Those stories do not fit the stereotype, he said, and almost never make the papers. Now he has caller ID, and screens for area codes like Washington's 202 that are overrun with reporters. When Mr. Gore's friends do talk, though, they frequently mention what a loyal guy he is. Edward Blair, an old running buddy in Tennessee, where he now is a United States marshal, remembers trying to talk Mr. Gore out of visiting someone they had known as kids who was in jail on a manslaughter charge. It was 1988 and he was running for president at the time. ''I said, 'How is this going to look?' But he said, ''If you were in jail, wouldn't you want me to visit you?' '' Yet they also leave the distinct impression that Mr. Gore does not share his emotions easily outside the Gore family circle.
 Vanilla Conventions  The Republican convention may have been bland, but George W. Bush got his message across. Now the question is whether Al Gore can do the same.
 Orlando Patterson Op-ed article on some observers contending that Republicans' posturing on inclusiveness is a mere charade; argues, however, that Gov George W Bush is likely to benefit from rainbow parade for a simple reason: Democrats have made their own mockery of inclusion; contends Vice Pres Al Gore has succumbed to left wing of his party on issues of race (M)0 A lot of people have made fun of the charade of inclusiveness last week at the Republican Convention, as one black or Hispanic speaker after another trooped to the podium. But George W. Bush is likely to benefit from the rainbow parade for a simple reason. The Democrats have made their own mockery of inclusion. Just as the G.O.P. platform calls for cultural and ethnic policies favored by the party's fringes, belying Mr. Bush's eloquent pleas for racial equality, Al Gore has succumbed to the left wing of his party on issues of race. Both candidates, knowing that most Americans now genuinely favor inclusiveness, have spun cobwebs of centrist deceit, projecting images of moderation that bear no relation to the underlying intolerance among hard-liners of their respective parties. A lot of people have made fun of the charade of inclusiveness last week at the Republican Convention, as one black or Hispanic speaker after another trooped to the podium. But George W. Bush is likely to benefit from the rainbow parade for a simple reason. The Democrats have made their own mockery of inclusion. Just as the G.O.P. platform calls for cultural and ethnic policies favored by the party's fringes, belying Mr. Bush's eloquent pleas for racial equality, Al Gore has succumbed to the left wing of his party on issues of race. Both candidates, knowing that most Americans now genuinely favor inclusiveness, have spun cobwebs of centrist deceit, projecting images of moderation that bear no relation to the underlying intolerance among hard-liners of their respective parties. From Mr. Bush's convention speech, you'd never know his administration in Texas has imprisoned and executed more African-Americans than any predecessor; that he scuttled a bill to provide health insurance for poor children; and that he is generally hostile to legislation aimed at reducing racial profiling, restraining police brutality or getting the guns that disproportionately kill young blacks and Latinos off the streets. Yet the strategy is working. Mr. Bush leads in all national polls. Why? Perhaps because the swing voters sense that Mr. Gore is playing a similar game on the left. The Democrats are certainly more inclusive demographically and favor policies that more directly meet the immediate needs of underprivileged minorities. What is disturbing about Mr. Gore's campaign is that he has yielded to the established minority leadership (like the Congressional Black Caucus and some minority mayors), which is now committed to a conception of inclusiveness that eschews genuine social and cultural integration. Mr. Gore and the Democrats have rightly criticized the growing use of the death penalty and incarceration, and lamented internal problems of the African-American population, like collapsing families and the education gap. But they dare not suggest specific bold solutions for fear of alienating core constituencies: they shy away from ideas to deal with the persistent failure of black students, for example, to avoid offending teachers' unions, and they yield to urban leaders opposed to plans aimed at moving inner-city dwellers to areas that offer better job and educational opportunities. Instead we find Mr. Gore playing the identity game to the hilt, one day holding court with Al Sharpton, the next pandering to the fanatical Cuban-American leadership over Elian Gonzalez. Nor did it matter that Cuban-Americans and African-Americans often have strongly opposed interests. Give the demagogues what they want and let them take care of their own. It may be that the genuinely centrist and independent voters consider Mr. Bush's contradictions more palatable, not because they are racists, but because they believe that the long-term consequences for African-Americans, and for a truly integrated America, are not as devastating in Mr. Bush's camp as in the alternative.
 ''Social Security: The Phony Crisis,'' by Dean Baker and Mark Weisbrot ($22), argues that because of overly conservative economic projections, Social Security is not in danger and doesn't need to be ''saved'' by putting some of its funds into individual stock market accounts, as George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, and others advocate. This is a very readable book by two economists that is actually influencing the political debate.
 Onstage, the song and dance went perfectly. Offstage, however, George W. Bush's top economic adviser flubbed his lines. On Wednesday The Financial Times ran an interview with Lawrence Lindsey in which the former Fed official made much of his relationship with Alan Greenspan, and appeared to claim that Mr. Greenspan endorses Mr. Bush's economic plan. By the next day Mr. Lindsey was furiously back-pedaling, conceding that he had in fact never discussed the plan with the Fed chairman, and further opining that ''It's not for Chairman Greenspan to endorse one tax plan or another tax plan, or to endorse one candidate or another.'' Presumably Mr. Lindsey -- perhaps a bit rattled by analysts at Goldman Sachs and elsewhere who have warned that Mr. Bush's proposed tax cuts will drive up interest rates -- was just being sloppy. One hopes that from now on the Republican team will defend its plans on the merits -- starting, in the case of Social Security, by explaining what the plan actually is -- instead of trying to reassure us that everything is O.K. because Uncle Alan approves. And yet there is something more to this story than Mr. Lindsey's blooper. If you ask me, we're hearing too much these days about Mr. Greenspan's opinions. Onstage, the song and dance went perfectly. Offstage, however, George W. Bush's top economic adviser flubbed his lines. On Wednesday The Financial Times ran an interview with Lawrence Lindsey in which the former Fed official made much of his relationship with Alan Greenspan, and appeared to claim that Mr. Greenspan endorses Mr. Bush's economic plan. By the next day Mr. Lindsey was furiously back-pedaling, conceding that he had in fact never discussed the plan with the Fed chairman, and further opining that ''It's not for Chairman Greenspan to endorse one tax plan or another tax plan, or to endorse one candidate or another.'' Presumably Mr. Lindsey -- perhaps a bit rattled by analysts at Goldman Sachs and elsewhere who have warned that Mr. Bush's proposed tax cuts will drive up interest rates -- was just being sloppy. One hopes that from now on the Republican team will defend its plans on the merits -- starting, in the case of Social Security, by explaining what the plan actually is -- instead of trying to reassure us that everything is O.K. because Uncle Alan approves. And yet there is something more to this story than Mr. Lindsey's blooper. If you ask me, we're hearing too much these days about Mr. Greenspan's opinions.
 Reporter finds that a private dinner with Vice Pres Al Gore that Gore is the good company that his friends say he is, laughing over some of his favorite stupid country music lyrics, making fund of himself for pandering to Roman Catholics, and even gossiping a little (S)5 Al Gore's Hank Williams imitation is certainly surprising, and he did it at dinner, by request -- with his mouth full of food, actually. ''Have you ever seen a robin cry,'' he twanged, ''when leaves begin to fall.'' Then, on a roll, he sang a few lines of Garth Brooks's ''I've Got Friends in Low Places.'' Though there is no sense in which a recent on-the-record dinner with a reporter can be considered an occasion to glimpse the ''private'' Al Gore, he was the good company his friends swear that he is, laughing over some of his favorite stupid country lyrics, making fun of himself for pandering to Roman Catholics, even gossiping a little. Al Gore's Hank Williams imitation is certainly surprising, and he did it at dinner, by request -- with his mouth full of food, actually. ''Have you ever seen a robin cry,'' he twanged, ''when leaves begin to fall.'' Then, on a roll, he sang a few lines of Garth Brooks's ''I've Got Friends in Low Places.'' Though there is no sense in which a recent on-the-record dinner with a reporter can be considered an occasion to glimpse the ''private'' Al Gore, he was the good company his friends swear that he is, laughing over some of his favorite stupid country lyrics, making fun of himself for pandering to Roman Catholics, even gossiping a little. And the fact that the dinner took place at all, unsupervised by aides, in Mr. Gore's hotel suite on the road in New York several weeks ago, says that he is not always as cautious as he is generally considered.
 If you prefer to let someone else do the driving, there's the Bushmobile. It carries 24 passengers -- from infants to seniors -- and is emblazoned with the motto of Dieter Hartmann, its German operator: ''Ve get U there when others would not dare!'' Mr. Hartmann is a tour operator with a unique resume. He migrated to Australia as an engineer and then decided to live in the bush with his wife and another couple. They built a cabin deep in the forest and subsisted for several years entirely on food they hunted and gathered themselves. ''I was the guinea pig for the plants we found,'' he says. ''I would eat it, and if I didn't get sick, then we knew it was safe.'' Upon returning to civilization, Mr. Hartmann applied his engineering skills to the Bushmobile, a converted military transport vehicle with a 20-speed transmission, enormous tires and a hydraulic winch for extricating itself from quicksand that sometimes forms in the dunes near Port Stephens. Mr. Hartmann's tour included dramatic descents in the Bushmobile as well as a chance to do some sandboarding -- the dune equivalent of sledding. He took us into Tin City, a little shantytown in the dunes. He also conducted what he called a magic carpet ride, which consisted of bouncing across the sand on a mat dragged behind the Bushmobile. From toboggan to Bushmobile Bushmobile tours ($16) depart from Anna Bay; (61) 500-55 00 66.
 But just what role can these mavericks hope to play? The historical answer appears to be a small, but occasionally important, one. About the best any of them did was Theodore Roosevelt in 1912, when he broke from the Republican Party of President William H. Taft to run as the candidate of the Bull Moose Party and won 27 percent of the popular vote. That was good enough to get Woodrow Wilson into the White House for the Democrats. Similarly, many Republicans still blame Ross Perot for siphoning off conservative voters in 1992 and helping Bill Clinton defeat President George Bush. Mr. Nader, a longtime consumer advocate who won almost 700,000 votes in the 1996 election, has taken  particularly derisive aim this year at the major party candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, calling them ''Tweedledee and Tweedledum,'' although he does not specify who is which. Of the two outsiders this year, Mr. Nader is poised to have the greater impact on the election. Gnawing at Mr. Gore from the left, where he has considerable support among environmentalists and union workers, Mr. Nader has polled as high as 10 percent in some states, which could be enough to throw one or two of them to Mr. Bush. If that should happen in California, where Mr. Nader is popular among disaffected Democrats, Mr. Gore would have little chance of winning. The Democrats might consider sending a few million in campaign funds to Mr. Buchanan, a far-right conservative who is polling so low these days that it hurts Mr. Gore by not providing a counterbalance to Mr. Nader. As an ardent opponent of free trade, abortion rights and American military involvement abroad, Mr. Buchanan might have earned wider support if Mr. Bush had chosen a more moderate running mate than Dick Cheney. But Mr. Cheney's past positions on national defense, trade, abortion and other issues are close enough to Mr. Bush's -- and Mr. Buchanan's -- that Mr. Buchanan cannot claim to be the conservative alternative to a moderate Republican ticket. Mr. Buchanan's one advantage over Mr. Bush, as Steven J. Rosenstone, dean of the College of Liberal Arts at the University of Minnesota, said in an interview, is an outsized personality that allows him to be ''more vociferous, more outrageous,'' calling attention to issues he cares about.
 Harvey Araton Sports of The Times column discusses relationship between New York Mets manager Bobby Valentine and Texas Governor George W Bush; Valentine was manager of Texas Rangers when Bush was co-owner; photo (M) IT is not as if George W. Bush needed to convince Bobby Valentine that he could manage the country. Valentine is a registered Republican who last voted for the other ticket in 1972, for George McGovern. IT is not as if George W. Bush needed to convince Bobby Valentine that he could manage the country. Valentine is a registered Republican who last voted for the other ticket in 1972, for George McGovern. At least Bush, who inherited Valentine when he became the Rangers' managing partner in 1989, didn't have some coach or functionary stick his head into Valentine's office and suggest he pack up, as another George with Republican Party ties has been known to do. ''What I always thought was different than what I expected was that he worked within the structure,'' Valentine said of Bush. ''I figured he would be the one to say, 'O.K., we have a five-game losing streak, so we're going to wear a different color uniform today.' He didn't. That is, he recognized that there were part-owners, a team president, a general manager.'' So Bush had Tom Grieve, the g.m. and Valentine's good friend, break the news, then summoned Valentine into his office, where the future governor said, ''If you have any complaints, I want to hear 'em.'' Valentine never did learn if his firing was a Grieve idea that Bush agreed with or a Bush idea that Grieve had no choice but to agree with. He settled on its being a ''collective decision,'' which made him more comfortable when the hotel room telephone rang in Pittsburgh in May at 7:30 a.m. and the candidate said, ''I've got a meeting this morning, but let's work out when I get back.'' Bush, it turned out, was in town to make peace with John McCain after their bitter primary campaign. The governor and the manager hit the weights, just as they used to in the Rangers' clubhouse before the players would come in. They had lunch, Bush seemingly more interested in the Mets than in McCain. Oh, that was another thing that surprised Valentine about Bush. He was never a sports-talk-radio caller disguised as an owner, not the type to suggest they trade two utility infielders and his presidential father's autograph for Don Mattingly. Before starting their current road swing through Arizona and Houston, Bush country, Valentine said he was eager to watch Bush's acceptance speech at the Republican convention in Philadelphia last Thursday night. People have been asking him all the time, he said, why they should vote for Bush, but he doesn't want to sound like some cable network partisan. George Bush, like Valentine, was an unconventional baseball man, and a political conservative who canned him with compassion.
 Comment on names that political parties to give to orgns of their top campaign donors; Republican Party gives big titles to big donors; photo of Gov George W Bush (S)0 Hardly. Team 100 was made up of the $100,000 contributors, the pinnacle of political generosity back in 1988 when George Bush invented the Republicans' first elite donor club for a handful of the party's most generous patrons. Hardly. Team 100 was made up of the $100,000 contributors, the pinnacle of political generosity back in 1988 when George Bush invented the Republicans' first elite donor club for a handful of the party's most generous patrons. Last week, the Regents were given receptions with both George Bushes, a Saks Fifth Avenue fashion show and a party at Tiffany & Co. ''There's something to do every minute,'' said Sam Fox, the top-giving Regent (nearly $600,000), who sounded worn out by the yacht rides and golf tournaments.
 Gov George W Bush's performance at Republican convention is seen successful in that he went long way toward achieving two essential goals: to recast Republican Party's image as sunny, nonthreatening and compassionate, and to demonstrate that he is not untested political ingenue that Democrats have labeled him; Bush is also credited with blurring party lines; photo (M) SUSAN ESTRICH, the manager of Michael S. Dukakis's unsuccessful 1988 campaign for president, was rattling off ways Al Gore could use the Democratic convention to rebut George W. Bush's accomplished performance last week when she stopped short and laughed at herself. ''Most people won't be listening to any of this!'' she exclaimed. Ms. Estrich may be on to something. It is true that Mr. Bush went a long way toward achieving two essential goals: to recast the Republican Party's image as sunny, nonthreatening and compassionate, and to demonstrate that he was not the untested political ingenue that the Democrats have labeled him. SUSAN ESTRICH, the manager of Michael S. Dukakis's unsuccessful 1988 campaign for president, was rattling off ways Al Gore could use the Democratic convention to rebut George W. Bush's accomplished performance last week when she stopped short and laughed at herself. ''Most people won't be listening to any of this!'' she exclaimed. Ms. Estrich may be on to something. It is true that Mr. Bush went a long way toward achieving two essential goals: to recast the Republican Party's image as sunny, nonthreatening and compassionate, and to demonstrate that he was not the untested political ingenue that the Democrats have labeled him. But equally significant, at least as far as Mr. Gore is concerned, was Mr. Bush's success at orchestrating a convention that was uncontroversial and, for the most part, dull. At a time when public interest in political conventions is already in decline, the G.O.P. convention may have in effect been an anticommercial -- Don't Watch This! -- for Mr. Gore's convention next Monday in Los Angeles. Mr. Gore is getting a lot of advice on what he should do to spark his campaign, but it's not going to help his already uphill effort if no one is watching. To be sure, Mr. Bush delivered a lively acceptance speech, and Dick Cheney, his running mate, went on the attack. But dissent was so discouraged that hours would slog by without any indication that this was a partisan gathering, much less a Republican one. The production, often as relentlessly upbeat as a Pepsi commercial, sent million of potential viewers (and potential voters) scurrying to find more compelling fare on television. The Republican convention was important to Mr. Bush, who entered it ahead in the polls, but the Democratic convention is crucial for Mr. Gore's hopes of moving from his residence on the grounds of the Naval Observatory to the White House next January. The gathering next week is likely to be one of the last high-profile opportunities that this very familiar political figure has to get voters to reconsider him, outside of the expected debates. Oddly, it is now Mr. Gore, who has spent a lifetime in government service, rather than Mr. Bush, who is in the position of having to make the speech of his life. The issue of viewership aside, there is no shortage of advice on what Mr. Gore should do and say once he gets to Los Angeles. Indeed, there is a surprising amount of agreement among Democrats and Republicans alike. If Mr. Bush needed to demonstrate that he had both intellect and an engaging personality, Mr. Gore probably needs to show the reverse: to demonstrate that he is something else than the brainy if drab No. 2 who has stood off to the side of the national stage for the past eight years. Accordingly, Mr. Gore's campaign has assembled a heavy package of biographical tributes (Mr. Gore, you will learn, served in Vietnam) in their undying hope that to know Mr. Gore is to like him. Beyond that, the orchestrated fluffiness of the Republican convention is being seized by Mr. Gore's advisers as a tactical mistake. And in response, a strategy is taking shape. AND that is what Mr. Gore is intending to do. His advisers say convention speakers in Los Angeles, and the vice president as he campaigns en route, will offer detailed discussions of one Democratic initiative each day, starting with Social Security. They are already encouraging reporters to draw contrasts to what they describe -- with a touch of envy -- as Mr. Bush's ''cotton-candy convention.'' The risk is that this might evoke an image of Mr. Gore as the dreary, pedantic candidate at a blackboard, holding a piece of chalk. That said, Mr. Gore may not have much choice.  ''Bush has a more appealing personality than Gore and the Republicans have put on an appealing convention in terms of image,'' said William Kristol, the publisher of the conservative Weekly Standard. ''They need desperately to make this a campaign about issues, rather than image. And here they have been given something of an opening.'' Beyond that, Mr. Gore's advisers are taking solace in the fact that Mr. Bush spoke first, giving Mr. Gore the last word. For example, in what was probably the central political formulation of Mr. Bush's speech, the Republican argued that President Clinton and Mr. Gore squandered eight years of prosperity. It opened the way for Mr. Gore to respond with what his aides asserted was abundant evidence to the contrary -- as well as to remind voters of what the economy was like under the George Bush who preceded Mr. Clinton. ''Gore now has an opportunity,'' said Michael McCurry, the former White House press secretary under Mr. Clinton. ''They're going to have to go back and remind people of what they've done for the past eight years.'' The other George Bush, by the way, was in the convention hall almost as often as the most conscientious delegate, sitting in a V.I.P. section that included a who's who of Republican warhorses: among them, 87-year-old Gerald Ford, former cabinet officials under Presidents Bush and Reagan and Mr. Cheney, who served as defense secretary under Mr. Bush's father. This aging if distinguished tableau of power offers another point of contrast that Mr. Gore intends to make at the convention. ''The mistake they made is the they posited themselves in the past,''  said Rahm Emanuel, an adviser to both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore. ''And that's from the moment of the Cheney selection forward. The thematic of the campaign is future versus past.'' Mr. Gore is well aware, an aide said, that none of this will matter if no one is there to hear his tree fall. His campaign has begun to try to deal with that: Mr. Gore will, for example, do hard-driving, telegenic events during the day intended to get him on the network news, and is considering a range of interviews with unusual sources, from MTV to Jay Leno, reminiscent of what Mr. Clinton did in 1992. The daytime events are designed to get the vice president on the television news every night, with the convention serving as something of a late-evening coda that reinforces the message of the day. THE challenge for Mr. Gore now is grabbing the the public's attention. Even someone like Ms. Estrich who has lived and breathed politics for more than 20 years had little interest in tuning into the high point of the Republican convention, Mr. Bush's speech. In the midst of an interview last Thursday, she noted that she had arranged to have drinks that night with another Democrat involved in planning Mr. Gore's convention. Their appointment, she said, was scheduled at the time Mr. Bush would take the stage to offer his vision for the presidency.
 There were two parallel conventions in Philadelphia last week, one a televised coronation of the Republican ticket inside the First Union Center, the other an endless parade of off-camera fund-raising events in hotel suites, private clubs and restaurants throughout the city. In these genteel settings and others -- including a string of private railroad cars provided by the Union Pacific Railroad and a quiet Pennsylvania trout stream, where House Speaker Dennis Hastert found that donors were biting more readily than the fish -- corporations and wealthy individuals unloaded millions of dollars in an effort to buy influence with a Bush-Cheney administration and with Republicans in the next Congress. The Republicans, of course, are not alone in their addiction to the soft money that has come to dominate the modern campaign environment. Vice President Al Gore and the Democrats will engage in much the same tawdry exercise when they convene in Los Angeles next week. But it is worth pausing for a moment to reflect on the G.O.P.'s week of excess, not least because of the hypocrisy it exposes. There were two parallel conventions in Philadelphia last week, one a televised coronation of the Republican ticket inside the First Union Center, the other an endless parade of off-camera fund-raising events in hotel suites, private clubs and restaurants throughout the city. In these genteel settings and others -- including a string of private railroad cars provided by the Union Pacific Railroad and a quiet Pennsylvania trout stream, where House Speaker Dennis Hastert found that donors were biting more readily than the fish -- corporations and wealthy individuals unloaded millions of dollars in an effort to buy influence with a Bush-Cheney administration and with Republicans in the next Congress. The Republicans, of course, are not alone in their addiction to the soft money that has come to dominate the modern campaign environment. Vice President Al Gore and the Democrats will engage in much the same tawdry exercise when they convene in Los Angeles next week. But it is worth pausing for a moment to reflect on the G.O.P.'s week of excess, not least because of the hypocrisy it exposes. The convention hall was full of talk about political morality, about restoring decency and respect and integrity to the Oval Office, code words for not only President Clinton's personal lapses but also his casual abuse of the White House -- the private coffees, the renting out of the Lincoln bedroom and all the other tacky devices he and Vice President Gore used to underwrite their political futures. But like so much else at this convention, there was a big gap between words and reality, and while the words promised reform, the reality was the spectacle of huge sums of money changing hands. Among other things, this conclave marked the emergence of a new group of superdonors known as Republican Regents, wealthy individuals and corporations that have given at least $250,000 in the election cycle that began in January 1999. This elite cadre now consists of 139 members whose largesse makes the 600 or so members of Gov. George W. Bush's Team 100 ($100,000 minimum) look like pikers. With checkbooks like these floating around town, little wonder that the Republican National Committee was able to raise $10 million at a single lunch on Tuesday. The simple truth of the matter is this. The morality and integrity that Dick Cheney and Governor Bush invoked so easily last week will never become a reality in Washington until the present campaign fund-raising system is destroyed. Mr. Bush and the Republican platform both promise to end soft-money donations from corporations and labor unions. But they say nothing about the big individual donors, whose contributions account for at least half of the soft money the party and its various fund-raising arms have taken in so far. To his credit, Mr. Gore has promised to shut down individual gifts as well.
 ''Fourteen million eligible voters watch The Rock every single week,'' he said with an oratorial fervor calculated to inspire young Republicans and voters everywhere to perform their civic duty. But were they watching? Do the G.O.P.'s demos mix with the W.W.F.'s young male viewers? Only if they were hoping to see a steel-cage death match pitting the tag team of George W. and Poppy Bush against John S. McCain and Jesse (The Governor) Ventura, who wrestled when The Rock was a mere pebble.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on presidential campaign sees nothing going Al Gore's way, contending it is impossible to think of a worse city than Los Angeles to showcase Democratic nominee; notes every day brings news of another lavish tribute/fund-raiser larded on for Bill and Hillary Clinton (M)l Al Gore has got to be dying. Mr. Gore, already coiled to the max, must head to the West Coast for his big week with scenes of a Bush triumph buzzing in his head. Sure, it's a palindrome. AL-LA. But how can the Uptight Al Gore try once more to set free the Real Al Gore if no one is paying any mind? Hollywood players have struggled to transfer their affections to Mr. Gore. But the most fickle town in the world remains steadfastly loyal to the Entertainer in Chief. The boy from Hope gave the glitteries all the respect and overnights in the Lincoln Bedroom they yearned for; plus he's a bona fide groupie. Hollywood, where focus groups also determine how the product is pitched, has an uneasy sense that Mr. Gore is a supporting character, not a leading man. He's bad box office. And we can only assume he hasn't taken advantage of offers from worried directors  like Steven Spielberg to help him improve his ''I Walked With a Zombie'' speaking style. Los Angeles also makes Mr. Gore a juicy target for the Republicans. The man who ''reinvents'' himself ''at every turn,'' according to Mr. Bush, is going to the capital of reinvention to reinvent himself yet again. Mr. Gore will give his speech amid Hollywood values -- out-of-control  egos, blatant materialism, a dog-eat-dog ethos and a devotion to pretense. Mr. Bush, who hopes to win by excoriating louche Clinton values, summed up the president this way: ''So many talents, so much charm, such great skill. But in the end, to what end? So much promise, to no great purpose.''
 A front-page article on July 26 about the selection of Dick Cheney as George W. Bush's choice for vice president misidentified Bruce Buchanan, who teaches courses on the presidency at the University of Texas and has closely followed Mr. Bush's career. He is a professor of government, not a historian. A front-page article on July 26 about the selection of Dick Cheney as George W. Bush's choice for vice president misidentified Bruce Buchanan, who teaches courses on the presidency at the University of Texas and has closely followed Mr. Bush's career. He is a professor of government, not a historian.
 Gov. George W. Bush signed a proclamation declaring June 10 to be Jesus Day in Texas; he has now come under criticism from groups who say the measure shows insensitivity. Many of Vice President Al Gore's close friends are unhappy with news coverage that portrays him as stiff or cynical. Vice President Al Gore will begin a campaign tour on Tuesday, when he plans to appear for the first time with his running mate.
 Exercise regimens of Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore compared; photos (M) In 1978, George W. Bush's first campaign ad showed him jogging through Lubbock, Tex. It didn't help him. The only folks who run around here, his opponent joked, are trying to get away from someone. Two decades later, when the cardiovascular health of Bush's vice-presidential running mate, Dick Cheney, is front-page news, it's hard to imagine the public electing someone who doesn't jog -- or at least make all the right claims about physical fitness. (Bush's spokeswoman, Karen Hughes, in fact, made sure to emphasize that when Bush called Cheney to offer him the position, Cheney was on the treadmill and could not answer the phone.) But who could beat whom in a real race? In 1978, George W. Bush's first campaign ad showed him jogging through Lubbock, Tex. It didn't help him. The only folks who run around here, his opponent joked, are trying to get away from someone. Two decades later, when the cardiovascular health of Bush's vice-presidential running mate, Dick Cheney, is front-page news, it's hard to imagine the public electing someone who doesn't jog -- or at least make all the right claims about physical fitness. (Bush's spokeswoman, Karen Hughes, in fact, made sure to emphasize that when Bush called Cheney to offer him the position, Cheney was on the treadmill and could not answer the phone.) But who could beat whom in a real race? WEIGHTY THOUGHTS  Gore has been quoted as claiming: ''Making decisions is a little bit like working out with weights. When you start working out, you may get sore and the gains don't come very quickly, but if you hang in there, then you begin to build up and get stronger. I think there is a decision-making muscle, and I think it gets stronger the more you use it.''
 Both major candidates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, have shown themselves to be sensitive to those wishes. Mr. Gore is sticking to a 1960's Democratic format of strong federal intervention in education issues. Mr. Bush, true to Republican traditions, relies upon financial incentives for state and individual action. Unfortunately, neither candidate is capable of cutting to the core of America's educational problems. Mr. Gore's activist approach ignores the history of federal failures in setting education policies. Uncharacteristically for a Republican, Mr. Bush has also adopted an activist role for government, and his voucher proposals overlook public schools' historic successes. A similarly dismal story could be told regarding federal efforts involving special education, vocational education, racial desegregation and subsidies for students' cafeteria meals. Both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are making proposals that fly in the face of these historic federal government limitations. Mr. Gore appears willing to gloss over conventional wisdom regarding a limited federal education role. He caters to teachers' union supporters by pledging anticipated government budget surpluses to raise teacher pay through a federal stipend, to have a vastly expanded Federal Teacher Corps and to have a major federal government influence over teacher licensing standards. In a speech in Michigan in May, Mr. Gore said, ''I will ensure that there is a fully qualified, well-trained teacher in every single classroom, everywhere in this nation, by the end of the next four years.'' If he wins the Presidency, Mr. Gore had better hope the public has a short memory, lest this promise become the embarrassing analog of President Bush's infamous ''read my lips'' promise regarding tax increases. Neither the money nor the necessary political consensus is likely be present to enable Mr. Gore to fulfill his promise of good teachers everywhere. Mr. Bush, while offering no such sweeping promise, does propose a federal government reading program, based upon successes he has had in Texas. States and districts accepting federal funds would have to follow a federally specified set of strategies for teaching reading. This is hardly a states-rights, federal-government-hands-off approach. Mr. Bush further steps outside traditional boundaries by advocating use of federal education funds for private school support. This is similar to the plan of his brother, Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, for schools in his state that perform poorly. This modified voucher plan is not a central feature of the Bush platform, but it is notable for its departure from convention. Mr. Bush's voucher sentiments are admirable. Poor children should not bear the burden of failing schools anymore than should the children of the wealthy who can afford to buy their way out of low-performing public schools.
 Economic agenda presented to Republican National Convention and nation on Thursday night by Gov George W Bush sticks closely in many ways to Republican orthodoxy (News Analysis) (M) The economic agenda presented to the Republican National Convention and the nation on Thursday night by Gov. George W. Bush stuck closely in many ways to Republican orthodoxy. The economic agenda presented to the Republican National Convention and the nation on Thursday night by Gov. George W. Bush stuck closely in many ways to Republican orthodoxy. Throughout the convention, the Bush team sought to counter the idea that Republicans stand for sweeping tax cuts that are reckless and a boon only to the country-club set. Tax cuts were showcased in Philadelphia as a prudent way to spur entrepreneurship, help people looking to reach the middle class, and provide an economic pick-me-up should the long business expansion begin to flag. Gone was the Republican call to shrink government's size and influence by starving it of revenues. Mr. Bush went so far in his speech as to single out his support for federal programs like Head Start. Perhaps most notably, Mr. Bush made clear how he intended to handle one of his trickiest political tasks: making a case against an incumbent vice president whose administration is presiding over an economic boom. Rather than ignoring it, or getting into a battle over who deserves the credit, Mr. Bush said the real issue should be what the nation chooses to do with its prosperity. ''We will use these good times for great goals,'' Mr. Bush said, pledging in particular to ensure the solvency of Social Security and Medicare. To some degree, Mr. Bush was trying to do for Republicans on economic policy what President Clinton has done for Democrats. Similarly, Mr. Bush seems intent on dispelling the idea that conservative policy is inconsistent with helping people who have not already made it economically, and his tax plan contains elements specifically intended to help the working poor. But Mr. Bush is by no means apologizing for the fact that his proposals to cut all income tax rates would do what such proposals always do: provide most of their benefits to the people who make the most money. So Mr. Bush is certain to draw heavy fire from Vice President Al Gore. Democrats said that the focus in Philadelphia this week on helping single mothers, struggling family farms and Hispanic entrepreneurs was nothing more than camouflage for the usual conservative effort, embodied by the Bush campaign, to reward the wealthy people and powerful interest groups that finance Republican campaigns. Democrats look at the Bush tax plan and see 43 percent of the benefits going to the top 1 percent of households by income, those making more than $319,000 a year, according to Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal-leaning research group. Lawrence B. Lindsey, Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser, said Republicans remained focused on the incentives that tax cuts provide to earn and save more, whether for a waitress earning $18,000 a year or the entrepreneur who wants to be able to pass a painstakingly built business along to her heirs without being subject to a hefty federal estate tax. But to the extent that he emphasizes the substance of economic policy, Mr. Bush risks not only inviting an onslaught from Mr. Gore over class politics and fiscal rectitude, but also focusing voters on the fact that the Clinton-Gore years have been pretty good for most people. With unemployment at 4 percent, inflation benign and incomes broadly rising, Democrats gathering for their Los Angeles convention this month will no doubt be eager to show that on those counts, Mr. Gore's election would mean more of the same.
 Gov George W Bush and running mate Dick Cheney continue campaigning in Midwest by train; photo (M) It was the second straight day on the rails for Gov. George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney -- the second straight day of trying to turn the momentum from a convention into a mandate from Americans. And it took the Republican duo across much of the breadth of southern Michigan, where they spent about seven stop-and-go hours before abandoning the ground for the sky and flying here tonight. It was the second straight day on the rails for Gov. George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney -- the second straight day of trying to turn the momentum from a convention into a mandate from Americans. And it took the Republican duo across much of the breadth of southern Michigan, where they spent about seven stop-and-go hours before abandoning the ground for the sky and flying here tonight. ''I wish you could travel with us and see the great spirit of America,'' Mr. Bush told the people at the East Lansing rally. ''It lies in the heartlands of our country. It lies along the tracks that we've been on with people from all walks of life.'' ''Our pledge is that if you give us the opportunity to lead this nation, not only will we work on a positive agenda for what is right for our country,'' Mr. Bush added. ''Our pledge is that if you give us your trust, we will honor it.'' As with much of the oratory that they used at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney were offering indictments, both implicit and explicit, of President Clinton, and they were attaching Vice President Al Gore to whatever disappointments Americans had felt about Mr. Clinton's presidency. The large, enthusiastic crowds mostly gobbled it up. They toted signs with messages like, ''I'd rather be Bushed than Gored.'' They chanted, ''No more Gore! No more Gore!'' At a few stops, a few people protesting Mr. Bush's support for capital punishment or opposition to abortion sought to thrust their own voices and placards into the picture, but they were well outnumbered. Mr. Bush's train trip through Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and Illinois, which he was scheduled to tour on Sunday, represented a bid to win swing states that had voted Democratic in the last two presidential elections, and Mr. Bush made a point at several stops today to mention that his campaign was open to independents and Democrats, and he beckoned them aboard. Mr. Cheney, at the stop in Durand, said the train trip showed that he and Mr. Bush were going to ''carry this fight from border to border and coast to coast, because it's extraordinarily important that we have a change in Washington.''
 Nationally, too, we're talking a winning scenario. Gov. George W. Bush thinks Social Security should be invested in the stock market? Of course it should . . . by the firm of Clinton & Lazio Investments. Easy street, here comes the whole nation.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, in days leading to Democratic convention, plans to tour several important battleground states, from Georgia to Pennsylvania to Michigan, hammering at emerging themes of his campaign: that presidential race will be about substance versus flash and new ideas against old; Gore attends two fund-raisers for Democratic National Committee on Long Island; photo (M) In the days leading to the Democratic convention, Vice President Al Gore plans to tour several important battleground states, from Georgia to Pennsylvania to Michigan, hammering at the emerging themes of his campaign: that the presidential election will be about substance versus flash and new ideas against old, his aides said today. In separate appearances with Southern Democratic governors, President Clinton and his soon-to-be-announced running mate, Mr. Gore will focus on a different issue each day, including welfare, Social Security, health care and the economy, seeking to draw sharp differences in style and policy with his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. In the days leading to the Democratic convention, Vice President Al Gore plans to tour several important battleground states, from Georgia to Pennsylvania to Michigan, hammering at the emerging themes of his campaign: that the presidential election will be about substance versus flash and new ideas against old, his aides said today. In separate appearances with Southern Democratic governors, President Clinton and his soon-to-be-announced running mate, Mr. Gore will focus on a different issue each day, including welfare, Social Security, health care and the economy, seeking to draw sharp differences in style and policy with his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''This tour will offer a striking contrast to the Bush campaign's approach of image rather than issues, photo-ops rather than substance,'' Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane, said. The ''Going the Distance Tour,'' as the Gore campaign has dubbed it, will begin on Tuesday in Nashville, when the vice president will appear for the first time with his running mate. It will end on Tuesday, Aug. 15, in Michigan when Mr. Gore stands shoulder-to-shoulder with Mr. Clinton for a symbolic passing of the party's leadership torch. Mr. Gore will arrive at the convention in Los Angeles the next day, and will accept the party's nomination the night of Thursday, Aug. 17. Mr. Clinton is scheduled to address the convention on Monday night and then leave the next day, effectively clearing the stage for Mr. Gore. The vice president has previewed many of the themes he plans to emphasize during his tour in speeches over the past two days. The tour is also intended to highlight Mr. Gore's biography, and today in remarks before the National Association of Police Organizations in Washington, he talked extensively about his time as an Army reporter in Vietnam and as a police reporter for The Nashville Tennessean newspaper. Mr. Gore told the group that he would push for ''common sense''  laws to keep guns out of the hands of children and criminals. He noted that in Congress, he had supported bills banning so-called cop-killer bullets and plastic guns. In doing that, he drew an implicit contrast with Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, who voted against both bills while a congressman from Wyoming. The police group, which endorsed the Clinton-Gore ticket in 1996, has not decided whom to support this year. But in introducing Mr. Gore today, the group's president, Thomas J. Scotto, warmly praised Mr. Gore, saying the group has had a relationship with the White House that ''is probably the envy of all other law enforcement groups and politicians throughout this country.'' From Washington, Mr. Gore flew here to spend the weekend on Long Island attending three fund-raising events. Mr. Gore continued to hold any vice-presidential decision close to the vest. When he landed this afternoon at the Suffolk County Airport, reporters asked him if he was close to making a decision. Mr. Gore was attending two fund-raisers tonight for the Democratic National Committee. He raised $250,000 at a fund-raiser sponsored by Scott Bessent, a hedge-fund manager, and Will Trinkle, a real estate developer, from about 100 people, many of them gay or lesbian. From Long Island, Mr. Gore heads to Nashville on Sunday afternoon to prepare for the announcement of his vice-presidential pick on Tuesday. He will travel on Wednesday with his running mate to Carthage, Tenn., Mr. Gore's hometown. They will hold a town hall meeting at the Carthage elementary school with about 150 Tennessee residents, many of whom will reminisce about Mr. Gore. Mr. Rendell also said that William S. Cohen, the Republican who is secretary of defense, could have been the candidate if he had not announced that was voting for Mr. Bush. ''He might be our candidate -- he'd be dynamite,'' he said. On Thursday, Mr. Gore and his running mate will go to Atlanta for a meeting with Southern governors and a discussion on welfare. On Friday, it is on to the Philadelphia suburbs for an event with working women. On Saturday, they will travel to western Pennsylvania and the girlhood home of the late Rachel Carson, the environmental advocate and author of ''Silent Spring,'' a book that Mr. Gore says strongly influenced him. Next Sunday, Mr. Gore plans to discuss children's health care at University Hospital in Cleveland. On Aug. 14, the day the Democratic convention opens, Mr. Gore will be in Independence, Mo., home of Harry S. Truman, where he will discuss issues involving senior citizens. That night, Mr. Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, will speak at the convention. Mr. Gore  will meet Mr. Clinton on Tuesday at an as-yet-undesignated spot in Michigan, a crucial state, where they will showcase the nation's economic expansion and try to highlight Mr. Gore's role in the prosperity. The next day, Mr. Gore will fly to Los Angeles, where his running mate will be nominated. Thursday night, Mr. Gore gives his acceptance speech and flies out that night to the Midwest, where he will begin a four-day boat trip across the Great Lakes and down the Mississippi River.
 Republican national convention officials in Philadelphia try to satisfy needs of local electronic news media to a degree unmatched by previous party gatherings; using battalion of bookers, Republicans put 200 Bush surrogates at disposal of radio stations, Web sites and especially local television outlets; they provide free satellite time to stations that did not book their own, and concentrate heavily on contacting outlets in markets in crucial states like Florida, Ohio, Illinois, Pennsylvania and Michigan; photo of Elizabeth Dole (M) On the airwaves in Atlanta, prominent Republicans like Colin L. Powell, Dick Cheney, Elizabeth Dole and Newt Gingrich were not mere fixtures on network news programs, but also appeared in profile pieces and sat for interviews with local anchors and reporters. On Chicago's top-rated WLS, Bush family members spoke with Linda Yu, an anchor. And in Boston, the final night of WCVB's coverage from Philadelphia featured one of its reporter-anchors, Natalie Jacobson, proclaiming in a way that put a familiar local face on convention-floor exuberance: ''What a night for George W. Bush! What a convention!'' Using a battalion of bookers, the Republicans put 200 Bush surrogates at the disposal of radio stations, Web sites and especially local television outlets. They provided free satellite time to stations that did not book their own, and concentrated heavily on contacting outlets in markets in crucial states like Florida, Ohio, Illinois, Pennsylvania and Michigan, with offers to put Republican talking heads on their news programs. ''It ranged from congressmen to Condoleezza Rice,'' Nels Olson, the convention's master scheduler, said, referring to Mr. Bush's top foreign policy adviser. ''She was going on local shows, even the Internet. The idea was to get as many people out there as we could talking about George Bush. This is my third convention in this job and in terms of sheer volume, this is two or three times the volume we did last time.'' In the absence of real news, or even real debate, what dominated American news pages and airwaves last week was the sound of one party clapping. How that played depended greatly on how much each of the 1,600 news organizations at the convention, and myriad others that watched from afar, was willing to go beyond the happy talk and examine the nature of Mr. Bush's appeal and the issues that defined his campaign. And for the Republicans, the public-relations bonanza -- and the bounce in Mr. Bush's own ratings -- was the payoff for the intensive message discipline imposed on the proceedings. An upbeat message seemed to be delivered uniformly from one end of the country to the other, from the pages of The Honolulu Advertiser (''State G.O.P. leaders say Bush will do well in Isles,'' said a Friday headline) to The Portland Press Herald (''Mainers Uplifted by Bush Message''). Mr. Bush's acceptance speech was not only the most prominently reported event of the week but also the most favorably received. Commentators as diverse as Jacob Weisberg of the Webzine Slate, Margaret Carlson of Time magazine and the conservative columnist Robert Novak all gave it admiring notices. The address, by Mr. Bush's chief speechwriter, Michael Gerson, was loaded with quotable lines, and the media turned some into overnight classics. Among the most often cited, a reference to President Clinton, ''So much promise, to no great purpose,'' and a dig at Vice President Al Gore, ''I am not running in borrowed clothes.'' KNX, an all-news radio station in Los Angeles, site of the Democratic convention next week, sent two reporters to Philadelphia and broadcast reports from there for 9 to 10 minutes every hour. And talk radio in Boston, a Democratic town, was nonetheless consumed with the topic on the night of Mr. Bush's speech. ''The crowd tonight would applaud and go crazy,'' said Jon Keller, a WBZ radio commentator reporting from the convention floor, ''if he held up a piece of French toast.'' Locally, the numbers were off, too. In Atlanta, for instance, according to Ray Carter, news director for the market-leading WSB-TV, an average of about 88,500 households watched this year's convention, down from 118,600 in 1996. In fact, at 10 p.m. Thursday, when Atlanta's big three affiliates carried Mr. Bush's speech in its entirety, they were easily beaten by the Fox affiliate, WAGA, which chose to run its regular newscast with only about eight and a half minutes of convention coverage. Glen Horn, executive producer of WFOR, a CBS affiliate in Miami, said his reporter, Elliott Rodriguez, covered a meeting Mr. Bush held with Hispanics.
