 Sen John McCain sheds rebellious image to laud Gov George W Bush, speech to Republican National Convention; holds Bush would be able to defend nation's interests abroad; speech anchors evening aimed at invoking symbols of military might and assuring national viewing audience that Bush can be trusted as commander in chief and steady hand in foreign policy despite his lack of experience; speakers include other military heroes: Bob Dole, Gen H Norman Schwarzkopf and Sen Chuck Hagel, and Condoleeza Rice, Bush's chief international affairs adviser, who as African-American also underscores his pledge to place minorities in key roles; photos (M) Senator John McCain shed his rebellious image to play the admiring party stalwart at the Republican National Convention tonight, commending Gov. George W. Bush to independents and Democrats and -- addressing one of the governor's most pronounced vulnerabilities -- saying he would ably defend the nation's interests abroad. ''I support him,'' said a subdued Mr. McCain, trying to erase tensions from a primary battle that had been so raw that Mr. McCain waited two months to reluctantly endorse Mr. Bush. ''I am grateful to him. And I am proud of him.'' Senator John McCain shed his rebellious image to play the admiring party stalwart at the Republican National Convention tonight, commending Gov. George W. Bush to independents and Democrats and -- addressing one of the governor's most pronounced vulnerabilities -- saying he would ably defend the nation's interests abroad. ''I support him,'' said a subdued Mr. McCain, trying to erase tensions from a primary battle that had been so raw that Mr. McCain waited two months to reluctantly endorse Mr. Bush. ''I am grateful to him. And I am proud of him.'' Mr. McCain's speech anchored an evening whose overarching objective was to assemble several faces, old and new, and invoke symbols of military might like the Persian Gulf War. The intention was to assure the national viewing audience that Mr. Bush could be trusted both as a commander in chief and someone who could provide a steady hand in foreign policy despite his lack of experience in the field. Thoughout the evening, a cavalcade of military heroes -- from Mr. McCain to Bob Dole to Gen. J. Norman Schwarzkopf to Senator Chuck Hagel -- offered testimonials to Mr. Bush, who did not serve in Vietnam. Joining the chorus in the other high-profile speech was Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief international affairs adviser who, as an African-American, also underscores Mr. Bush's pledge to place minorities in consequential roles. ''The George W. Bush that I know is a man of uncommonly good judgment,'' said Ms. Rice, a national security council official in President Bush's administration. ''He is focused and consistent. He believes that we Americans are at our best when we exercise power without fanfare and arrogance.'' For all their praise of Mr. Bush's personal attributes, Mr. McCain and Ms. Rice said little about specific policies or countries. Despite the emphasis at this convention on molding a newly diverse and moderate Republican Party, the drama tonight was provided by stars of party's past, from former Presidents Gerald R. Ford and George Bush -- to an absent Ronald Reagan, represented here by his wife, Nancy. To the delight of the delegates, Barbara Bush at one point appeared unannounced on stage to introduce her son, who was linked via satellite. Besides trying to shore up Mr. Bush's record, speaker after speaker reminded the public of Republican presidents like Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush, the governor's father, who were known for projecting respect for America abroad and for their emphasis on national security. He asked: ''Wouldn't it be great for our armed forces, and for America, if we could have another commander in chief named George Bush?'' Elizabeth Dole, who ran against Mr. Bush in the primaries and had a starring role at the convention in 1996 when she spoke reverently of her husband, said Mr. Bush would ''put an end to the smash-mouth politics of recent years and to the name-calling that tarnishes our trust.'' Delegates rose in applause to a tableau representing every living Republican president: Mr. Ford and his wife, Betty, and Mrs. Reagan joined Mr. and Mrs. Bush in prime seats overlooking the convention. After a video tribute to Mr. Reagan, Mr. Bush leapt to his feet to lead another standing ovation; Mrs. Reagan and her step-daughter, Maureen, who both appeared emotionally struck by the ovation, held their arms around one another as the band played, ''Stand by Me.'' Introduced by his mother, Barbara Bush, who drew an ovation of her own, Governor Bush appeared before the convention by a satellite hookup for the second night in a row. This time, the location was Gettysburg, Pa., where Abraham Lincoln delivered a famous speech and where general-turned-president Dwight D. Eisenhower once lived. Mr. Bush praised his foe from the primaries, saying of Mr. McCain,  ''His straight talk and strong convictions are admired across America.'' Mr. Bush's popularity -- and eagerness to extend his appeal beyond his party -- afforded him the freedom to play to a broader audience outside the hall by giving a speaking slot, albeit not in prime time, to an openly gay congressman, Representative Jim Kolbe of Arizona. Mr. Kolbe spoke about international trade and made no mention of his sexual orientation. But this was clearly Mr. McCain's night. There were even ''McCain for President'' banners spotted in the sea of Bush placards. The Bush campaign's decision to give a vanquished rival such a prominent role on the second night of the convention marked a striking departure from the last several Republican conventions. At the 1996 convention, the prized Tuesday-night slot was given to then-Representative Susan Molinari, who had been one of Mr. Dole's most steadfast backers. For his part, Mr. McCain recognized that there was no political upside to stirring up trouble for Mr. Bush and that he could score points by playing the loyal trooper. Strikingly, he was so determined to fall in line behind Mr. Bush that he did not raise his signature issue of campaign finance reform. Mr. McCain, a prisoner of war in Vietnam whose primary campaign had raised questions about Mr. Bush's fitness to lead the military, said, ''Now it is my turn to serve.'' Mr. McCain, who drew a potent turnout of independents and Democrats in the primaries, implored his supporters to rally behind Mr. Bush. ''I say to all Americans, Republican, Democrat or independent,'' he asserted, ''if you believe America deserves leaders with a purpose more ennobling than expediency and opportunism, then vote for Governor Bush. If you believe patriotism is more than a soundbite and public service should be more than a photo-op, then vote for Governor Bush.'' While the speakers touched on a panoply of foreign-policy issues, the matters left unaddressed were telling. For example, despite General Schwarzkopf's praise of President Bush's victorious leadership in the gulf war, American warplanes still bomb Iraq and President Saddam Hussein remains entrenched. Ms. Rice said that Governor Bush would never let the United States be blackmailed by outlaw states, and urged construction of a national missile defense to safeguard against missile strikes, but did not dwell on the debate about the proposal. Ms. Rice depicted Mr. Bush as a bilingual internationalist, meeting with leaders from Mexico, Russia and South Africa. But, in fact, many meetings were little more than handshakes and hellos. Yet the most memorable moments were the personal touches. Former President Bush, brimming with pride in one video, said his son's record ''can stand all the scrutiny in the world,'' and ''will show a man of honor, a man of integrity.''
 Vice President Al Gore was deeply involved in crafting the Kyoto treaty and any deadlock in talks would be a blow to him. On the other hand, although Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has said he believes global warming is a significant problem, he opposes ratification of the Kyoto Protocol, saying it would unfairly burden the United States. White House officials said Mr. Gore was being apprised of the proposed strategy.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column sees presidential race between George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore finally emerging as battle for vindication between former Pres George Bush and Pres Clinton; holds Bush fights for symbolic second term Clinton denied him and Clinton for what he perceives as kind of third term he needs to enhance his legacy; sees feud fueled by class rage (M) Unleashing Chiang, in the loopy Bush family patois used in golf and tennis, means giving the ball a good whack. Our summer of torpid politics suddenly came alive with the freaky spectacle of two presidents trash-talking. The race turns out to be what we thought it was all along: President Bush vs. President Clinton. The Bushes have been privately steaming that Gore/Clinton have not abided by Marquess of Queensberry rules, allowing the Republicans to enjoy their nomination party without any Democrats throwing a punch. Bush Pere believes his manners toward his successor have been impeccable, and that he has been discreet out of loyalty to the office. So the Bushes felt the gentlemanly rules of order were broken over the last week when the Democrats put out an ad attacking Dick Cheney's conservative record and two more attacking W. on health care and the environment, and when Bill Clinton repeatedly mocked W. as a coddled daddy's boy at fund-raisers. ''The country was in the ditch,'' Mr. Clinton said in Boston last Friday, talking about '92, comparing the Bush White House to a ditzy ''Wayne's World.'' Nobody gave Mr. Clinton, who never knew his own father and who had to stand up to an abusive, alcoholic stepfather, a solid gold key to success. And he clearly thinks Al Gore, another regent raised to be president by a famous political father, is not up to the challenge of gutting the Bushes on the entitlement issue. It has to be galling to Mr. Clinton that Americans don't seem inclined to reward his vice president for the purring economy. And he is surely fed up with the Republicans acting as if his two terms were merely Bushus Interruptus. Even though Mr. Simpson says that the Bushes avoided publicly criticizing Mr. Clinton about Monica Lewinsky, that is in fact the subtext of W.'s campaign -- restoring ''honor and dignity'' to the White House. Mr. Clinton thinks a rejection of Mr. Gore would be a ratification of the Bushes' contention that he sullied the White House. The president can also see that it is hard for Al Gore to attack, because even people who agree with Mr. Gore find him insufferable on the attack. W. and Mr. Gore will probably keep campaigning, but we all know it's not about them anymore. Maybe it never was.
 Whatever scraps of enlightenment there were came from poking holes in the slick packaging. Most conspicuously, every channel and nightly newscast contrasted Monday's minority-loaded Republican show with the overwhelmingly white makeup of the convention itself. And last night, planned as National Security Night (there's a catchy show title), was full of women, offsetting any possible macho tone. Speakers included Condoleezza Rice, George W. Bush's foreign policy adviser, and Elizabeth Dole. (Among major networks, only PBS carried her speech; that's the sign of a falling star.) On cable, there was enough hot air to knock a viewer unconscious. Tim Russert, on MSNBC, heralded the importance of last night's speakers by speculating that if Mr. Bush won, Ms. Rice might be his national security adviser. (Or not.) This is surely the find-the-silver-lining approach to a nonevent. PBS, the only broadcast network offering full evenings of the convention, was just as soporific.
 Gore Vidal fills in for Charles Durning at rehearsal of Vidal's play The Best Man, which is being revived on Broadway; photo...Mick Jagger tells Family Court in Manhattan that he is not prepared to submit financial statement in long-running child support case...Nigel Cole comments on use of real hemp plants in filming of Saving Grace, his movie about an English orchid grower who starts growing marijuana (M)
 Gov George W Bush's campaign, for all its focus on nicer, blander image, is attacking what it calls negative campaigning by Democrats; Bush campaign denies consistent message is derived from polls or focus groups (M) For all its focus on a nicer, blander image, there is one thing the Bush campaign wants to be negative about -- negative campaigning from the other side. Former President George Bush complained that attacks on the vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, were ''coming out of the bowels of the Democratic National Committee.'' For all its focus on a nicer, blander image, there is one thing the Bush campaign wants to be negative about -- negative campaigning from the other side. Former President George Bush complained that attacks on the vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, were ''coming out of the bowels of the Democratic National Committee.'' In Columbus, Ohio, the former president's son, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, said ''Americans are ''sick and tired of the politics of tearing people down.'' In Charleston, W. Va., he said: ''This nation is looking for an administration that will appeal to our better angels, not our darker impulses. This nation does not want four more years of Clinton-Gore.'' And Monday night the prospective nominee's wife, Laura Bush, told the delegates that her husband ''sets a tone that's positive and constructive, a tone that is very different from the bitterness and division that too often characterizes Washington, D.C.'' Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said this consistent message was not derived from polls or focus groups but from the candidate's ''heart.'' But a prominent Republican operative, Frank Luntz, said it matched the strategy his focus groups had dictated. ''What are you going to say when you get a great, outstanding choice like Cheney, who's widely respected?'' former President Bush continued. ''They've got a carping -- they've got a little minion sitting there with their dark glasses, you know, digging up dirt on someone.'' Mark Fabiani, a Gore spokesman, responded, ''it tells you a lot about George Junior that he has to send his father out to defend himself.'' He said: ''Someone's record is a legitimate issue. It's hardly improper to criticize someone's record.'' And Mr. Fabiani said that Gov. Bush was no innocent when it came to negative campaigning, noting that his first defense of Mr. Cheney was a hostile comparison to President Clinton. Gov. Bush said of Mr. Cheney, ''He's a man who understands what the definition of 'is' is.''
 Dick Cheney, Gov George W Bush's running mate, has not run for office since 1988 and is many ways neophyte on national campaign trail; seems at east giving short, serious speeches and fielding questions from television talk show hosts, but not at working crowds or at posing for television cameras at campaign rallies; photo (M) Mr. Cheney, 59, has lived in the bubble of public life for more than a quarter-century, as White House chief of staff, congressman and secretary of defense. He presided over the military in the Persian Gulf war in 1991. But he has not run for office since 1988, in his last race for re-election as Wyoming's lone House member. As Gov. George W. Bush's running mate, he is in many ways a neophyte on the national campaign trail. Even Governor Bush has gently poked fun at his partner's dry campaign style, but he continues to praise Mr. Cheney and brags that picking him was a ''presidential decision.'' Indeed, Bush campaign advisers argue that vice presidents do not need to be galvanizing campaign figures. Jack F. Kemp, for example, was supposed to jazz up Bob Dole's lagging campaign in 1996, but it made no difference. So with the Secretary, as many campaign aides call Mr. Cheney, preparing to give the speech of his life to the convention on Wednesday night, the Bush camp's strategy has been to let Cheney be Cheney, with a few tweaks here and there. Last Thursday, for example, the Bush campaign dispatched two top policy aides, Joshua Bolten and Gary Ebson, to Mr. Cheney's Dallas home to brief him on Mr. Bush's position on issues like taxes, oil policy, health care and the environment. Mr. Cheney and Mr. Bush have talked regularly by phone, aides said, as the governor continues his five-day road trip to the convention. ''A man of Secretary Cheney's stature and experience came here prepared,'' said a Bush campaign spokesman, Ari Fleischer. Prepared to champion Mr. Bush's policies, perhaps, but advisers conceded that no one anticipated that Mr. Cheney would spend much of his week defending his voting record in Congress. And that has set off some backbiting among Bush loyalists. One prominent Republican strategist said that the rollout of Mr. Cheney had been disappointing, that whatever spontaneous excitement there might have been was drained away when news of Mr. Cheney's selection leaked out days in advance. But many Bush advisers played down the issue. Tom Rath, a Republican national committeeman from New Hampshire who still advises the campaign, said: ''The Democrats' attempts to make Cheney a scary figure are not going to work, because he's not a scary figure. The base is very content with him, and if the base is content, then you can work on the middle.'' ''Bush has the warmth, and Cheney has the competence and integrity,'' said Jean Preston, a North Carolina delegate and a state assemblywoman. ''But we've got to make sure Cheney appeals to women and minorities, showing his interest and listening to their needs.'' Bridging Mr. Cheney's world in the executive branch and executive boardroom to Mr. Bush's realm of ''compassionate conservatism'' will help define the campaign's success, Republican consultants say. And today, Mr. Vande Beek said that Mr. Cheney was close to naming a chief of staff. Bush campaign aides have stepped in to keep reporters posted on Mr. Cheney's schedule, assemble a media contact list and organize a press pool. Mr. Cheney told lunch guests today that he and Mr. Bush would head out by train and barnstorm through Ohio, Michigan and Illinois for several days after the convention ''to take the battle straight to the heart of Democratic territory.''
 Asked about the Republican Party's platform, which, among other points that differ from Mr. Lazio's positions, opposes abortion, Mr. Lazio said, ''I think the platform, frankly, has become largely obsolete.'' But he cited only the abortion plank as problematic, adding, ''I think the party platform is going to be determined by Governor Bush.'' (Mr. Lazio does oppose public financing for abortions and late-term procedures.) Mr. Lazio faced numerous questions about his brief visit, and he restated that he would not be here on Thursday for Gov. George W. Bush's acceptance speech. Some have suggested that the Lazio campaign was irritated that he was not offered a greater role. But Mr. Lazio said:  ''My job is to get back to New York. That's where the votes are. I'm not running for national office here.'' ''Which part of the Bush-Cheney ticket does he support?'' asked Howard Wolfson, Mrs. Clinton's spokesman. ''Does he support a risky tax scheme that would make a U-turn for our economy?''
 Editorial comments on Gov George Bush's defense policy and his ideas of military strength, as expressed by some keynote speakers on second night of Republican National Convention in Philadelphia; says all that Americans learned was importance of military strength; says how strength should be used must be elucidated in campaign (M) The Republican Convention in Philadelphia set aside its nurturing themes about children last night and returned to the traditional G.O.P. territory of defense policy and military strength. Popular war heroes like former Senator Bob Dole and Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf implied that the Clinton administration had let veterans down and allowed defenses to erode. But a strangely subdued note was struck by the keynote speaker, Senator John McCain, the self-described ''distant runner-up.'' His generous but obviously unenthusiastic praise of Gov. George W. Bush was punctuated with intimations of his own mortality. His maudlin address seemed designed to echo Gen. Douglas MacArthur's farewell and perhaps to suggest a subtext of ''I shall return'' if Mr. Bush falters in November. Keynote speeches are usually aimed at firing up the crowd. Mr. McCain's passive approach flattened the already placid mood of the convention.  Few delegates were likely to be convinced by his praise of the prospective nominee as ''my friend.'' Moreover, Mr. McCain, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam, described a convoluted generational and military link to the Texas governor by asserting that his grandfather had been former President George Bush's commander in World War II. Then he conceded that ''it is my turn to serve under the son of my grandfather's brave subordinate.'' The Republican Convention in Philadelphia set aside its nurturing themes about children last night and returned to the traditional G.O.P. territory of defense policy and military strength. Popular war heroes like former Senator Bob Dole and Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf implied that the Clinton administration had let veterans down and allowed defenses to erode. But a strangely subdued note was struck by the keynote speaker, Senator John McCain, the self-described ''distant runner-up.'' His generous but obviously unenthusiastic praise of Gov. George W. Bush was punctuated with intimations of his own mortality. His maudlin address seemed designed to echo Gen. Douglas MacArthur's farewell and perhaps to suggest a subtext of ''I shall return'' if Mr. Bush falters in November. Keynote speeches are usually aimed at firing up the crowd. Mr. McCain's passive approach flattened the already placid mood of the convention.  Few delegates were likely to be convinced by his praise of the prospective nominee as ''my friend.'' Moreover, Mr. McCain, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam, described a convoluted generational and military link to the Texas governor by asserting that his grandfather had been former President George Bush's commander in World War II. Then he conceded that ''it is my turn to serve under the son of my grandfather's brave subordinate.'' Before one of the most tranquilizing keynote addresses in modern convention history, the podium last night seemed like a kind of class reunion for the gulf war. It was a tableau with certain pitfalls as well as advantages for Governor Bush. Like the choice of former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney as his running mate, the evening reminded the audience that the war was the high point of Mr. Bush's father's term in the White House, without offering much of a suggestion about the policies of another Bush presidency. Some listeners might also recall that as a senator from Tennessee, Al Gore broke with many Democrats and supported the war. The idea that military spending suddenly declined under President Clinton is also based partly on myth. The Pentagon budget began declining under President Bush and has risen in recent years under Mr. Clinton and his Republican defense secretary. Convention speeches are not to be confused with subtle foreign policy pronouncements. But there has been a certain confusion about Republican declarations on foreign policy that Mr. Bush will eventually have to clear up. The most extensive statements on the subject have come from the governor's main foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, who also spoke at the convention last night. Her criticism of the administration is that it has spent too much time on trivial ''humanitarian'' interests and failed to deal seriously with potential rivals like China and Russia or cultivate major allies. Cooperating with allies sounds good in principle, but Mr. Bush seems determined to embark on a risky missile defense system that major European allies regard as unworkable. The Republican Convention, as it has in all things, has papered over cleavages within the domestic ranks on foreign policy. Mr. Bush had to repudiate his own Congressional leadership early this year when he called for support of American peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo. Sorting these issues out will come only when Vice President Gore gets a chance to challenge Mr. Bush after the conventions. All that Americans learned last night was the importance of military strength. How that strength is to be used will have to be elucidated in the campaign to come.
 Gov George W Bush, fleshing out details of his education agenda in face of polls showing education is top concern for voters, grapples with question of how education can be national priority while remaining local government responsibility; Republican's new stress on education stems partly from movement by governors and business leaders to improve student achievement through rigorous standards and high-stakes testing (M) But as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas accepts his party's nomination this week and fleshes out details of his education agenda this fall, he must grapple with an internal contradiction in his Republican philosophy: How can education be a national priority while remaining the responsibility of local governments? While Republicans in Congress have long tried to curtail federal financing for schools or provide money in block grants rather than for specific programs, Mr. Bush has proposed withholding money from any state that does not administer annual achievement tests and break out the results by students' race and class. He also wants to expand financing for Head Start and start a $5 billion national reading program. ''Bush believes that his experience reforming education in Texas can be refracted on the whole country,'' said Chester E. Finn Jr., an assistant secretary of education in the Reagan administration. ''In his view, the federal government is sort of like a magnifying glass -- it takes energy originating elsewhere and focuses it and concentrates it.'' The change was fueled by the failure of the Republicans' anti-public schools message in 1996. Shortly after that election, Mr. Bush worried aloud at a meeting of Republican governors that the Democrats' dominance on education had cost his party crucial votes among women, announcing, ''Republicans must say that we are for education.''
 Both former Pres Bush and Pres Clinton are overshadowing process by which their political heirs, Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, are supposed to be coming into own by giving newly candid, newly bracing glimpses into how much they apparently dislike each other; rivalry is also shaping how their would-be successors see each other and sell themselves; Bush threatens more direct intervention if Clinton continues to belittle son, television interview; Clinton repeatedly denigrates former president to rally Democratic faithful at fund-raisers; photo (M) But now, with a volley of words that unearthed genuine emotion amid a contrived spectacle, two leaders who had pledged to let the 2000 election be about the future are demonstrating how much of it is about the past -- about lingering animosities, dueling legacies, competing claims to vindication and rivals with the names Bush and Clinton, not Bush and Gore. But now, with a volley of words that unearthed genuine emotion amid a contrived spectacle, two leaders who had pledged to let the 2000 election be about the future are demonstrating how much of it is about the past -- about lingering animosities, dueling legacies, competing claims to vindication and rivals with the names Bush and Clinton, not Bush and Gore. In an interview broadcast on NBC's ''Today'' show this morning, George Bush put President Clinton on warning, telling him that if he persisted in belittling Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the former president's eldest son, he would be sorry. ''I'm tempted to get off the reservation,'' Mr. Bush told Jamie Gangel,  as he took at least a half step across the line. ''But I'll tell you what I'm going to do: I'm going to wait a month. Now, you give me a call; I'll give you the home number.'' Mr. Bush was responding to a swipe that Mr. Clinton had taken at the Texas governor last week, when Mr. Clinton said: ''The message of the Bush campaign is just that, 'How bad could I be? I've been governor of Texas. My daddy was president'.'' But President Bush was also proving how thoroughly he had come to hover over this race in recent weeks, pulled back into it by those who think his memory will do them good and by those who think his memory will do their opponent harm. His son's choice of Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary, as a running mate seemed to mark a kind of turning point in the Texas governor's campaign. While Governor Bush had for months kept his father at a political distance, he now seems to be hugging him tight. In interviews and conversations with reporters in the days after he formally announced the selection of Mr. Cheney, Governor Bush gushed and gushed about Dad. When Laura Bush, the Texas governor's wife, talked about all the parents who tell her husband that they want their children to be able ''to respect the president of the United States,'' the ghost in that sentence was Mr. Clinton, and he was plenty visible to members of the audience, who cheered wildly. When General Powell said that Mr. Bush ''comes from a family with a generations-long tradition of public service,'' the obvious point of contrast was Mr. Clinton, not Vice President Al Gore. Today, the Texas governor went further and, like his father, took Mr. Clinton on directly, saying that the president's recent insults showed that he was ''so desperate to have his legacy intact by getting Al Gore elected, he'll say anything.'' The subject, yet again, was not a would-be president's agenda but a will-have-been president's self-conscious place in history. Mr. Gore's aides expressed delight at the turn of events, saying that President Bush's ''Today'' show interview rooted out the bitterness beneath all the sweetness of the convention, disrupted the intricate choreography and cast the Texas governor as too feeble to fend for himself. ''Ultimately, the whole thing tells people a lot about George Jr.,'' said Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. Mr. Bush's advisers and supporters agree that the elder Bush is a window into the younger one, but they have a different take on what it shows: carefully nurtured values of honesty and integrity. One Republican strategist said that as soon as the Texas governor hooked up with Mr. Cheney, there could no longer be any pretense that President Bush was not a part of his political fortunes. A Republican official who sometimes advises the Bush campaign said that the Texas governor had reached a point in his campaign where he had proven his mettle and could now acknowledge and include both of his parents more openly without worrying about much of a downside. The upside, this official said, were polls this year that showed a sizable majority of voters with favorable opinions of the former president and the former first lady. But several people close to the former president said that his remarks about Mr. Clinton and the amount of attention they garnered  were not a political plot. It was all much more personal, Mr. Bush's friends said, and it betrayed a simmering ire that his son's big moment and his son's big party was being crashed by a man who, in the former president's view, had no manners. ''It's not that Clinton beat him,''  said one of these friends, trying to explain President Bush's perspective. ''It's that Clinton has no respect for the presidency.''
 Richard Rothstein column says it will be impossible to tell what kind of president Gov George W Bush will be in the area of education until his sorts out the conflicting messages he has been sending; says that Bush portrays himself as a consensus leader who has built upon the reforms of predecessors, but that since many of those programs resemble those supported by Vice Pres Al Gore, he also poses as a savior of Texas's failing public schools, advocating more ideologically conservative approaches to education, like vouchers or character education,' that had nothing to do with Texas' success; drawing (M) At times, Mr. Bush has portrayed himself as a consensus leader who has built upon the reforms of predecessors. At times, Mr. Bush has portrayed himself as a consensus leader who has built upon the reforms of predecessors. But many of those programs resemble those supported by his opponent in the presidential race, Vice President Al Gore. So to appear more confrontational and conservative, Mr. Bush has also posed as a savior of Texas' failing public schools. In the campaign for president, Mr. Bush has advocated more ideologically conservative approaches to education, like vouchers or ''character education,'' that had nothing to do with Texas' success. Mr. Bush took office in 1995, so he can't take credit for scores already high in 1990, or for gains that began then. Mr. Bush strengthened accountability, with an emphasis on early reading skills. He increased financing for education to 49 percent from 42 percent of the state budget. At times, Mr. Bush has acknowledged a debt to his predecessors, but at others does not. The governor can take credit, not of rescuing a failed system, but of strengthening a bipartisan consensus to combine more money with more accountability. He has led an education system that rejected vouchers while following some strategies Mr. Gore supports (like preschool for disadvantaged children and higher standards and salaries for teachers). But it is still unknown whether as president Mr. Bush would do as he actually did in Texas, or take a more ideological approach, as he often does in the campaign.
 Gov George W Bush, after days of subtle digs at Pres Clinton, takes him on directly, holding Clinton will say anything to get Vice Pres Al Gore elected president to keep his legacy intact; responds to jabs from Clinton; visits West Virginia and Pennsylvania en route to Republican National Convention; photo (M) After four days of subtle digs at President Clinton, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas took him on directly today and said the president was ''so desperate to have his legacy intact by getting Al Gore elected, he'll say anything.'' Mr. Bush's remarks on his campaign plane came as he stopped in two more battleground states -- West Virginia and Pennsylvania -- on his way to a triumphant coronation at the Republican convention. After four days of subtle digs at President Clinton, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas took him on directly today and said the president was ''so desperate to have his legacy intact by getting Al Gore elected, he'll say anything.'' Mr. Bush's remarks on his campaign plane came as he stopped in two more battleground states -- West Virginia and Pennsylvania -- on his way to a triumphant coronation at the Republican convention. The Texas governor was prompted by a stream of broadsides from Mr. Clinton, who said at a recent Democratic fund-raiser that Mr. Bush's message amounted to ''How bad could I be? I've been governor of Texas. My daddy was president. I own a baseball team. They like me down there.'' Today, Mr. Bush said he welcomed the jabs. ''It's amazing to me that the president of the United States would spend time trying to be a political pundit,'' he said. ''He's so desperate to have his legacy intact by getting Al Gore elected, he'll say anything, just like Al Gore will. And I welcome him to the arena.'' Later, at his first rally of the day at the West Virginia war memorial at the foot of the State Capitol, Mr. Bush stepped up his criticism. ''We're going to win the state of West Virginia,'' he told a crowd of several thousand people, ''and we're going to do so because this nation is sick and tired of the politics of personal destruction.'' He added, ''This nation is looking for an administration that will appeal to our better angels, not our darker impulses. This nation does not want four more years of Clinton-Gore.'' Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, made a similar dig on Monday in her convention speech about education when she that said her husband hears pleas from people to bring back an era when children can ''respect the president of the United States.'' Mr. Bush said they were simply reflecting public sentiment. ''When people walk up and say 'don't let us down,' we're just reporting what's happening,'' he said. ''I don't think I've ever mentioned President Clinton's name on the stump recently.'' Asked whether he was talking about Mr. Clinton when he called his running mate, Dick Cheney, a man ''who knows what the meaning of is is,'' Mr. Bush said, ''Yeah. I was talking about him then. I sure was. But in the context of having somebody who's going to shoot straight with the American people.'' Mr. Bush's rally in West Virginia was followed by one in Harrisburg late this afternoon, as he completed a trip through six swing states and prepared to make his entrance in Philadelphia on Wednesday. Like all the crowds Mr. Bush has drawn during the last five days, the ones today were overwhelmingly white, despite the choreography of the convention, which has been featuring minority speakers to moderate the party's image and to appeal to suburban voters. The largest group of blacks to appear at any of Mr. Bush's rallies were union members who staged a protest against him on Thursday in Columbus, Ohio. Asked if the lack of diversity showed that his appeals were not resonating with minority voters, Mr. Bush said, ''We'll see on Election Day.'' He added: ''I can't remember the makeup of the crowds in Texas, but I got nearly 50 percent of the Hispanic vote, and I'm not so sure the nature of the crowd necessarily reflects the nature of the vote.'' Mr. Bush praised retired Gen. Colin L. Powell for his challenge to  Republicans on Monday to reach out to black voters and ''not just during an election-year campaign.'' Asked about Mr. Powell's criticism that some in the party condemn affirmative action to help ''black kids get an education'' but not ''affirmative action'' for lobbyists, Mr. Bush sidestepped the issue. ''I don't know what specific policies he had in mind,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Children not getting into places of higher education? In my state of Texas we took a very positive step toward ensuring the racial mix of Texas universities reflected the nature of our population.'' Mr. Bush was referring to legislation he signed in Texas after a court threw out an affirmative action plan for higher education. The law guarantees that the top 10 percent of graduates from every high school in the state will be ensured a place in a Texas college or university.
 Democrats and their allies, accusing Republican Party of using its convention to mask Gov George W Bush's deeply conservative stands on controversial issues, are unleashing commercials that criticize his record; biggest barrage is coming from Democratic National Committee, which has been releasing at least one new ad each day and plans to continue doing so (M) Accusing the Republican Party of using its convention to mask Gov. George W. Bush's stands on controversial issues, Democrats and groups with close ties to them are unleashing commercials that criticize his record in Texas as well as his positions on gun control and abortion. The groups -- Planned Parenthood, Handgun Control and the Sierra Club -- are all running commercials singling out Mr. Bush in a week in which Republicans are staging a convention that was intended to sidestep divisive topics like abortion. Accusing the Republican Party of using its convention to mask Gov. George W. Bush's stands on controversial issues, Democrats and groups with close ties to them are unleashing commercials that criticize his record in Texas as well as his positions on gun control and abortion. The groups -- Planned Parenthood, Handgun Control and the Sierra Club -- are all running commercials singling out Mr. Bush in a week in which Republicans are staging a convention that was intended to sidestep divisive topics like abortion. Today, the committee unveiled a 30-second commercial, to be broadcast in 17 crucial states from the Pacific Northwest to New England, that accuses Mr. Bush of favoring ''the big drug companies, the H.M.O.s and the insurance industry'' over Texas residents. Democratic staff members, including one of the party's national chairmen, Joe Andrew, have set up shop here to reinforce their contention that the Republicans are glossing over what they view as Mr. Bush's deeply conservative agenda in an effort to appeal to moderate Democrats and independents. Mr. Andrew said that with all the mass communication techniques -- the party is running seven anti-Bush Web sites -- it may sound as if the strategy is novel. ''But it's not,'' he said. ''It's actually old-fashioned. We're back to making sure people know what's going on.'' ''I think the Democrats look at Governor Bush's inclusive style and they've gone into full party panic,'' said Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman. ''The more they attack, the more people don't like Al Gore's manner of campaigning. They are sick and tired of this.'' The latest commercial follows a theme that forces allied with Democrats have been returning to again and again: Mr. Bush's record in Texas. This one compares the governor's commitment to health care unfavorably with Mr. Gore's. ''George Bush: his plan protects special interests instead of working families,'' the announcer says as the screen shows a black and white portrait of an utterly forlorn woman in a wheelchair. The special interest groups say their goal is to ensure that like-minded voters who might be misled by the convivial tone of the convention and the campaign understand that on issues like health care and abortion rights, Mr. Bush is out of step. Gloria Feldt, president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, said focus groups found that many women who identified  themselves as moderate to conservative and who supported abortion rights were not aware of Mr. Bush's opposition to abortion. ''Bush has been extraordinarily successful at obfuscating, at fuzzying around the edges of issues, especially on reproductive health and rights,'' she said. Additional advertisements are planned after the party conventions. Mr. Fleischer said that the Democrats' efforts only pointed up Mr. Gore's own fuzziness on issues like gun control; Mr. Bush is considered a reliable ally of the National Rifle Association, a group Mr. Gore regularly attacks but did work with on issues when he was in Congress.
 The stage in Philadelphia is brimming with minority faces. But among the delegates and in the convention hall the crowds are unremittingly white. Black people have been strategically placed throughout the hall to show up on television, next to George and Barbara Bush, for example, or near other important Republicans.
 Analysis of political motives involved in choice of two black people, Gen Colin L Powell and Condoleeza Rice, as principal speakers on two consecutive nights at Republican National Convention; Gov George W Bush, with little chance of capturing much of black vote, may be playing to suburbanites and moderate swing voters (M) Tonight, for the second night in a row, one of the principal speakers at the Republican National Convention was a black person. Tonight, it was Condoleezza Rice, the chief national security adviser to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas; on Monday night, it was Colin L. Powell, who may be secretary of state if Mr. Bush is elected president. Tonight, for the second night in a row, one of the principal speakers at the Republican National Convention was a black person. Tonight, it was Condoleezza Rice, the chief national security adviser to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas; on Monday night, it was Colin L. Powell, who may be secretary of state if Mr. Bush is elected president. Obviously, this was no happenstance. In this convention, whose sole mission is to glorify Mr. Bush, happenstance just doesn't happen. The question occurs, what is all this about? Granting that Mr. Bush has demonstrated in his brief political career a much greater sensitivity to minority concerns than the average Republican, what political purpose lies behind the image-making? Mr. Bush acknowledged that ''we have a lot of work to do.'' According to exit polls conducted by Voter News Service, a consortium of television networks and The Associated Press, Mr. Bush took 27 percent of the black vote in his re-election contest in 1998. That may have been an exaggeration of his true strength, because his Democratic opponent, Tony Mauro, was never seen as a viable alternative. Mr. Bush did much less well against Ann Richards in 1994, winning 15 percent of the black vote then. During this year's campaign, he made a point of appearing before the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. But in South Carolina, when Senator John McCain of Arizona was pressing him hard, Mr. Bush was unwilling to condemn the flying of the Confederate battle flag on the statehouse, and he campaigned at Bob Jones University in Greenville, which banned interracial dating at the time of his speech. Mr. Bush has also described Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia, dyed-in-the-wool conservatives whose very names are anathema to many blacks -- even though Mr. Thomas is himself black -- as model Supreme Court justices. ''Most of my friends see him as a kind of god,'' said a black Republican delegate here, who asked that his name not be used. ''Some of that rubs off on Al Gore, and it makes Bush's job in November terribly difficult.'' The latest New York Times/CBS News poll, taken between July 20 and 22, suggested how difficult a job Mr. Bush faces in courting black votes. In a two-way race, Mr. Gore won the support of 84 percent of African-Americans to Mr. Bush's 6 percent. In any event, things are going well for Mr. Bush among white suburbanites. The same Times/CBS poll showed him ahead of the Mr. Gore among that group, 52 percent to 34. If, as Mr. Bositis and a number of Republican tacticians suggested, Mr. Bush's real aim in appealing to blacks is to solidify his support among white moderates, he would not be the first Republican nominee to try that ploy. In 1980, Ronald Reagan made much of his endorsement by the civil rights leaders Ralph David Abernathy and Hosea Williams.  His black support barely budged;  but that was not the point, a strategist, Richard Wirthlin, later explained. The target, Mr. Wirthlin said, was white suburbanites.
 Following is an excerpt from remarks delivered last night at the Republican National Convention by Condoleezza Rice, Governor George W. Bush's foreign policy adviser, as recorded by The New York Times: We have, ladies and gentlemen, a presidential nominee who knows what America must do to fulfill the promise of this new century. We have a nominee who knows the power of truth and honor. We have a nominee who will be the next great president of the United States of America, Texas Gov. George W. Bush. Following is an excerpt from remarks delivered last night at the Republican National Convention by Condoleezza Rice, Governor George W. Bush's foreign policy adviser, as recorded by The New York Times: We have, ladies and gentlemen, a presidential nominee who knows what America must do to fulfill the promise of this new century. We have a nominee who knows the power of truth and honor. We have a nominee who will be the next great president of the United States of America, Texas Gov. George W. Bush. It is fitting that I stand before you to talk about Governor Bush's commitment to America's principled leadership in the world, because that is the legacy and tradition of our party, because our party's principles made me a Republican. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney live and breathe these Republican principles. They understand what is required for our time, and what is timeless. And it all begins with integrity in the Oval Office. George W. Bush is a man of his word.  Friend and foe will know that he keeps his word and tells the truth. George W. Bush believes that America has a special responsibility to keep the peace, that the fair cause of freedom depends on our strength and purpose. He will keep faith with them because they are the strongest shield and surest sword in the maintenance of peace. And I want to assure you, if the time ever comes to use military force, President George W. Bush will do so to win, because for him, victory is not a dirty word. George W. Bush will never allow America and our allies to be blackmailed. And make no mistake about it; blackmail is what the outlaw states seeking long-range ballistic missiles have in mind. It is time to move beyond the Cold War. It is time to have a president devoted to a new nuclear strategy and to the deployment of effective missile defenses at the earliest possible date. George W. Bush knows that America has allies and friends who share our values. And he has said the president should call our allies when they are not needed, so that he can call upon them when they are needed. But most importantly, George W. Bush, the George W. Bush that I know, is a man of uncommonly good judgment. He is focused and consistent. He believes that we Americans are at our best when we exercise power without fanfare and arrogance. He speaks plainly and with a positive spirit. George w. Bush speaks to the Mexican people not just in the language of diplomacy but in their native tongue. And Governor Bush has joined the bipartisan tradition of support for Israel's quest for enduring peace with its neighbors. George W. Bush will work with Congress so that America speaks with one voice. He has demonstrated in this campaign that he will never use foreign policy for narrow partisan purposes. But my friends, the United States cannot lead unless the president inspires the American people to accept their international responsibilities. George W. Bush will inspire us, because he understands who we are. And, my friends, George W. Bush understands that America is special among nations. That throughout our history, people everywhere have been inspired to flee tyranny and the constraints of class to gain liberty and pursue happiness in this great land. George W. Bush would have liked Granddaddy Rice. He was the son of a farmer in rural Alabama, but he recognized the importance of education. Around 1918, he decided he was going to get book learning. And so, he asked, in the language of the day, where a colored man could go to college. He was told about little Stillman College, a school about 50 miles away. So Granddaddy saved his cotton for tuition and went off to Tuscaloosa. My friends, George W. Bush challenges us to call upon our better selves, to be compassionate toward those who are less fortunate, to cherish and educate every child, descendants of slaves and immigrants alike, and to thereby affirm the American dream for us all.
 Maybe Miller's political gibes won him USA Today's top spot: he called the Democrats and the Republicans ''4-12 teams'' and said George W. Bush, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, possessed the same ''deer-in-the-headlights look'' shown by the 49ers' backup quarterback, Giovanni Carmazzi.
 Some viewers described a sense, rather, of watching as a precaution, on the off chance that something could bollix up George W. Bush's momentum. It would have been more riveting if the choice of running mate had remained unclear, they said, or differing opinions on platform issues were expressed. But no such luck; so somehow, even on the 48- and 50-inch TV sets that fill whole den walls here, the convention seemed a small event. Even Monday night's trickiest moment, when Colin L. Powell chided his fellow Republicans from the convention's rostrum for opposition to affirmative action, caused little stir on White Oak Circle. Tired and a bit distracted at that late hour, the viewers let it slip by, focusing instead on their continuing admiration for General Powell, whom several described as a great potential president, and their new affection for Laura Bush, who, they said, will make an appealing first lady if her husband makes it to the White House. ''I'm watching to make sure he doesn't mess up,'' Dr. Dick Lewis, a surgeon, said of Mr. Bush. ''His single most outstanding characteristic is that he's got the ability to beat Gore. That's more important than this platform or anything else, as far as I'm concerned.'' Down the street, Diane Goldschmidt, community service coordinator at Mount Lebanon's award-winning high school, said she had explained to her 18-year-old son that ''if some major trauma occurred, if Bush had a heart attack or we found out he's a spy, if something occurred that would prevent him being a candidate, this is when it would happen.'' Short of that, she said, she has read enough about Mr. Bush in recent years that ''I know my opinion won't be altered.'' Her husband, Jack, a financial consultant, noted that this time around, he had no real questions lingering about candidates or issues, which  was by no means the case when Mr. Bush's father ran against Ross Perot eight years ago. Whatever the convention's limitations, they did not prevent the viewers from enjoying Monday night's top speeches and forming a few new impressions. For one thing, Mrs. Bush garnered high marks. Mr. Lammert's wife, Teri, responded particularly when Mrs. Bush talked about returning respect to the presidency, a reference to the Clinton scandals. ''That's a powerful comment,'' Mrs. Lammert said. ''That brings up a lot of memories of what happened. I think we have to make the presidency respectable again, and I think he can do it and she can help.'' Dr. Lewis's wife, Charlene, a nurse and mother of three, said she felt as if she could relate to Mrs. Bush. ''She is foremost a mom before anything else,'' Mrs. Lewis said, ''and in the baby-boom generation I think that a lot of people can relate to her -- at least I can. She mentioned the empty-nest syndrome she's facing this fall, which is something we're facing. And she seemed so down to earth, I loved her.'' Mrs. Smith had watched much of the evening, she said, and felt no shift in her opinions about the party, the issues or Mr. Bush. ''Every time they talked about streamlining federal government, reducing bureaucracy, I felt energized,'' she said. ''And then they talked about his education initiative and requiring reading literacy at third-grade level by third grade, and I thought, 'That's all well and good, but that seems like as much or more federal involvement.' '' Mrs. Smith was also struck, she said, by the way all the earlier speakers followed the same pattern: they would talk about what they had managed to achieve because America was a land of opportunity, ''then education, then what good Bush was going to do, and then God bless America.'' She and most of her neighbors said they would continue watching the convention in dribs and drabs, and certainly try to tune in when Mr. Bush speaks on Thursday night. But they have little expectation of bombshells. ''I can't imagine anything that George Bush would say that would make me vote for his opponent,'' Mr. Smith said.
 McCain Vouches for Bush On Handling Foreign Policy  Senator John McCain shed his rebellious image to play admiring party stalwart atthe Republican National Convention, commending Gov. George W. Bush to independents and Democrats. He and other military heroes who spoke offered assurances that Mr. Bush would ably defend national interests abroad. Joining the chorus and delivering the other high-profile speech was Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief international affairs adviser who, as an African American, also underscores his pledge to place members of minorities in consequential roles. Former President George Bush put President Clinton on notice over Mr. Clinton's belittling of his son.
 When we nominate Governor Bush for president, here in the city where our great nation was born, we invest him with the faith of our founding fathers, and charge him with the care of the cause they called glorious. When we nominate Governor Bush for president, here in the city where our great nation was born, we invest him with the faith of our founding fathers, and charge him with the care of the cause they called glorious. My friend, Governor Bush, believes in an America that is so much more than the sum of its divided parts. He wants to give you back a government that serves all the people no matter the circumstances of their birth. And he wants to lead a Republican Party that is as big as the country we serve. I am proud to do so for I know that by supporting George W. Bush I serve my country well.
 You might mistake the Republican convention for an ethnic festival or a forum on women's rights,'' The New York Times said in a news story that seems to capture the scene in Philadelphia this week. Except this dispatch, reported by Maureen Dowd, didn't come from the convention that is nominating George W. Bush, but the one that nominated his father 12 years ago. You might mistake the Republican convention for an ethnic festival or a forum on women's rights,'' The New York Times said in a news story that seems to capture the scene in Philadelphia this week. Except this dispatch, reported by Maureen Dowd, didn't come from the convention that is nominating George W. Bush, but the one that nominated his father 12 years ago. A convention is a television commercial, and the decision to feature black or female faces has barely any deeper philosophical import than the decision to feature balloons or confetti. In February, when Mr. Bush needed the support of conservative whites in South Carolina, he visited Bob Jones University and refused to denounce the Confederate flag. This doesn't mean that Mr. Bush is a secret racist; it simply reflected expediency in the choice of racial symbolism at that moment. Now the moment and the symbolism have changed. The best evidence that Mr. Bush has not fundamentally altered the direction of his party is the acquiescence of the G.O.P.'s right wing. Conservatives are so vigilant against creeping moderation that they have denounced Newt Gingrich and Trent Lott for ideological deviation. Not only is this group not barking out any complaints now, but it is nuzzled lovingly in Mr. Bush's lap. And no wonder. His positions on economics and judicial appointments hew firmly to the conservative line.
 Christina Jones, president and founder of pcOrder, of Austin Tex., on how Gov. George W. Bush's formula of cutting taxes, encouraging investment and reforming education is the right mix for success in the new economy.
 McCAIN OFFERS WORDS OF ASSURANCE  Trying to erase tensions from the raw primary battle, Senator John McCain commended Gov. George W. Bush yesterday in a speech at the Republican convention, saying the Texas governor would ably defend the nation's interests abroad. Throughout the evening, a parade of military heroes -- from Mr. McCain to Bob Dole to Gen. J. Norman Schwarzkopf -- offered testimonials to Mr. Bush. Joining the chorus was Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief international affairs adviser, who, as a black, also underscored Mr. Bush's pledge to place minorities in consequential roles. BUSH CALLS CLINTON 'DESPERATE'  Prompted by a series of digs by President Clinton, Gov. George W. Bush took him on directly yesterday. As he campaigned en route to the convention, Mr. Bush said the president was ''so desperate to have his legacy intact by getting Al Gore elected, he'll say anything.'' At a recent Democratic fund-raiser, Mr. Clinton characterized Mr. Bush's message, in part, as ''How bad could I be? I've been governor of Texas. My daddy was president.'' Mr. Clinton also drew an angry response from the senior Mr. Bush, who told NBC yesterday that if Mr. Clinton persisted in belittling his son, ''I'm going to tell the nation what I think about him as a human being and a person.'' McCAIN OFFERS WORDS OF ASSURANCE  Trying to erase tensions from the raw primary battle, Senator John McCain commended Gov. George W. Bush yesterday in a speech at the Republican convention, saying the Texas governor would ably defend the nation's interests abroad. Throughout the evening, a parade of military heroes -- from Mr. McCain to Bob Dole to Gen. J. Norman Schwarzkopf -- offered testimonials to Mr. Bush. Joining the chorus was Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief international affairs adviser, who, as a black, also underscored Mr. Bush's pledge to place minorities in consequential roles. BUSH CALLS CLINTON 'DESPERATE'  Prompted by a series of digs by President Clinton, Gov. George W. Bush took him on directly yesterday. As he campaigned en route to the convention, Mr. Bush said the president was ''so desperate to have his legacy intact by getting Al Gore elected, he'll say anything.'' At a recent Democratic fund-raiser, Mr. Clinton characterized Mr. Bush's message, in part, as ''How bad could I be? I've been governor of Texas. My daddy was president.'' Mr. Clinton also drew an angry response from the senior Mr. Bush, who told NBC yesterday that if Mr. Clinton persisted in belittling his son, ''I'm going to tell the nation what I think about him as a human being and a person.'' CHENEY STILL LEARNING ABOUT CAMPAIGNING  Dick Cheney served in public life for more than a quarter-century, as White House chief of staff, congressman and secretary of defense. But he has not run for office since 1988, and as George W. Bush's running mate, he is in many ways a neophyte on the national campaign trail. He seems utterly at ease giving short, serious speeches and fielding tough questions from Sunday TV talk show hosts. But give him a crowd and a rope line, and Mr. Cheney rushes through, visibly relieved when he's finished. Even Governor Bush has gently poked fun at his partner's dry campaign style, but he praises Mr. Cheney and brags that picking him was a ''presidential decision.''
 Perry Gartner letter disputes assertion by Gerald Ford and Bob Dole in July 31 Op-Ed article that Bush-Cheney slate, in terms of experience, is one of most abundantly qualified in memory In ''The Wisdom of Choosing Dick Cheney'' (Op-Ed, July 31), Gerald R. Ford and Bob Dole make the astonishing assertion that ''if experience counts for anything -- and it ought to -- the Bush-Cheney slate is one of the most abundantly qualified in memory.'' In ''The Wisdom of Choosing Dick Cheney'' (Op-Ed, July 31), Gerald R. Ford and Bob Dole make the astonishing assertion that ''if experience counts for anything -- and it ought to -- the Bush-Cheney slate is one of the most abundantly qualified in memory.'' While Mr. Ford and Mr. Dole understandably want to emphasize Mr. Cheney's lengthy political career (and de-emphasize his excessively right-wing voting record), it is not Dick Cheney who is running for president. George W. Bush is, and by any and every conceivable measure, he is one of the least qualified presidential nominees in this country's history.
 While toning down what had been sharp criticism of Mr. Lazio, Mr. Cheney and Gov. George W. Bush, Mrs. Clinton said she had merely been pointing out facts. ''I don't think it's an attack to say Governor Bush went to Bob Jones University, Governor Bush supports the Republican platform and Supreme Court nominees who are dedicated to doing away with a woman's right to choose,'' she said. ''I don't think it's negative or an attack to say here are the facts and let people make their own judgment.''
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed article examines Gov George W Bush's vague proposals for Social Security and concludes that Bush does not really have a plan; notes very little was said about retirement security in Republican platform at national convention in Philadelphia (M) So I turned instead to a working paper released in June by Martin Feldstein -- the eminent Harvard economist, former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and adviser to George W. Bush -- and Andrew Samwick. The paper is a detailed discussion of how Mr. Bush's proposal to allow individuals to divert part of their Social Security contributions into personal retirement accounts might work. So I turned instead to a working paper released in June by Martin Feldstein -- the eminent Harvard economist, former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and adviser to George W. Bush -- and Andrew Samwick. The paper is a detailed discussion of how Mr. Bush's proposal to allow individuals to divert part of their Social Security contributions into personal retirement accounts might work. I say ''might,'' because Mr. Bush has not been forthcoming on specifics. Indeed, the paper contains a disclaimer: ''although the plan described here resembles the proposal of Governor Bush . . . our analysis is not of the 'Bush plan' since Governor Bush did not provide enough information with which to specify a 'Bush plan.' '' Whew! I was wondering why I didn't understand the Bush plan, so it's a relief to know that it's not my fault: there isn't any plan. The big question about Bush-like plans is this: If Social Security contributions go into personal accounts instead of the trust fund, where does the Social Security system get the money to pay benefits? The Feldstein-Samwick paper offers two answers. First, according to their plan, any money people make on their personal retirement accounts will in effect be taxed at a 75 percent rate -- that is, every dollar you receive from your own investments will be offset by a 75-cent reduction in your other benefits. Since the authors assume that the high rates of return earned by stock in the postwar years will continue forever -- an assumption that has been refuted in recent papers by leading experts on financial markets, but never mind -- they believe that this will eventually save the system a lot of money. Now let's be clear here: I'm not describing Governor Bush's actual plan. I'm only describing something that is the best indication available about what his plan might look like if he did have a plan, which he doesn't.
 Mr. Ford appeared frail as he sat in a V.I.P. box at the back of the First Union Center on Tuesday night along with his wife, former President George Bush and his wife, Barbara, and other prominent Republicans. He was visibly moved when a video-taped tribute to him was displayed on the large screens inside the hall.
 How times have changed. During the prime-time speeches tonight, the mayor was not sitting with the New York delegation, but next to Cindy McCain, whose husband, Senator John McCain of Arizona, was a featured speaker and a friend of the mayor's. He was also situated one row in front of the elder Bushes and Nancy Reagan.
 American League  BOSTON RED SOX--Placed INF Jose Offerman on the 15-day disabled list. Recalled 1B-DH Morgan Burkhart from Pawtucket of the International League.  OAKLAND ATHLETICS--Placed 3B Olmedo Saenz on the 15-day disabled list. Recalled 2B Jose Ortiz from Sacramento of the PCL.  TORONTO BLUE JAYS--Placed 2B Homer Bush on the 15-day disabled list. American League  BOSTON RED SOX--Placed INF Jose Offerman on the 15-day disabled list. Recalled 1B-DH Morgan Burkhart from Pawtucket of the International League.  OAKLAND ATHLETICS--Placed 3B Olmedo Saenz on the 15-day disabled list. Recalled 2B Jose Ortiz from Sacramento of the PCL.  TORONTO BLUE JAYS--Placed 2B Homer Bush on the 15-day disabled list.
 At 4 p.m. on Monday, Tiffany & Company closed early so it could hold a private reception for 200 Regents and their spouses. They sipped soup from mock Faberge eggs as a string quartet played. Joan Specter, the wife of Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, designed the table arrangements, which included rare orange Gerber daisies and matching roses. Each Regent was given a robin's-egg-blue Tiffany box containing a crystal bowl, inscribed with George W. Bush's signature. In previous years, the donor elite was Team 100, a group of $100,000 contributors that began in 1988 to help elect President George Bush. The club, now dedicated to the election of his son George W., the governor of Texas, has grown to 600 members and accounts for more than $60 million of the party's $137 million in soft money. In Philadelphia, some Team 100 members have complained that their events are too crowded. One Regent crowed that Team 100 members were packed like sardines in their party suite, while the $250,000 club members had ''room to stretch our legs.'' ''We are the party of small donors who represent grass-roots America,'' said Jim Nicholson, the party chairman. ''We're pleased with the outpouring of support we've seen in recent weeks, particularly since Governor Bush announced his selection of Dick Cheney.'' Since March 1999, Governor Bush has raised $93.2 million in checks of $1,000 or less, much of it raised by a network of fund-raisers called the Pioneers. He has promptly listed his donors and the amounts they have contributed on his Web site. ''I have always supported rapid public disclosure of campaign contributions as a healthy campaign finance reform,'' Mr. Bush said in September. This week's highlight event is a ''Regents only'' reception that precedes Wednesday's Republican gala lunch to be held at the Philadelphia Marriott. The Regents will get to meet privately with Governor Bush and his wife, Laura; Mr. Cheney; and Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida.
 I got some help from La Cuisine in Alexandria, Va., one of a few shops to carry the pans. Stephanie Gorenflo, who works there and does the experimental baking, advised lowering the baking temperature 10 to 15 degrees to compensate for the color of the paper, which makes the food brown more quickly.
