 FRIEDLAND-Mary. On August 10th. Beloved wife of the late Noah. Devoted mother of Joyce Bush and the late Harriet Okun. Adored grandmother of Amy, Marcy and David Bush and Andrew, Robert and Jodi Okun. Loving great grandmother of Five. Service Sunday, August 13 at Park Avenue Synagogue, 87th Street and Madison Avenue. FRIEDLAND-Mary. On August 10th. Beloved wife of the late Noah. Devoted mother of Joyce Bush and the late Harriet Okun. Adored grandmother of Amy, Marcy and David Bush and Andrew, Robert and Jodi Okun. Loving great grandmother of Five. Service Sunday, August 13 at Park Avenue Synagogue, 87th Street and Madison Avenue.
 Gov George W Bush urges Vice Pres Al Gore to state his disapproval of Pres Clinton's sexual conduct in office and to send Americans clear message that he would maintain high level of integrity if elected to presidency; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush called on Vice President Al Gore today to emphatically state his disapproval of President Clinton's sexual conduct in office and to send Americans a clear message that he would maintain a high level of integrity if elected to the presidency. Mr. Bush, who has pledged ''to restore honor and dignity'' to the White House, conceded that Mr. Gore could accomplish the same task. But he said that Mr. Gore first needed to signal his intent to do so and to acknowledge that Mr. Clinton had done the country damage. Gov. George W. Bush called on Vice President Al Gore today to emphatically state his disapproval of President Clinton's sexual conduct in office and to send Americans a clear message that he would maintain a high level of integrity if elected to the presidency. Mr. Bush, who has pledged ''to restore honor and dignity'' to the White House, conceded that Mr. Gore could accomplish the same task. But he said that Mr. Gore first needed to signal his intent to do so and to acknowledge that Mr. Clinton had done the country damage. ''If he's got a problem with what went on in the past, he ought to explain what it is,'' Mr. Bush said aboard his campaign plane as he flew here from Sacramento during a four-day campaign swing through states on the West Coast. Mr. Bush also said that if Mr. Gore was determined to govern with a set of scruples different from Mr. Clinton's, ''he ought to say so.'' ''If Al Gore has got differences with the president, he ought to say them loud and clear,'' Mr. Bush said, referring in part to a published interview in which Mr. Gore stated that he wanted to give the country ''a fresh start.'' ''He ought to let us know where he differed from the president, on policy matters as well as everything else.'' The 10-minute conversation, which came on the heels of an appeal by Mr. Clinton on Thursday that voters not let whatever misdeeds he committed affect their judgments about Mr. Gore, was noteworthy for several reasons. In saying that Mr. Gore was also capable of bringing a renewed dignity to the White House, Mr. Bush seemed to undercut a principal argument for his own candidacy. But the conversation also reflected and distilled Mr. Bush's continuing attempts to have it several ways in his campaign, especially when it comes to the topics of Mr. Clinton's affair and Mr. Gore's aspirations. On one hand, Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, insisted that this race was about the future, as he often has. ''This is a campaign that is going to be writing new chapters in the 21st century,'' he said. ''We're moving forward.'' On the other hand, Mr. Bush once again summoned the specter of Mr. Clinton's past, which he clearly sees as a useful wedge against Mr. Gore, his Democratic rival. Mr. Bush's delicate and sometimes awkward attempt to straddle this contradiction was evident when he quibbled with reporters who noted that he and his advisers had frequently said he would ''restore honor'' to the Oval Office, a clear assertion that this virtue had been lost. Mr. Bush countered today that his standard pledge, at the end of almost every stump speech, was not to restore but ''to uphold the honor and integrity'' of the presidency. He did not acknowledge the occasional use of the other, more loaded phrase or the fact that both he and his running mate, Dick Cheney, have at times in the last two weeks added the word ''decency'' to the list of qualities that the next occupant of the White House should possess. The semantic squabbling took an even odder turn when Senator John McCain of Arizona, who had stood beside Mr. Bush on the plane, introduced him at a subsequent rally here. Mr. McCain opened his remarks by saying that Mr. Bush would ''restore dignity, honor and respect to the White House.'' Mr. Gore has been doing his own balancing act, trying to associate himself with the prosperity of the Clinton era but not with Mr. Clinton's personal behavior. He rarely makes reference to Mr. Clinton's affair, but he has condemned the president's behavior on a few occasions, once branding it ''inexcusable.'' Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said that Mr. Bush should talk about his plans, not Mr. Clinton's past, and was ''only offering Americans a rear-view-mirror vision for the country's future.'' Mr. Bush, who has vowed time and again to run a positive and upbeat campaign, said on his plane that he was simply noting an important reality. ''The president embarrassed the nation,'' he said. And he said that American voters sought some reassurance that the next president understood that and wanted to fix it. ''Unfortunately, in this point in history, it's a pledge that those of us running for office must make and should keep,'' Mr. Bush said. When one reporter noted to Mr. Bush that many Democrats, along with Republicans, had publicly blamed Mr. Clinton for dishonoring the presidency, Karen P. Hughes, the communications director for the Bush campaign, interjected, ''Joe Lieberman said that, and Al Gore did not.'' She was referring to Mr. Gore's running mate, the Connecticut senator. When another reporter asked Mr. Bush if Mr. Gore could be an agent of the reassurance that voters needed, Mr. Bush said: ''I think he can. He ought to say so.''
 A Milosevic move on Montenegro, if it comes, could be intensely troublesome for President Clinton -- and Vice President Al Gore. It would be difficult to find a legal basis for military intervention, given the fact that Montenegro is still formally a part of Yugoslavia. In 1992 Mr. Kucan urged the American secretary of state, James Baker, to help the Yugoslav republics become independent peacefully. But President George Bush wanted to discourage the breakup of the Soviet Union, so Mr. Baker told Mr. Milosevic that we favored preserving Yugoslavia. Mr. Milosevic took that as a green light for his savage assaults on Croatia and Bosnia.
 Re ''Moguls Rattled by Gore's Choice of Critic of Entertainment Industry'' (news article, Aug. 11): Re ''Moguls Rattled by Gore's Choice of Critic of Entertainment Industry'' (news article, Aug. 11):
 Andy Spahn, Mr. Geffen's chief political aide, said Mr. Geffen had made clear from the beginning that he would help bring the convention to Los Angeles but intended to direct his fund-raising and contribution efforts to the actual electing of Democrats, beginning with Vice President Al Gore.
 Frederick Willman letter responds to Aug 11 editorial; urges Al Gore to put campaign finance reform at top of his acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention Al Gore has a splendid opportunity to use the Clintons' hustle for money to put campaign finance reform at the top of his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention. Both parties have been corrupted by the ceaseless, demeaning hunt for cash, and without reform, Mr. Gore can argue that his presidential agenda will be vulnerable to sabotage by corporate interests. Al Gore has a splendid opportunity to use the Clintons' hustle for money to put campaign finance reform at the top of his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention. Both parties have been corrupted by the ceaseless, demeaning hunt for cash, and without reform, Mr. Gore can argue that his presidential agenda will be vulnerable to sabotage by corporate interests. By giving vivid examples of how the influence of money has stolen the vote from Americans and by promising to restore dignity to the political process, Mr. Gore would have a ''story'' for his campaign that goes beyond the uninspiring theme of continuing prosperity and trump George W. Bush's promise to ''change the tone'' of Washington politics.
 Cheney's Retirement Payout Set  Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential candidate, is expected to receive an early retirement package worth an estimated $20 million when he officially steps down next Wednesday as chairman and chief executive of Halliburton, according to people who have reviewed the deal. The Halliburton board approved the package in Dallas on July 20, five days before Gov. George W. Bush announced his selection of Mr. Cheney, 59, as his running mate. [A1.]
 Christopher P Edelson letter responds to Douglas MacKinnon Aug 11 Op-Ed article; holds that his attempt to reassure us that George W Bush is not recent convert to notion of racial inclusiveness avoids or ignores some questions that beg to be answered Douglas MacKinnon's attempt to reassure us that George W. Bush is not a recent convert to the notion of racial inclusiveness avoids or ignores some questions that beg to be answered. Douglas MacKinnon's attempt to reassure us that George W. Bush is not a recent convert to the notion of racial inclusiveness avoids or ignores some questions that beg to be answered. If Mr. Bush has been interested in getting the Republicans to reach out to minorities since 1987 or 1988, how has he translated this idea into action? During this campaign season, some of Mr. Bush's most glaring missteps suggest clumsiness on the minority issue -- for example, his appearance at Bob Jones University and his passive stance regarding the flying of the Confederate flag over the South Carolina Statehouse. Second, Mr. MacKinnon tells us that he worked for Lee Atwater, the Bush campaign manager in 1988. This was a campaign notorious for playing the race card. If Mr. Bush was so committed to inclusiveness in 1987 and 1988, did he tell his father what he thought about Willie Horton?
 Aug 11 article about Al Gore's earliest political campaign misspelled newspaper on which he worked before deciding to seek office; it is Tennessean A front-page article yesterday about Al Gore's earliest political campaign gave a misspelled name at several points for the newspaper on which he worked before deciding to seek office. It is The Tennessean, in Nashville, not Tennesseean. A front-page article yesterday about Al Gore's earliest political campaign gave a misspelled name at several points for the newspaper on which he worked before deciding to seek office. It is The Tennessean, in Nashville, not Tennesseean.
 Halliburton Co agrees to let its former chmn Dick Cheney retire with package worth estimated $20 million; informed sources say company approved arrangement on July 20, five days before Gov George W Bush annouced his selection of Cheney as his running mate; deal allows Cheney to avoid potentially costly aspect of his employment contract, which said he would forfeit some of his compensation if he retired before age 62 without board's permission; Cheney photo (M) The board of the Halliburton Company, which is based in Dallas, approved the arrangements on July 20, five days before Gov. George W. Bush announced his selection of Mr. Cheney as his running mate. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, rejected that view. ''America is best served when good people from the private sector are willing to return to the public sector,'' Mr. Fleischer said.
 Rep Ken Lucas of Kentucky, one of most conservative Democrats in Congress, says he will not vote for Vice Pres Al Gore at Democratic National Convention and might not support ticket in Nov (S) SAYING NO TO GORE -- Representative Ken Lucas of Kentucky, one of the most conservative Democrats in Congress, said yesterday that he would not vote for Vice President Al Gore at the Democratic National Convention next week and might not support the ticket in November. Mr. Lucas, a freshman congressman from a traditionally Republican district, disagrees with Mr. Gore on such issues as abortion, gun control and tobacco policy. ''Personally, I like Al Gore and I think he made an excellent choice in Joe Lieberman as his running mate, but these are issues I feel very strongly about,'' Mr. Lucas said. Since he has been in Congress, Mr. Lucas has refused to greet either President Clinton or Mr. Gore when they have come to the Cincinnati area, which is just across the state line from his district. SAYING NO TO GORE -- Representative Ken Lucas of Kentucky, one of the most conservative Democrats in Congress, said yesterday that he would not vote for Vice President Al Gore at the Democratic National Convention next week and might not support the ticket in November. Mr. Lucas, a freshman congressman from a traditionally Republican district, disagrees with Mr. Gore on such issues as abortion, gun control and tobacco policy. ''Personally, I like Al Gore and I think he made an excellent choice in Joe Lieberman as his running mate, but these are issues I feel very strongly about,'' Mr. Lucas said. Since he has been in Congress, Mr. Lucas has refused to greet either President Clinton or Mr. Gore when they have come to the Cincinnati area, which is just across the state line from his district.
 Bush Challenges Gore  Gov. George W. Bush called on Vice President Al Gore to emphatically state his disapproval of President Clinton's sexual conduct in office and to send a clear message that he would maintain a high level of integrity if elected president. Bush Challenges Gore  Gov. George W. Bush called on Vice President Al Gore to emphatically state his disapproval of President Clinton's sexual conduct in office and to send a clear message that he would maintain a high level of integrity if elected president.
 Rep Loretta Sanchez, yielding to pressure from Vice Pres Al Gore and other Democratic leaders, agrees to move Hispanic fund-raising event from Playboy mansion in Los Angeles to Universal Studios (S) Yielding to pressure from Vice President Al Gore and other Democratic Party leaders, Representative Loretta Sanchez tonight agreed to move a Hispanic fund-raising event from the Playboy Mansion to Universal Studios. Yielding to pressure from Vice President Al Gore and other Democratic Party leaders, Representative Loretta Sanchez tonight agreed to move a Hispanic fund-raising event from the Playboy Mansion to Universal Studios.
 ON THE SCREEN -- With ''Hail to the Chief'' playing, stock film rolls of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore greeting and speaking to supporters at various public functions, followed by a video montage of Mr. Nader through the years.
 Vanity Fair contributing editor David Margolick Op-Ed article holds that Al Gore's selection of Sen Joseph Lieberman, Orthodox Jew, as his running mate will test limits of American tolerance (M) Take the initial reaction to the news. Jews everywhere were instantly on their telephones, friends calling friends, parents calling children, children calling parents, all prompted by the same reactions: joy, yes, but also disbelief. We had been assuming that Mr. Lieberman was, like another member of Mr. Gore's ''short list,'' Gov. Jean Shaheen of New Hampshire, mere window dressing to humor a key Democratic constituency. Even younger Jews had accepted that a Jew on a national political ticket was something they would never see. Our amazement at finding we had been wrong was a reminder -- a surprising, telling reminder -- that for all of our successes, we still felt like outsiders. Take the initial reaction to the news. Jews everywhere were instantly on their telephones, friends calling friends, parents calling children, children calling parents, all prompted by the same reactions: joy, yes, but also disbelief. We had been assuming that Mr. Lieberman was, like another member of Mr. Gore's ''short list,'' Gov. Jean Shaheen of New Hampshire, mere window dressing to humor a key Democratic constituency. Even younger Jews had accepted that a Jew on a national political ticket was something they would never see. Our amazement at finding we had been wrong was a reminder -- a surprising, telling reminder -- that for all of our successes, we still felt like outsiders.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign is not benefiting from strong economy, and his efforts to portray himself as superior steward of economy have fallen flat; graph (M) With less than three months until Election Day, Vice President Al Gore faces a crucial and perplexing question: why does his presidential campaign not seem to be benefiting from an economy that is as good as it gets? Heading into the Democratic National Convention next week in Los Angeles, Mr. Gore can point to an array of indicators that would seem to work powerfully to the advantage of the incumbent party in the White House, especially when today's economic conditions are compared with those that the Clinton administration inherited seven and a half years ago. With less than three months until Election Day, Vice President Al Gore faces a crucial and perplexing question: why does his presidential campaign not seem to be benefiting from an economy that is as good as it gets? Heading into the Democratic National Convention next week in Los Angeles, Mr. Gore can point to an array of indicators that would seem to work powerfully to the advantage of the incumbent party in the White House, especially when today's economic conditions are compared with those that the Clinton administration inherited seven and a half years ago. It may be too early to count the economy out as a big factor in Mr. Gore's favor. But so far, prosperity's glow has done little for him. Not only has he trailed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in nearly every national poll for months, but his efforts to portray himself as a superior steward of the economy have also fallen flat. A New York Times/CBS News Poll last month found that 75 percent of voters said they believed Mr. Gore was likely to keep the economy strong if elected president, compared with 71 percent for Mr. Bush, a statistical dead heat. Asked which candidate would do a better job of managing the economy, respondents in a Business Week/Harris Poll last month favored Mr. Bush by 51 percent to 33 percent. ''At the moment, the economy is not cutting for Gore as much as I would like,'' said Al From, president of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group of centrist Democrats. Political analysts and officials of both parties said Mr. Gore might have hurt himself to a degree by failing to stick to a simple, consistent message about the economy, especially during the spring, when he veered into issues like the Elian Gonzalez case. And they said Mr. Bush had artfully tried to shift the debate from who gets credit for prosperity to what should be done with it. But they said the real difficulty for Mr. Gore might be that times had  been good for so long that voters took prosperity for granted. ''Al Gore's biggest problem on the economy is that this recovery has been going on much longer than any previous recovery,'' said Robert B. Reich, who served as labor secretary in President Clinton's first term. ''It's become almost background noise, and people assume the good economy will just keep on rolling.'' Not only do voters show little willingness to grant credit to Mr. Gore, analysts said, but the electorate also does not see either candidate as having much control over an economy that seems increasingly driven by technological advances, globalization and other forces beyond the control of any administration. ''In the economy we're in now, the public doesn't buy the idea that the economy is good because of the Clinton-Gore administration, and they'd be just as disinclined to credit the Republican Congress,'' said Mickey Edwards, a former Republican congressman from Oklahoma who is now a professor at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. Some analysts -- as well as Mr. Gore's aides -- point to the last time a sitting vice president ran for president with a strong economy at his back -- in 1988, when Governor Bush's father faced Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts. For most of the summer, Mr. Bush was behind despite nearly six years of steady economic expansion and an unemployment rate that had been halved, to 5.4 percent, since 1982. A Gallup poll in June 1988 showed Mr. Dukakis ahead by 52 percent to 38 percent, and when asked which candidate would do a better job keeping the country prosperous, voters ranked the candidates evenly at around 40 percent. But by November, Mr. Bush had a 52-to-35 advantage on economic management in the Gallup poll, and he won the election comfortably. Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager for communications, said most voters had not yet focused on the election, and that when they did, they would conclude that Mr. Gore had supported and shaped the policies that had brought the economy to where it was and that his approach was more prudent than his rival's. And he said Mr. Gore would seek to link Governor Bush's economic plans to those of his father, who presided over a recession that contributed to his defeat in 1992. ''People in the end will focus on the economy as the most important issue, and in the end will focus on whether we're on the right economic track and whether they are better off than they were four or eight years ago,'' Mr. Fabiani said. ''The answers to those questions are good for Gore and bad for Bush.'' If anything, Mr. Gore is emphasizing the economy more as the campaign progresses, using a message that has two distinct components. One is unabashedly populist, and is aimed in part at the party's liberal base and at people who do not feel that they have fully benefited from the boom. It is built around the assertion -- challenged by Republicans -- that Mr. Bush's economic platform amounts to tax cuts for the wealthy, an overhaul of Social Security that would leave the retirement security of working people at risk and deference to powerful special interests like oil and pharmaceutical companies.
 ''Ultimately, the White House is responsible, just as I am responsible for what happens to our state forests here in Montana,'' said Governor Racicot, who is regarded as a close ally of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Democratic National Committee ask Rep Loretta Sanchez to scuttle fund-raiser at Playboy Mansion in Los Angeles; photo of Gore campaigning in Bridgeport, Pa (M) Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman came to this small factory town outside Philadelphia today to praise working women. They visited Little Souls, a company owned by women that makes handcrafted dolls, where they called for equal pay and expanded day care benefits. Both paid elaborate homage to their own wives, daughters and mothers. ''When my sister and I were growing up,'' Mr. Gore told a small audience made up mostly of women, ''there was never any doubt in our minds that men and women were equal, if not more so.'' Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman came to this small factory town outside Philadelphia today to praise working women. They visited Little Souls, a company owned by women that makes handcrafted dolls, where they called for equal pay and expanded day care benefits. Both paid elaborate homage to their own wives, daughters and mothers. ''When my sister and I were growing up,'' Mr. Gore told a small audience made up mostly of women, ''there was never any doubt in our minds that men and women were equal, if not more so.'' Unmentioned, though, was the one topic that had their audience buzzing this morning: aggressive efforts by Mr. Gore and the Democratic National Committee to scuttle a Democratic congresswoman's fund-raiser next Tuesday at the Playboy Mansion in Los Angeles. Several women here described the site as the sleazy epitome of a society that treats women not as equals but as sex symbols to be exploited and degraded. But on a day when the Gore campaign had hoped to highlight proposals for helping working women, it instead found itself facing questions about values, its tolerance for sexually explicit publications and campaign contributions from Playboy executives. ''They sure do enjoy that Playboy money,'' said Jim Nicholson, the Republican national chairman, all too happy to portray Mr. Gore and his campaign aides as morally selective for accepting those contributions  even as they criticized Ms. Sanchez. Today, before word of the congresswoman's reversal began to circulate, Mr. Gore said in a Fox television interview that he supported the action of the party chairman, Joe Andrew, in taking away her speaking role at the Democratic National Convention because of her earlier refusal to move her event. And during the appearance here at Little Souls, Mr. Lieberman pointedly emphasized that a Gore-Lieberman White House would work to help families teach strong moral values to their children. But the Gore campaign's efforts to quickly put the Playboy matter to rest were complicated by its refusal thus far to return a $1,000 campaign contribution from Hugh Hefner, Playboy's founder, and a $500 contribution from his daughter, Christie Hefner, the chief executive of Playboy Enterprises. ''Apples and oranges,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's campaign press secretary, when asked the difference between holding a fund-raiser at the mansion and accepting campaign contributions from Playboy executives. The Hefners' contributions, he said, are only a tiny fraction of the money raised by the Gore campaign, while the fund-raiser is a major event for some 600 guests. Richard Rosenzweig, executive vice president of Playboy Enterprises, defended the company in an interview, saying it was as ''American as apple pie'' and asserting that Mr. Gore and other party leaders were ''following political correctness right out the window.'' According to campaign records, Playboy executives have made several contributions to Democratic candidates. Mr. Rosenzweig contributed $500 to the Clinton-Gore campaign in 1996, and another $500 to Geraldine A. Ferraro's 1998 Senate campaign in New York. Helen Isaacson, a senior vice president for Playboy, donated $500 to Bill Bradley's presidential campaign this year. In 1996, Ms. Hefner donated $250 to John D. Dingell, a veteran Democratic congressman from Michigan.
 As a number of Democrats have noted in recent days, Mrs. Clinton has set up a more high-profile schedule for herself than has Al Gore, who will be, presumably, the focus of attention of the presidential nominating convention. But the more apt comparison may be to her opponent, Representative Rick A.  Lazio, and what he did -- or rather did not do -- at the Philadelphia convention last week. And there were some flashes of humor tonight. She prepared her own version of one of Mr. Leno's standing features, called Jay Walking, in which Mr. Leno stops people on the street, shows them pictures of famous political leaders, like George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, and asks them to identify the leaders.
 Adam Clymer, in Political Memo column, holds that five-party system of Democrats, Republicans, Greens and two Reform parties is helping Gov George W Bush in important ways; maintains that fracture in Reform Party has dampened whatever hopes ex-Republican Patrick J Buchanan had for weakening Bush from right; says energetic campaign by Green Party's Ralph Nader is helping Bush maintain his lead over Vice Pres Al Gore; photo (M) The five-party system of Democrats, Republicans, Greens and two Reform parties is something new in American politics, and right now it is helping Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in important ways. The fracture in the Reform Party has dampened whatever slim hopes the ex-Republican Patrick J. Buchanan had for weakening Mr. Bush from the right. And the energetic campaign by the Green Party's Ralph Nader, at least for the moment, is helping Mr. Bush maintain his lead over Vice President Al Gore. The five-party system of Democrats, Republicans, Greens and two Reform parties is something new in American politics, and right now it is helping Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in important ways. The fracture in the Reform Party has dampened whatever slim hopes the ex-Republican Patrick J. Buchanan had for weakening Mr. Bush from the right. And the energetic campaign by the Green Party's Ralph Nader, at least for the moment, is helping Mr. Bush maintain his lead over Vice President Al Gore. Of course, the election is months away, and the fluctuations in the polls reinforce the impression that it is far from the minds of most Americans, even those who state a preference. And Mr. Buchanan and Mr. Nader have a potential for also hurting Mr. Bush -- Mr. Buchanan with social conservatives and Mr. Nader with die-hard campaign reform voters, the old John McCain crowd. But not yet. Remember last fall, when Mr. Buchanan's romancing of the Reform Party seemed to threaten Mr. Bush? Well, his need to reinvent himself as an authentic Reform Party man distanced him from his core anti-abortion, anti-homosexual, anti-immigrant base. And even though Mr. Buchanan tried to return to his first love on Thursday with a statement of social value principles, Mr. Bush has used the last 10 months to fill the conservatives' dance card, and stir their dreams of Supreme Court justices who would reverse Roe v. Wade. Then there is Mr. Nader, ranging from 5 to 9 points in national polls and thus plainly able to tip some battleground states like Michigan, Washington, Wisconsin and maybe California to Mr. Bush by draining support from Mr. Gore. Of course, Mr. Nader and his backers say that is not their purpose. And Mr. Gore and his backers say that will not be the result. But the Gore folks are whistling past the graveyard. The threat to Mr. Gore is the real meaning of the Nader campaign. Right now there is no question that two-thirds or more of Mr. Nader's backers, in state after state, are coming out of the vice president's potential support. And some Gore backers outside his campaign recognize the problem. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the president of the Water Keeper Alliance and a lawyer for the Natural Resources Defense Council, wrote in an Op-Ed article in The New York Times on Thursday, ''A vote for Mr. Nader is a vote for Mr. Bush, and environmentalists who join his personal crusade risk marginalizing the conservation movement.'' Second, he says that while Mr. Gore might be slightly better than Mr. Bush on the environment and a couple of other issues, the differences are too small to matter. Scholars of third parties, and the Gore campaign, argued that such candidacies always fade. Representative John B. Anderson of Illinois fell to 6 percent from 15 percent in 1980. Henry A. Wallace declined similarly in 1948. A Gore strategist agreed, saying: ''I don't see Nader being like Perot in being able to communicate. He won't spend $56 million.'' And the strategist argued, ''As people get to know Gore better, I think it's going to make it a lot easier to see him as someone who fights for people and will be on their side.'' Mr. Nader sometimes argues that even if Mr. Gore loses, the Green Party's efforts will help elect more Democrats to the House, and make Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri the next speaker. And while ads for which little time was bought, like the Willie Horton commercial to promote Mr. Bush's father in 1988, have sometimes become effective by being repeated on news programs, there is no indication that will happen with Mr. Nader's commercials. The only real money available for the outsider candidates is the $12.6 million for the Reform Party. Even if Mr. Buchanan gets it, the Bush campaign dismisses him as meaningless. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said: ''The sun has set on Pat Buchanan's candidacy and will not rise again. Pat Buchanan is old news.''
 Joseph I. Lieberman, the United States senator who on Monday became Al Gore's vice-presidential running mate, has confirmed his initial preference to continue his Senate re-election campaign, his spokesman said today. The decision to stay in the Senate race was made carefully, after discussions with Mr. Gore and other Democratic leaders in Washington and Connecticut, said Dan Gerstein, Mr. Lieberman's press secretary. Joseph I. Lieberman, the United States senator who on Monday became Al Gore's vice-presidential running mate, has confirmed his initial preference to continue his Senate re-election campaign, his spokesman said today. The decision to stay in the Senate race was made carefully, after discussions with Mr. Gore and other Democratic leaders in Washington and Connecticut, said Dan Gerstein, Mr. Lieberman's press secretary. The decision is significant because it means that a Gore-Lieberman victory in November would allow Connecticut's Republican governor,  John G. Rowland, to appoint someone from his own party to fill Mr. Lieberman's Senate seat. Such a move would undermine the drive by Democrats to retake control of the Senate, where they are now a 46-to-54 minority. If Mr. Lieberman had decided to pull out of the Senate race, figuring another Democrat would win it anyway, he would face the specter of being out of elective office, should he and Mr. Gore lose the presidential election. On the other hand, should Mr. Gore win the White House, Mr. Lieberman would have to sacrifice his valuable Senate seat to a Republican chosen by Mr. Rowland. That person would serve until 2002, when the next statewide elections are held. ''Senator Lieberman has been so extraordinarily effective and distinguished in the Senate that I would hate to lose him if the Gore ticket is not successful,'' Mr. Blumenthal said today. ''There is no other way to guarantee that he would be there if he's not vice president.'' Since Monday, when Mr. Gore chose Mr. Lieberman, the junior Senator from New Haven, to be his running mate, there has been near-constant debate about whether Mr. Lieberman should give up the Senate and put all his efforts into his vice-presidential bid. Connecticut Republicans have begun portraying Mr. Lieberman's vow to stay the Senate race as proof that Democrats do not believe they can beat their Republican rival, Texas Governor George W. Bush. ''It sends a signal nationally that he believes Gore's chances of winning are not good,'' Robert Ward, the minority leader in the state House, told The Associated Press. Mr. Gerstein of the Lieberman campaign denied any hedging on Mr. Lieberman's part. ''This is in no way a sign of a lack of confidence in the Gore ticket,'' he said. ''The governor has said he's not going to spend any time thinking about that because he's going to be campaigning for Governor Bush,'' Mr. Pagani said.
 Just over a half-century ago the Dixiecrat walkout kept Democrats in front of their radios. Four years later, Republicans were riveted by the televised nomination battle between Dwight Eisenhower and Robert Taft. The last presidential convention that kept delegates and television viewers on the edge of their seats was in 1976, when an interloper from California, Ronald Reagan, nearly edged out the incumbent president, Gerald Ford, for the nomination. In that year about 32 percent of American households watched on one of only a few channels. Now, with more than 60 channels available to most Americans, George W. Bush's big night with his grand finale speech reached about half that percentage of homes. Just over a half-century ago the Dixiecrat walkout kept Democrats in front of their radios. Four years later, Republicans were riveted by the televised nomination battle between Dwight Eisenhower and Robert Taft. The last presidential convention that kept delegates and television viewers on the edge of their seats was in 1976, when an interloper from California, Ronald Reagan, nearly edged out the incumbent president, Gerald Ford, for the nomination. In that year about 32 percent of American households watched on one of only a few channels. Now, with more than 60 channels available to most Americans, George W. Bush's big night with his grand finale speech reached about half that percentage of homes.
 Vice Pres Al Gore is trying to distance himself from Pres Clinton and to demonstrate that he is his own man, worthy of presidency in his own right; photo (M) For months now, Al Gore has been searching for the proper degree of separation from Bill Clinton. He has used measured words and occasional policy differences both to try to distance himself from the president and to demonstrate that he is his own man, worthy of the presidency in his own right. For months now, Al Gore has been searching for the proper degree of separation from Bill Clinton. He has used measured words and occasional policy differences both to try to distance himself from the president and to demonstrate that he is his own man, worthy of the presidency in his own right. But in an ultimate twist, it seems that Mr. Gore may have to rely on the very man he is distancing himself from to make his case. The Gore campaign is planning a multistage separation process over the next few days, although there are still internal debates over some details and how explicit Mr. Clinton should be in talking about his personal behavior and impeachment when he addresses the convention on Monday night. That process may have begun prematurely with Mr. Clinton's comments on Thursday, when he said in a lengthy public confessional that voters should not hold Mr. Gore accountable for Mr. Clinton's sins. Gore advisers have been frustrated over the months with some of Mr. Clinton's moves that were intended to be helpful but often upstaged Mr. Gore. But they said today that Mr. Clinton's most recent comments could help the vice president -- because they expected the light to shine brightly on Mr. Clinton at this point anyway. ''We have known for the last four months that the first few days of the ramp-up into our convention was in large measure going to be about Bill Clinton and the last eight years,'' said a top Gore adviser. ''To do it any other way would be frankly ungracious and not politically smart.'' But such is the entangled relationship between the president and vice president -- and such is the admiration for Mr. Clinton's political skills -- that questions were raised about whether the White House and the Gore campaign had actually planned Mr. Clinton's remarks as a way for Mr. Clinton to give Mr. Gore some breathing space, even if they dredged up the unpleasantness that led to the impeachment. Both camps said no. Joe Lockhart, the president's spokesman, said Mr. Clinton arranged the interview with his pastor and did not clear it with the Gore campaign. The Gore adviser said the same thing. ''I have no idea whether Clinton's remarks were spontaneous or premeditated,'' he said. ''But they were not coordinated.'' But much of the distancing dance that will take place in the next few days has been planned. Mr. Gore has given Mr. Clinton the starring prime-time role at the convention on Monday. Both sides are envisioning not only a celebration of Mr. Clinton's glory years but a clear signal that his problems are of his own making and should not be used against Mr. Gore. The Gore campaign said Mr. Clinton will not be so explicit at the convention, and White House officials agreed, adding that Mr. Clinton used the forum on Thursday as more of a pre-emptive cleansing so he would not have to do that at the convention. In any case, Gore advisers are focused on other things. ''Clinton has great job performance ratings and terrible personal ratings,'' one aide said. ''The whole trick here is to try to be associated with the job performance.'' On Tuesday, a symbolic passing of the torch from Mr. Clinton to Mr. Gore has been arranged in Michigan. The Clinton Question has been swirling around the Gore candidacy for months, and Mr. Gore has dealt with it in various ways. He began his campaign in June 1999 with his strongest comments to date about Mr. Clinton's affair, but he seemed genuinely surprised along the campaign trail to be asked about the president. Finally, he figured out a fairly formulaic answer, which he has more or less followed for months. He told audiences that his relationship with Mr. Clinton consisted of four parts. As he put it in January to New Hampshire Public Radio: ''First of all, we're friends, and that friendship is genuine. Secondly, I have been critical of the personal mistake that the president made, which I've been asked about from time to time in this campaign. Third, I have fought alongside the president for this strong economy and for the other improvements that we've seen during the Clinton/Gore administration. And fourth, I have to win this race on my own.'' Gore advisers acknowledge that this is an important week for the Clinton/Gore relationship. And they acknowledge that Mr. Gore's selection of a running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who was the first Democratic senator to openly chastise Mr. Clinton for his behavior, was part of the larger process of trying to inoculate himself against Mr. Clinton's behavior. For his part, Mr. Clinton, who arrived in Los Angeles today for Mr. Gore's nominating convention, is charting his own course in how a president ought to hand off the baton. He has already broken with the tradition of past presidents who arrived just as the conventions for their vice presidents were set to begin. While Mr. Clinton is attending several galas in his honor, aides said the president would spend much of his time polishing his speech. Mr. Clinton intends to give a valedictory address that is shorter than former President Reagan's 53-minute speech in New Orleans but just as focused on making the case for 12 years of one-party rule. As is the custom, the White House has shared early drafts of the speech with Mr. Gore. White House officials have told the Gore campaign there will be no surprises. Reviewing the hubbub over the day and Mr. Clinton's comments, Gore advisers said all the media's roiling and roar over the Clinton-Gore relationship today was nothing new, at least for the Gore campaign. Said one, ''It's just another day at the office.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore's selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as his running mate has dimmed Democrats hopes of regaining control of Senate; Connecticut Gov John G Rowland, Republican, would pick Lieberman's replacement if he is elected vice president (M) However much the selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman has helped the presidential prospects of Vice President Al Gore, it has dimmed the Democrats' flickering hopes of regaining the Senate. Those hopes shot up when Georgia's former Democratic governor Zell Miller was named to replace Senator Paul Coverdell, a Republican, who died last month. Mr. Miller is generally conceded to be a sure winner in November. That meant the Senate had 54 Republicans and 46 Democrats, and so the minority had to gain five seats for a clear majority, or just four if Mr. Gore won and his vice president could cast a tie-breaking vote. However much the selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman has helped the presidential prospects of Vice President Al Gore, it has dimmed the Democrats' flickering hopes of regaining the Senate. Those hopes shot up when Georgia's former Democratic governor Zell Miller was named to replace Senator Paul Coverdell, a Republican, who died last month. Mr. Miller is generally conceded to be a sure winner in November. That meant the Senate had 54 Republicans and 46 Democrats, and so the minority had to gain five seats for a clear majority, or just four if Mr. Gore won and his vice president could cast a tie-breaking vote. If the Gore-Lieberman ticket loses but Mr. Lieberman, as expected, wins re-election to the Senate, the Democrats would still need to win, elsewhere, five more seats than they lost, for a total of 51. If they had only 50, Dick Cheney, as vice president, would break a tie against them. Connecticut Republicans have taunted Mr. Lieberman to withdraw to show his confidence in a Gore victory. But he is not taking the bait. Mr. Daschle had been given the same misinformation about Connecticut law. He got it from Mr. Gore himself. Mr. Daschle had spoken publicly about his hope that Mr. Gore would not choose a senator from a state with a Republican governor. But on Monday afternoon, Mr. Daschle said in an interview that Mr. Gore had told him that very day that Connecticut law called for a special election early next year. The Gore campaign did not respond when asked how Mr. Gore happened to misinform Mr. Daschle. Jim Jordan, the executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, said that if the Gore-Lieberman ticket looked like a winner in late October, Mr. Lieberman would quit the Senate race then.  Mr. Jordan said that the state's Democratic attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, could win the seat even with only 10 days to campaign.
 Vice Pres Al Gore invites former Pres Jimmy Carter to Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; Carter, who has had strained relations with Pres Clinton, did not attend 1996 Democratic convention (M) On Aug. 2, when the Republicans were paying tribute to their three living former presidents, Ford, Reagan and Bush, with brief videos, Vice President Al Gore was watching intently. On Aug. 2, when the Republicans were paying tribute to their three living former presidents, Ford, Reagan and Bush, with brief videos, Vice President Al Gore was watching intently. Moved by the films, Mr. Gore called the sole living former Democratic president, Jimmy Carter, the next morning and invited him to the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. Mr. Carter, who has had strained relations with President Clinton and who spent the 1996 Democratic convention vacationing in Montana, had been wavering about attending next week's event. But when Mr. Gore called, he said yes. (An aide to Mr. Carter said the former president had a good relationship with Mr. Gore.) Each night, they will hold carefully staged panels featuring people Mr. Gore has met during the campaign -- some of them just happen to be Democratic delegates -- talking about the big issues, like health care, crime and the economy.  ''The Gore campaign has been reacting to everything Governor Bush has done since the beginning of the campaign,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate. ''It's not surprising they might be following our lead on the convention as well.'' But in another marked contrast to the Republican program, Congressional Democrats will have prominent roles in their convention. In Philadelphia, the Republicans gave few prime-time speaking slots to their Congressional leaders, saying they were trying to leave the limelight to Mr. Bush. The Democrats contend the Bush campaign was trying to distance itself from an unpopular Republican Congressional majority. Not so with Mr. Gore and the Congressional Democrats, they say.
 Fikry B Salib letter disputes Elma Gonzalez Aug 5 letter criticizing Gov George W Bush Ms. Gonzalez criticizes George W. Bush, who also grew up in West Texas, for declaring that ''anybody could succeed, and everybody deserved a chance.'' It seems to me that achieving the distinguished position of professor in the department of organismic biology, ecology and evolution at the University of California at Los Angeles, which is Ms. Gonzalez's occupation, makes a great argument in support of Mr. Bush's statement.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column disputes contention of political press that Al Gore made bold move by choosing Sen Joseph Lieberman, Orthodox Jew, as his running mate (M) So righteous, so brave, so bold. The verdict is in: Al Gore is the best thing to happen to the Jews since Oskar Schindler. Such has been the ecstatic cry of the media bloviators once the vice president showed the guts, the courage and, yes (all together now!), the chutzpah to select a Jew -- an Orthodox Jew, yet -- as his running mate. Never mind that Alan Greenspan and Robert Rubin have been far more powerful than any vice president, Jewish or not, will ever be. Never mind that the also-rans on Mr. Gore's uninspiring list of potential running mates were of unambiguously lesser caliber than Joseph Lieberman. So righteous, so brave, so bold. The verdict is in: Al Gore is the best thing to happen to the Jews since Oskar Schindler. Such has been the ecstatic cry of the media bloviators once the vice president showed the guts, the courage and, yes (all together now!), the chutzpah to select a Jew -- an Orthodox Jew, yet -- as his running mate. Never mind that Alan Greenspan and Robert Rubin have been far more powerful than any vice president, Jewish or not, will ever be. Never mind that the also-rans on Mr. Gore's uninspiring list of potential running mates were of unambiguously lesser caliber than Joseph Lieberman. No matter. For a political press desperate for a new story line, here it is: The Republicans may have Charlton Heston, but in the newly daring Mr. Gore the Democrats at last have their own Moses, who just might lead them to the Promised Land in November after all. According to one account, a presidential candidate considered ''dull, cautious and incapable of stirring emotional loyalty even among his own supporters'' has with this surprise pick jump-started his idling campaign. (Actually, the quote comes from The Times in July 1984, after Walter Mondale anointed Geraldine Ferraro, but it can stand for the collective wisdom of August 2000.) Yes, Mr. Gore made his choice in defiance of lethal anti-Jewish bigots on the American fringe, from Sacramento to Crown Heights to cyberspace. And yes, polls say that 12 percent of the country is still anti-Semitic. But doesn't Pat Buchanan have those votes sewed up anyway? I defer to a recent Hebrew school grad in my household, 16-year-old Simon: ''Gore gets to prove himself risky by doing something completely unrisky -- picking a middle-of-the-road candidate like himself.'' His opinion was echoed by another Jew I canvassed, Woody Allen, who finds the fact that ''people are knocked out of their chairs'' by Mr. Lieberman's nomination ''ridiculous.'' He adds: ''It's an embarrassment for the country that it took to the year 2000'' for a Jew to be on the ticket. ''Everyone is saying how tolerant the country is -- they settle for so little!'' Conservative Republicans, meanwhile, seem to think that one size yarmulke fits all -- that all Orthodox Jews, Mr. Lieberman included, can be patronizingly stereotyped as cultural reactionaries with views closer to Jerry Falwell's than Mr. Gore's. Writing for The Wall Street Journal, Peggy Noonan celebrated Mr. Lieberman as a blood brother to such right-wing Orthodox Jews as Dr. Laura Schlessinger. Yet the Connecticut senator shares few of the views of the anti-gay, pro-life Dr. Laura (or others named by Ms. Noonan) and is in fact to the left of the Clinton-Gore administration on ''don't ask, don't tell,'' which he feels should be scrapped so that gays can serve openly in the military. Mr. Lieberman's cultural conservatism mainly consists of throwing occasional self-promotional press conferences with William Bennett to rail impotently against Jerry Springer. The beauty of the Lieberman nomination for Democrats is that it calls the Republicans' bluff on their new ''inclusiveness.'' George W. Bush may have put minorities onstage in Philadelphia, but Mr. Gore put one on the ticket. Better still for the Democrats, compassionate conservatism has such a strict code of political correctness that the Bush forces, already criticized by Jewish groups for the governor's official declaration of a ''Jesus Day'' in Texas this year, will never dare pick on a Jewish candidate. When Mr. Lieberman eloquently defended a woman's right to choose a so-called partial birth abortion on ''Larry King Live'' this week, you didn't hear any of the usual Republican cries of ''infanticide.'' Instead the G.O.P. tried to argue that Mr. Lieberman, who had a 95 percent voting record with the liberal Americans for Democratic Action last year, was a closet Republican. Now that's chutzpah. But just as the press gives Mr. Gore excessively high marks for doing the politically expedient thing in picking Mr. Lieberman, so it oversells Mr. Lieberman's value to Mr. Gore. The conventional media wisdom that the first Democratic senator to moralize against Monicagate will now inoculate Mr. Gore from Clinton fatigue and Clinton sleaze is beside the point, even if it were true. ''We're not choosing a preacher, we're choosing a president,'' said Mr. Gore in 1988, when deflecting Jesse Jackson in the primaries. Despite the biblical pandering by both tickets this year, the same still holds. If puritanical preaching against Bill Clinton's sins is such a sure winner, why did the Bush campaign lock Henry Hyde in an attic in Philadelphia last week? Why, at the height of G.O.P. moralizing against Monicagate in 1998, did the Democrats gain seats in the election? The same Washington geniuses who predicted -- with stunning unanimity and inaccuracy -- that voters would punish Mr. Clinton's party in '98 predict the same fate for Mr. Gore this year. And they're probably wrong again. Now, as then, voters dislike sanctimonious public scolds, regardless of faith or party, as much as they dislike public scoundrels. Now, as then, they know when Mr. Clinton is on the ballot and when he is not, and don't regard all Democrats as his surrogates. The real problem for Mr. Gore this year isn't Clinton fatigue -- it's Gore fatigue. And you feel it almost every time he opens his mouth. Whether in small groups or large, on the record or off, the hyper-cautious vice president has trouble speaking plainly and candidly when trying to further his views or his candidacy. Most Americans recognize that he is both far more experienced in and knowledgeable about government than Governor Bush. Few confuse his private life with Bill Clinton's. Polls show that Americans agree with Mr. Gore's positions on most issues and love the economy. But it all may be for naught for a candidate who not only tells you how to build a watch when you ask what time it is but is still talking after you've nodded off. A classic example was Mr. Gore's appearance on ''Meet the Press'' last month. Asked by Tim Russert for his visceral reaction to the photo of Elian Gonzalez at gunpoint, the vice president fudged (''I wasn't there, I didn't see exactly what happened'') and droned on in the impersonal legalese of Michael Dukakis's legendary debate flub. Simple requests for his judgments of Ralph Nader and Viktor Chernomyrdin yielded evasions like ''I don't really know him personally'' and ''I have no idea.'' Did Mr. Gore agree with the Supreme Court Boy Scouts decision handed down more than two weeks earlier? ''I haven't read the opinion.'' Worse, each of these non-answers was surrounded by yards of scripted boilerplate, obfuscation or equivocation, occasionally interrupted by attempts (thankfully foiled by Mr. Russert) to introduce charts. It's not good news for Democrats that Mr. Gore is said to be writing his own acceptance speech for next week. I wouldn't lose any sleep over it. If Mr. Gore loses, it's not going to be Mr. Lieberman's fault or Mr. Clinton's fault or some anti-Semitic cabal's fault but Mr. Gore's fault. And Mr. Lieberman will have proven himself the wisest guy on the ticket anyway, by not having given up his day job in the Senate to make the race.
 First, I have indicated that there are ''few major differences'' between the two parties, not that there is ''no difference between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush,'' as Mr. Kennedy wrote. First, I have indicated that there are ''few major differences'' between the two parties, not that there is ''no difference between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush,'' as Mr. Kennedy wrote. Second, I have never said that I would vote for George W. Bush, whom I have strongly criticized across the country, if forced to choose between him and Al Gore.  Indeed, I have never stated for whom I have ever voted or expect to vote since the 1960's, though it can be assumed that I will vote for the Green Party candidates this year.
