 GEORGE W. BUSH -- Portland, Ore.; Seattle  DICK CHENEY -- Holland, Mich.; Moline, Ill.  AL GORE -- Bridgeport, Pa.; Philadelphia; Detroit; New York; Pittsburgh  JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN -- With Mr. Gore in Bridgeport and Philadelphia GEORGE W. BUSH -- Portland, Ore.; Seattle  DICK CHENEY -- Holland, Mich.; Moline, Ill.  AL GORE -- Bridgeport, Pa.; Philadelphia; Detroit; New York; Pittsburgh  JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN -- With Mr. Gore in Bridgeport and Philadelphia
 Description of television advertisement launched by American Family Voices, group created by American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, attacking Gov George W Bush on health care and campaign financing issues; photos (M) The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, through a group it created called American Family Voices, has joined the political advertising wars with a 30-second television spot titled ''Invest.'' The advertisement takes George W. Bush to task for several decisions he has made as governor of Texas and tries to link them to large contributions to him and the Republican Party from the insurance, nursing home and drug industries. The slickly produced advertisement does not urge viewers to vote against Mr. Bush or for Vice President Al Gore, but asks them to call Mr. Bush's office or visit the sponsoring group's Web site. The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, through a group it created called American Family Voices, has joined the political advertising wars with a 30-second television spot titled ''Invest.'' The advertisement takes George W. Bush to task for several decisions he has made as governor of Texas and tries to link them to large contributions to him and the Republican Party from the insurance, nursing home and drug industries. The slickly produced advertisement does not urge viewers to vote against Mr. Bush or for Vice President Al Gore, but asks them to call Mr. Bush's office or visit the sponsoring group's Web site. PRODUCER -- Axelrod & Associates.  ON THE SCREEN -- A hand-held camera pans the confetti-strewn floor of a darkened arena after the Republican convention. The camera pauses at posters that list the size of campaign contributions from various industries to Mr. Bush and Republican committees. The spot closes with text giving the telephone number of Mr. Bush's office in Austin, Tex., and the Web address of American Family Voices. SCRIPT -- ''The convention's over,'' a narrator says.  ''And look who won. The insurance industry; they've invested millions in George W. Bush, who vetoed a patients' bill of rights in Texas. Nursing home operators; they've given over a hundred thousand to Bush, who weakened nursing home laws in Texas, while patient complaints doubled. The big drug companies; they've kicked in millions for Bush, who joined them in opposing guaranteed Medicare prescription coverage. Tell Bush when special interests win, America's families lose.'' ACCURACY -- The advertisement gives big numbers for industry contributions to Mr. Bush ($4.3 million from the insurance industry, $2.3 million from drug companies), but they include large soft-money donations to Republican Party committees and  smaller donations to the Bush campaign. The advertisement's other assertions are based on newspaper articles and are oversimplified but not false, although Mr. Bush has not opposed Medicare prescription drug coverage but only insisted that the benefit not be fully financed by taxpayers. SCORECARD -- With this spot, the labor movement and liberal interests are putting Mr. Bush and other Republicans on notice that they will conduct an aggressive negative campaign on economic issues this fall. Unions have budgeted millions of dollars for this and similar efforts that will support Democratic candidates around the country.
 CHENEYS STUMP IN OHIO  Dick Cheney and his wife, Lynne, visited an elementary school yesterday in Pickerington, Ohio, a largely Republican suburb of Columbus, to hammer home the importance of reading -- and Gov. George W. Bush's broader emphasis on education. ''The single most significant problem we face,'' Mr. Cheney said, ''is finding skilled, trained people to fill the jobs that are out there. But oftentimes our schools have failed us. What's the source of the failure? Lots of time the kids can't read. If we don't get those children reading by the third grade, all the evidence shows that it's very hard to get them back into the system and benefit from education.'' CHENEYS STUMP IN OHIO  Dick Cheney and his wife, Lynne, visited an elementary school yesterday in Pickerington, Ohio, a largely Republican suburb of Columbus, to hammer home the importance of reading -- and Gov. George W. Bush's broader emphasis on education. ''The single most significant problem we face,'' Mr. Cheney said, ''is finding skilled, trained people to fill the jobs that are out there. But oftentimes our schools have failed us. What's the source of the failure? Lots of time the kids can't read. If we don't get those children reading by the third grade, all the evidence shows that it's very hard to get them back into the system and benefit from education.'' Under Mr. Bush's plan, federal financing would be withheld if schools failed to meet state testing standards. Parents could then use that money to hire tutors, send their children to charter schools or pay tuition at private schools. CARDINAL WILL DELIVER INVOCATION AT CONVENTION  Cardinal Roger Mahony of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles, who denounced the 1998 political campaigns as disturbingly ''antilife,'' will deliver an invocation at the Democratic National Convention on Monday. Cardinal Mahony, 64, an increasingly influential member of the American Catholic hierarchy, accepted a surprise invitation this week from Vice President Al Gore's office, a spokesman for the archdiocese said yesterday. Days after the 1998 elections, Cardinal Mahony criticized candidates across the political spectrum for appearing to ''be engaged in a race to see who would go the extra mile in advancing policies that undermine the sanctity of life.'' MOYNIHAN WILL STAY HOME  New York's senior senator, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, 73, who is retiring, will miss the Democratic National Convention next week, preferring to spend time on his upstate farm with his two grandchildren and to work on his 19th book. Los Angeles, the site of the convention, is not really Mr. Moynihan's kind of town, according to Tony Bullock, the senator's chief of staff. Mr. Bullock added that the senator's plans did not reflect his feelings about the Gore-Lieberman ticket. Mr. Moynihan had endorsed Al Gore's primary opponent, Bill Bradley, and dismissed Mr. Gore as unelectable. After Mr. Bradley quit the race, Mr. Moynihan said Mr. Gore had evolved into an ''eminently electable'' candidate. The 500-acre Moynihan farm in Pindar's Corners is listed for sale. ''He's been to a lot of conventions,'' Mr. Bullock said. ''This is his last summer on the farm and he's got grandchildren to see.'' NADER WALKS THE LINE  Ralph Nader, the Green Party presidential nominee, walked the picket line with striking telephone workers in Falls Church, Va., yesterday, looking for votes and saying he was unconcerned that the strikers' union had already endorsed Al Gore. ''That's to be expected,'' said Mr. Nader, who joined Communication Workers of America employees who are on strike against Verizon Communications, the company formed by the merger of GTE and Bell Atlantic. ''At the rank-and-file level, it's open competition,'' he said. ''The other candidates will not even talk about these issues.'' Those issues include federal labor law and corporate influence on public policy, centerpieces of his campaign. Mr. Nader planned to discuss tort law today, calling for changes to make it easier for consumers to sue corporations and win damages.
 When Al Gore first ran for House of Representatives from Tennessee in 1976, his prospects were seen as slim, but Gore pulled off victory by a narrow margin, winning seat held by his father and creating in process the basis of his own campaign style, strategy, and ideology; 1976 campaign described in detail; photos (M) For years -- since college, anyway -- Al Gore had been telling friends that the very last thing he would ever do with his life was go into politics. That was fine for his father, he would say, but not for him. For years -- since college, anyway -- Al Gore had been telling friends that the very last thing he would ever do with his life was go into politics. That was fine for his father, he would say, but not for him. ''I had a vague, unarticulated game plan,'' Mr. Gore said in a recent interview. ''I'd get my law degree, continue in newspapers'' -- by buying The Carthage Courier, in the little Tennessee town where he had spent summers growing up -- ''move to the farm, spend 10 or 12 years establishing myself in the community and run for Congress at 40.'' Mr. Gore's friends remember being kept out of the loop, as usual, until after the fact. ''He didn't ask anybody whether he should run,'' said his closest Tennessee friend, Steve Armistead. In fact, Mr. Gore kept his own counsel right up until the very moment he heard that his local congressman, Joe L. Evins, was retiring unexpectedly -- years ahead of Mr. Gore's own plan. His boss at the paper, the publisher, John Seigenthaler, who had been encouraging Mr. Gore to consider public life, called him at home one evening in February of 1976 to tell him the news. ''I had not articulated the extent to which my thinking had evolved'' to anyone until then, Mr. Gore said. Surely he had dropped a hint to his wife, who has always been his closest confidante and adviser? But had he even mentioned the possibility to his wife? Well, no, Mr. Gore said finally, after some hemming and hawing. ''I don't think she's over it yet,'' he sighed. His wife's memory of that evening is that she had just put a tuna noodle casserole on the table when the phone rang and their lives changed. ''It was unsettling to me,'' Mrs. Gore said in a separate interview in their home. ''I had a new baby, a couple of part-time jobs and a husband who'd just quit law school to run a race he wasn't supposed to win. Nobody's ever thought about it that way, have they?'' Mr. Gore did take a risk in 1976, pouring a huge chunk of his own money into a campaign that was short on other people's cash because he was not favored to win. In that race, Mr. Gore's first job was to differentiate himself from his father, former Senator Albert Gore, who had suffered a bitter defeat six years earlier. In the same way, the vice president must in this campaign separate himself from another political force of nature, Bill Clinton. The question for Al Gore was then and is now: Is he his own man? And the answer has stayed the same also. And though Mr. Gore has certainly been a dutiful senator's son and loyal vice president, he is so self-contained, making even important decisions in a surprisingly solitary way, that it is possible to conclude that, if anything, he is probably too much his own man. Throughout his career, he has stubbornly resisted advice to a degree that has driven generations of aides crazy. One longtime aide said Mr. Gore really listens only to his family, who tend to encourage him to follow his own instincts. So for Mr. Gore, being his own man has often meant going it alone. He said he wanted nothing to do with his father's line of work after watching the Vietnam fiasco. And had all the legislation in the world kept the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. from getting shot? When his father was turned out of office in what historians regard as a particularly dirty race in 1970, Al Gore not only walked away, he walked away mad. After he got back from Vietnam, he turned down all the invitations to political functions that poured in from his dad's old friends, who were eager to adopt him. He showed next to no interest in discussing politics. Even on the night President Richard M. Nixon resigned, Mr. Gore stayed home, instead of joining friends at a party. Mr. Seigenthaler had made a habit of hiring celebrity offspring like Mr. Gore, including Robert F. Kennedy's son David and Hank Aaron's daughter Gaile. The paper's longtime city editor, Frank Ritter, edited them all. He approached the lowliest assignments with great industry. ''Even when he was asked to cover the Christmas parade,'' said one former colleague, Alan Carmichael, who now owns a public relations firm in Knoxville, ''it was a very serious project for him.'' (The byline on that one was ''Ebenezer Scrooge, as told to Albert Gore, Jr.'') Yet Mr. Gore did not fail to notice that he was no competition for Mr. Halberstam. ''I saw a lot of others who did better stories,'' he said, ''day after day after day.'' With Mr. Seigenthaler's blessing, Mr. Gore worked with law enforcement officials on a sting operation -- a relationship that many journalists these days would consider too cozy. A source of Mr. Gore's wore a wire as he met with a council member. Mr. Gore later helped transcribe the tapes, and the cash that the authorities said had exchanged hands during the sting was provided by The Tennessean. But when the case against the council member went to trial, the defense accused the paper of going after the official because he was black. The jury deadlocked along racial lines, a mistrial was declared and the man was acquitted at a second trial. Colleagues remember that Mr. Gore was devastated. And it was that experience, he says, that ultimately led him to explore a career in the law, and then circle back to politics. ''It was a kind of call to arms,'' said Mr. Gore, who often speaks about his work in moral and even religious terms. ''This process held nearly sacred is being defiled, and good people need to jump in and help the forces of good prevail.'' Quietly, though -- and without ever committing himself -- Mr. Gore had already prepared himself to take advantage of the ''once-in-a-lifetime opportunity'' that presented itself when Mr. Evins, who was considered congressman-for-life, decided to retire. Though he says he did not have a political run in mind at the time, while still in college he took a summer course in Tennessee history and bought into a real estate venture in Tennessee's fourth district that, in addition to making him some money, provided him with business credentials there. Later that same night, Mr. Gore called his parents to tell them he was running for his father's old congressional seat. As Mr. Gore remembers it, the senator was initially unenthusiastic. ''He had begun to see how much of life he had been missing,'' Mr. Gore said. ''There was no 'Yippee!' He said, 'Al, it's such a hard life, I hate for you to put yourself through this.' '' Before long, though, Mr. Gore said, his father's ''zest for battle came bubbling up and he was raring to go.'' And at that point, Mr. Gore told the senator point blank that he would have to sit out the campaign -- much as Gov. George W. Bush seems to have sidelined his father during his first political race, also for a freshly vacant Congressional seat, in 1978. Mr. Gore was adamant that the senator would have to refrain from making a single speech or statement on his behalf. ''He didn't understand it or like it, but I insisted,'' the vice president said. Yet this distancing strategy was as tricky in 1976 as it is today. Though Senator Gore had lost statewide in 1970, he was still well regarded in his old district, even if the district was more conservative than the senator. Even Mr. Gore's campaign press secretary, Ken Jost, a colleague at The Tennesseean, said it had never really occurred to him that Mr. Gore might actually win. And plenty of people thought the only way Mr. Gore could even hope to prevail was by exploiting the familial connection he was busy running away from. Mr. Gore, though, balked at this, and thought the key was to outwork the competition. And that's what he did, starting the morning he announced his candidacy -- right after he threw up in a public restroom inside the Smith County courthouse. Day after day, he drove the back roads of middle Tennessee, and ran across fields to ask farmers for their support. On one occasion, he even climbed a telephone pole to shake hands with the lineman. Certainly, Mr. Gore was not anyone's idea of a natural on the stump, and he stuck with the same two tired jokes throughout the campaign, though they almost never got a laugh. He told one of them, about the Republican kittens that became Democrats -- ''They have their eyes open now'' -- on the trail again only recently. Still, Mr. Gore kept going back, asking for support time and time again, and in many cases wore people down. Recently, Mr. Gore's jam-packed campaign schedule and hours-long town hall meetings have been seen as a sign of desperation in his race against Mr. Bush, whose pace is more leisurely. But even after Mr. Gore won his Congressional seat, he held something like 1,200 town meetings. The exact number of meetings, like the number of burgers sold by McDonald's, was always the last line in Representative Gore's news releases. And right or wrong, it is Mr. Gore's enduring belief that the winner is usually the guy who works the hardest. Last fall, at the peak of the Bill Bradley boomlet, Mr. Armistead had lunch with his old friend and told Mr. Gore he was a little worried that Mr. Bradley might take the nomination away from him. Mr. Gore, though, seemed perfectly serene. There had already been a turning point in the race, he declared -- one somehow overlooked by all the pundits. ''He told me he thought the turning point was that Bradley had to leave a debate in New Hampshire'' soon after it was over, leaving Mr. Gore alone to work the crowd for hours more. In those days, Mr. Gore not only made all the major decisions in his campaign, but financed it, too, like some independent film project, with loans and maxed-out credit cards. He took out a $50,000 loan and kicked in a total of $125,000 of his own money. Though his father was not a wealthy man while Mr. Gore was growing up, he did make a lot of money after losing office in 1970. And at age 27, Mr. Gore already had a substantial bank account, owing mostly to the homebuilding business and another real estate venture his family had brought him in on. His donations to his own campaign accounted for more than two-thirds of the $188,560 he raised in the race, at a time when his financial statements showed a net worth of $273,841. Though aides insist that he has long since gotten over the inclination to run his own campaign, Mr. Gore still does not seem able to resist involving himself in the details. He reads his clips closely enough to be able to spar over word choice, and is remarkably well-versed on the gossip from his campaign plane. In his first race, though, he could serve as his own driver without getting accused of micromanaging. One day, as he was ferrying his wife, his press secretary, Mr. Jost, and a reporter, Mr. Carmichael, between campaign stops, Mr. Carmichael unexpectedly asked whether Mr. Gore had ever smoked marijuana. Mr. Carmichael said Mr. Gore immediately stopped the car, got out and walked around for a few minutes -- a technique the vice president still uses in interviews. Recently, after being asked a delicate question over the phone, he repeated a couple of times that he was losing the connection: ''What? I'm losing you.'' Then he went on and answered. When Mr. Gore came back to the car where Mr. Carmichael was waiting, he said he would not answer the question because it had not been put to the other candidates. Eventually, the question was withdrawn and the news that the candidate had smoked marijuana was put off for 11 more years, when he revealed it during his first presidential campaign. What everyone covering the race did write about, though, was the surprisingly conservative ground staked out by Mr. Gore, who felt he had to distance himself from the senator's liberalism. His strongest competition in the race, Stan Rogers, now says that both he and Mr. Gore, whom he supports, pandered in that race. ''No doubt about it, Al postured himself in a more conservative image,'' Mr. Rogers said. ''But we both did, so I can't blame him. I attempted to paint him as the liberal even though that's what I was. I just tried to paint the senior brush on him'' -- as in Albert Gore, Senior -- ''but the senator was not photographed, not seen in the campaign, until election night when it was all over. And that was smart.'' In the campaign, Mr. Gore also spoke against gun control, and a week before the primary told a crowd, ''I don't believe a woman's freedom to live her own life, in all cases, outweighs the fetus's right to life.'' Both of these positions were news to his former colleagues at The Tennesseean, where he had written an editorial expressing outrage over the proliferation of cheap handguns. Mr. Gore turned in his last editorial just a few hours before he quit the paper to run for Congress. And already in campaign mode, the words he'd written were more colorful than usual. The piece never ran, but Mr. Armour still remembers how it began: ''Education in Tennessee is a damned disgrace.'' After Mr. Gore was elected, he would often stop back in at The Tennesseean at the end of a full day of town hall meetings. Then he'd plop down at a desk, and write his own story -- rather than just issuing a press release. His old editor, Mr. Ritter, was usually running the desk. Mr. Ritter, an enthusiastic mid-life convert to Catholicism, is fond of Mr. Gore and has a signed photo of the vice president and his wife meeting the Pope in his office at The Tennessean. But when asked where he thinks Mr. Gore really stands, he said: ''On those two issues, I have no idea. If I was a one-issue man and that was my one issue, either gun control or abortion, I'd be leery.'' Mr. Gore has remained consistent on some relatively conservative views he expressed back then -- on national defense and criminal justice, for example. But of course, he now categorically supports gay rights, strong gun-control legislation and abortion rights. Late into the night of the August 5th primary that would decide the race, it was still too close to call, and as Steve Armistead drove Mr. Gore to his victory party at the Holiday Inn in Lebanon, half an hour away, they still didn't know if he had won or lost. Mr. Armistead had also driven his friend to a party at Nashville's Hermitage Hotel the night his father lost his Senate seat in 1970. In the car that night, Mr. Gore had quietly told Mr. Armistead that his father had come to him and asked him to write his victory speech. When they arrived at the party in Lebanon, Mr. Gore sensed that his friends were steeling themselves for another Gore loss. The tally went back and forth. But Mr. Gore's home base in Smith County was one of the last to be counted, around 11 p.m., and Mr. Gore ended up winning by just a few thousand votes, receiving 32 percent of the vote to Mr. Rogers' 29 percent. ''He was never one to express himself a whole lot, but that was explosion night for him,'' said Mr. Armistead. ''He was hollering, shaking the hands. Senator Gore was just overly excited.'' The papers the next day reported that the senior Gore told the crowd: ''You elected me to Congress when I was 29 years old, and you elected Al at the age of 28. He's starting out one year earlier than I did, so maybe that means he'll go one step farther.'' In fact, the senator had gone to Washington at 30, but this was not a night for quibbles. Mr. Gore himself was so excited he just kept on thanking people. Al Gore's Journey This is the 10th article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future articles will look at George W. Bush's work in his father's White House and Al Gore's mid-life crisis. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE FIRST RACE  Correction:  August 12, 2000, Saturday  A front-page article yesterday about Al Gore's earliest political campaign gave a misspelled name at several points for the newspaper on which he worked before deciding to seek office. It is The Tennessean, in Nashville, not Tennesseean. A front-page article yesterday about Al Gore's earliest political campaign gave a misspelled name at several points for the newspaper on which he worked before deciding to seek office. It is The Tennessean, in Nashville, not Tennesseean.
 Editorial accuses Pres Clinton and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is running for US Senate, of 'blatantly hogging' spotlight at expense of Vice Pres Gore on virtual eve of Democratic National Convention; says their thirst for campaign money and other donations seems to be overriding both good manners and political prudence (M) Al Gore has got to be thinking ''Get the hook.'' After all, Los Angeles is a show-business town, and Democrats from across the country are heading there for what is supposed to be Vice President Gore's show. But President and Mrs. Clinton are blatantly hogging the spotlight from Saturday until next Tuesday. As has so often been the case in the Clinton administration, the thirst for campaign money and other donations seems to be overriding both good manners and political prudence. The bottom line is that Mr. Gore does not get to be the star of his own show until it is half over, and by that time the Clintons will have decamped with millions of Democratic dollars. By comparison, the last baton-passing by a two-term president was a model of grace and consideration. In 1988 Ronald Reagan zipped into New Orleans for 48 hours on a schedule adjusted to his vice president's political needs. Mr. Reagan gave one speech denouncing the Democrats and another asserting that George Bush was ready to lead, made a joint appearance with Mr. Bush at the airport and then winged off toward California. Al Gore has got to be thinking ''Get the hook.'' After all, Los Angeles is a show-business town, and Democrats from across the country are heading there for what is supposed to be Vice President Gore's show. But President and Mrs. Clinton are blatantly hogging the spotlight from Saturday until next Tuesday. As has so often been the case in the Clinton administration, the thirst for campaign money and other donations seems to be overriding both good manners and political prudence. The bottom line is that Mr. Gore does not get to be the star of his own show until it is half over, and by that time the Clintons will have decamped with millions of Democratic dollars. By comparison, the last baton-passing by a two-term president was a model of grace and consideration. In 1988 Ronald Reagan zipped into New Orleans for 48 hours on a schedule adjusted to his vice president's political needs. Mr. Reagan gave one speech denouncing the Democrats and another asserting that George Bush was ready to lead, made a joint appearance with Mr. Bush at the airport and then winged off toward California. It would be hard work to raise that kind of money later on for a facility in Arkansas, and that probably explains the president's willingness to compete with Mr. Gore for time and top billing among wealthy donors at the convention. But the president's insistent star turn misserves Mr. Gore in a way that goes beyond the financial. At this point in the campaign, the vice president needs to be seen as an independent force rather than a second banana who cannot even dictate the schedule of his own convention. This competition for attention between two supposedly best buddies creates an odd setting for Mr. Clinton's speech to the convention on Monday. Will it be a full-throated campaign speech for Mr. Gore as a leader who deserves to be president in his own right and on his own merits? Or will it be Mr. Clinton's valedictory reminder that he created an economic boom that Mr. Gore is lucky to be running on?
 Chief among Mr. Nicholson's worries is that a speech to be delivered by President Clinton on the convention's opening night, Monday, would be given more coverage than the address by Gen. Colin L. Powell on the first night of the Republican gathering. The chairman noted that CBS and ABC ran only portions of Mr. Powell's speech -- NBC covered it only on its cable channel, MSNBC -- and a speech by Laura Bush, the wife of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, which preceded General Powell's address, received even less attention. ''Are you now planning to give live coverage to Tipper Gore's speech at the Democrats' convention?'' Mr. Nicholson wrote. ''And will you be airing all of Bill Clinton's opening night speech?''
 As the Democratic National Convention nears, Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate has chilled wealthy Hollywood Democrats, who are upset that Mr. Lieberman is one of the Senate's most vocal critics of the entertainment industry. As the Democratic National Convention nears, Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate has chilled wealthy Hollywood Democrats, who are upset that Mr. Lieberman is one of the Senate's most vocal critics of the entertainment industry. ''It's so ironic -- they pick the chief Democratic critic of Clinton as well as Hollywood,'' said Tom Strickler, a a Republican who supports Gov. George W. Bush for president.  Article, Page A17.
 Gov George W Bush and Sen John McCain join forces on campaign trail for first time in 2000 presidential race, burying their once-bitter rivalry for three-day tour of West Coast; photo (M) With an eye toward independent-minded voters here and elsewhere on the West Coast, Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain today joined forces on the campaign trail for the first time in the 2000 presidential race, burying their once-bitter rivalry under a resolve to put a Republican in the White House. Mr. McCain had wanted passionately to be that man, and his appearance beside Mr. Bush in California, Oregon and Washington this week could be seen as the latest chapter in a tale of political resignation. With an eye toward independent-minded voters here and elsewhere on the West Coast, Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain today joined forces on the campaign trail for the first time in the 2000 presidential race, burying their once-bitter rivalry under a resolve to put a Republican in the White House. Mr. McCain had wanted passionately to be that man, and his appearance beside Mr. Bush in California, Oregon and Washington this week could be seen as the latest chapter in a tale of political resignation. Having formally endorsed Mr. Bush of Texas and having praised him from the stage of the Republican National Convention, Mr. McCain was now hitting the stump with the man who beat him for the Republican presidential nomination. He also did a jig around the questions reporters asked about the sharp differences between him and Mr. Bush on issues like tax cuts and campaign finance reform. Mr. McCain of Arizona redirected their attention toward what he said was his overarching support for, and belief in, Mr. Bush. If that made him sound like he was taking a needed dose of medicine -- a metaphor Mr. McCain jokingly used when endorsing Mr. Bush in May -- his comments at an event in Salinas  preceding the news conference were a bit more resounding. Mr. Bush said at the news conference that he and Mr. McCain had a long, lasting bond. Mr. Bush's advisers said that Mr. McCain's presence had grown from a previous offer to do whatever the Bush campaign thought best for its effort. Mr. McCain proved especially popular with the swing voters prevalent in this region of the country, so Mr. Bush's advisers said that he could be particularly helpful here. ''We think he has a lot of appeal to California's independent-minded voters,'' said Karen P. Hughes, the campaign's director of communications. Gerry Parsky, chairman of the campaign's California effort, noted that in the state primary in March, Mr. McCain attracted about 725,000 independent or Democratic voters, while Mr. Bush drew only 500,000. The joint appearances gave the campaign of Vice President Al Gore an opportunity to turn the tables on the Bush campaign, which had spent the past few days noting policy disagreements between Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. ''Al Gore is a strong leader, and it says a great deal about him that he picked someone who does not agree with him on every issue,'' Douglas Hattaway, a Gore campaign spokesman, said. ''Bush apparently lacked that leadership in bypassing John McCain.'' Mr. Hattaway was referring to Mr. Bush's selection of Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary, not Mr. McCain, as his running mate. ''You won't hear Bush and McCain talking about issues very much,'' Mr. Hattaway added. ''If they actually talked about issues, it would turn into a debate.'' In Atlanta today, Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman were supposed to use an appearance with four Southern governors to hail the Clinton administration's record in cutting welfare rolls and to promote ''the next critical phase of welfare reform,'' according to a release issued by the campaign. Instead, Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman made more generic speeches and barely mentioned welfare. Aides said they were not sure why Mr. Gore veered from his planned remarks. In the release, Mr. Gore vowed to help long-term welfare recipients find work by extending existing welfare-to-work grants to state, local and faith-based organizations. He also said he would ''fight to promote responsible fatherhood'' by creating programs that help low-income ''dead-broke dads'' find work so they can support their children. He proposed denying credit cards to parents who owe child support. Mr. Bush's appearances with Mr. McCain in Salinas preceded a train trip that they took north toward Sacramento. The men planned to cap three days of campaigning on the West Coast with a visit to Mr. McCain's cabin in Sedona, Ariz., on Saturday. Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, were to be overnight guests of Mr. McCain and his wife, Cindy. During the train trip, Mr. McCain and Mr. Bush chatted with reporters for about 25 minutes, and Mr. McCain had plenty of praise for Mr. Bush, especially for his efforts to portray the Republican Party as a home for a broad spectrum of voters. Mr. McCain also derided the Gore campaign's efforts to remind voters that he had once attacked Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan as excessive and that he advocated much stricter regulation of campaign contributions than Mr. Bush favors. ''It's foolishness,'' Mr. McCain said, ''and we all know it. And people will take it for that.'' ''Actually,'' said Mr. Bush, ''we're glad they're talking about us. Isn't that right, Senator?''
 Vice Pres Al Gore's choice of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as his running mate has chilled wealthy Hollywood Democrats, who are upset that Lieberman is one of Senate's most vocal critics of sex- and violence-laden entertainment industry; but with moguls and stars set to host Democratic fundraisers and parties during national convention, Hollywood is hardly in mood to publicly voice nervousness about Lieberman (M) The entertainment industry is facing the Democratic National Convention here next week with some last-minute jitters. Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate has chilled wealthy Hollywood Democrats, who are upset that Mr. Lieberman is one of the Senate's most vocal critics of Hollywood. The entertainment industry is facing the Democratic National Convention here next week with some last-minute jitters. Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate has chilled wealthy Hollywood Democrats, who are upset that Mr. Lieberman is one of the Senate's most vocal critics of Hollywood. ''It's so ironic -- they pick the chief Democratic critic of Clinton as well as Hollywood,'' said Tom Strickler, a partner at the Endeavor talent agency, and a Republican who supports Gov. George W. Bush for president. As the Senate's fiercest Democratic critic of Hollywood and what he views as society's moral decay, Mr. Lieberman has led hearings on violence in video games and deplored sex and violence in films and television. That over the years he has teamed up with William J. Bennett, a cabinet secretary for Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush who has denounced Hollywood's values, has also angered Democrats. Mr. Gore has called some top Hollywood supporters to ask what they thought of his running mate and received positive response. But his own relationship with Hollywood is hardly as warm as that of President Clinton, who not only seems to enjoy palling around with the Hollywood elite, but has also raised millions in campaign contributions here. In return, Mr. Clinton has treated his supporters here seriously, giving them the kind of importance they crave. Mr. Gore's boldness in selecting an Orthodox Jew was greeted with both enthusiasm and some uneasiness in a community that has seen attacks on Hollywood by conservatives as  veiled anti-Semitism. But some of the wealthiest Democrats in the entertainment business who are especially friendly with Mr. Clinton -- at least publicly -- expressed delight with Mr. Gore's selection. Mr. Lieberman will probably not hurt the Democratic ticket financially. Mr. Gore has raised at least $880,000 in Hollywood, according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics. This compares with about $688,000 raised by Mr. Bush and $22,000 for Ralph Nader, the Green Party's presidential nominee.
 Douglas MacKinnon Op-Ed article says Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush is sincere about Republican Party becoming more inclusive of minorities, despite allegations by Gore campaign and political pundits (M) There has been a good deal of talk from the Gore campaign and pundits questioning the seriousness of Gov. George W. Bush's desire to reach out to minority and poor communities. Some have suggested that this effort is newfound, an act or a false religion. But I know Mr. Bush is sincere about the Republican Party becoming more inclusive of minorities, because just over a decade ago, when I was a junior staff member on his father's campaign staff, he talked to me at length about that very same commitment. There has been a good deal of talk from the Gore campaign and pundits questioning the seriousness of Gov. George W. Bush's desire to reach out to minority and poor communities. Some have suggested that this effort is newfound, an act or a false religion. But I know Mr. Bush is sincere about the Republican Party becoming more inclusive of minorities, because just over a decade ago, when I was a junior staff member on his father's campaign staff, he talked to me at length about that very same commitment. Back in 1987 and 1988, I worked on the presidential campaign of then Vice President Bush, helping to write speeches and doing research for his campaign manager, Lee Atwater, and his deputy, Ed Rogers. I was a minor league player in big-time politics. But because I worked with Mr. Atwater and Mr. Rogers, I had a certain access that most did not. During the campaign, they had offices next to each other, and George W. Bush, who was helping his father's campaign, had an office across the hall. When Mr. Bush was not working at campaign headquarters in Washington, Lee and Ed would sometimes park me in his office. On more than one occasion Mr. Bush walked in and found me sitting at his desk. The first time this happened, I jumped up and apologized.  He told me to sit down in his chair while he sat in a guest chair in front of the desk. Mr. Bush almost immediately began asking me if I thought the G.O.P. was doing enough to reach out to black and Hispanic voters. I told him it was not. He then proceeded to tell me why the party had to do more, that it is was not rocket science to get it done and that for the party to grow and survive, we had to reach out. What struck me most about those  conversations more than 12 years ago was that Mr. Bush was not trying to spin or impress anyone, because there was no one to impress. There were no cameras, no reporters, no senior staff members -- no one. It was just he and I, a junior campaign nobody, sitting in his office talking about the need for the Republican Party to snap out of it and start talking to minority voters. He was sincere, he was animated, and he was a bit angry at his party.
 You note that state polls show that even a majority of death-penalty supporters think the mentally retarded should not be executed. But George W. Bush continues to oppose laws that would prohibit their execution. He calls himself a ''compassionate conservative.'' But the evidence is much stronger for ''conservative'' than for ''compassionate.''
 Pres Clinton, on visit to Willow Creek Community Church in South Barrington, Ill, describes how his life spun out of control after adulterous affair, how his job sometimes overwhelmed him, and high and low moments of past seven and a half years; reflection amounts to a live public interview on the personal travails of his presidency, conducted by Rev Bill Hybels, who has counseled him regularly since 1992; Clinton also goes out of his way to give credit to Vice Pres Al Gore for administration's successes and to insist that Gore should not be blamed for Clinton's personal failings; photo (M) And he went out of his way to give credit to Vice President Al Gore for the administration's successes and to insist that Mr. Gore should not be blamed for Mr. Clinton's personal failings. His appearance at the church came at a delicate time, just a few days before the Democrats are to open their political convention in Los Angeles and shift the spotlight from Mr. Clinton to Mr. Gore. Aides to Mr. Gore have expressed their annoyance that Mr. Clinton and his wife, Hillary, plan such a high profile at the convention, and the president's headline-grabbing remarks here on the eve of the convention could add to their annoyance, even if they are grateful to Mr. Clinton for his praise today for the Vice President. Indeed, the Gore campaign continued to express frustration over the repeated dredging up of Mr. Clinton's affair -- already back in the news because Mr. Gore's vice-presidential pick, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, had criticized Mr. Clinton so openly about it. One Gore adviser observed drily, ''We're trying to keep the focus on the future and on the issues that matter to the voters, and this isn't in that category.'' Another Gore aide said the campaign hoped that the selection of Mr. Lieberman, the first Democratic senator to chastise the president openly, would underscore that the ticket was separate from the president and also that the president's comments clearly reflected that his affair had been his own problem.
 Re ''Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece'' (front page, Aug. 9): Re ''Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece'' (front page, Aug. 9): Watching the coverage of Al Gore's selection of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, I was happy to see Mr. Lieberman's religious faith portrayed in a positive way. With all the focus on a candidate's religion, however, one cannot help but remember a similar situation handled much differently earlier in the presidential race. When Gov. George W. Bush, in response to a question, said his favorite philosopher was Jesus, some said Mr. Bush was exploiting religion to get votes. Perhaps those who condemned Mr. Bush have since changed their views on how a candidate should express his religious beliefs, and they therefore celebrate Mr. Lieberman's convictions. Or perhaps they apply a double standard when Democrats speak of their faith and when Republicans do the same.
 Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (Op-Ed, Aug. 10) is correct. However noble it might be to vote for Ralph Nader, reality requires liberal voters of conscience to think twice before rejecting Al Gore. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (Op-Ed, Aug. 10) is correct. However noble it might be to vote for Ralph Nader, reality requires liberal voters of conscience to think twice before rejecting Al Gore. If ''making a personal statement'' by voting for Mr. Nader were the only factor, fine. But too much is at stake. Not only environmental issues but also Supreme Court appointments, progressive educational policy and the need to move toward positive humanitarian goals demand that we vote based on the fact that only Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore can realistically be elected president.
 Mr. Kennedy may certainly support Al Gore as he chooses, but he shouldn't try to minimize the integrity of my vote for Ralph Nader by calling it a vote for George W. Bush. It is nothing other than a vote for Mr. Nader, regardless of who else may be running.
 Repr Loretta Sanchez announces that she is going ahead with plans to hold fund-raiser at Playboy mansion in Los Angeles, despite pleas from Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign and Democratic leaders to move event; party officials respond quickly, yanking the California congresswoman from coveted speaking slot at national convention (M) A California congresswoman who is an ally of Vice President Al Gore announced today that she was going ahead with plans to hold a fund-raiser on Tuesday at the Playboy mansion in Los Angeles, despite pleas from Mr. Gore's campaign and Democratic leaders to move the event. A California congresswoman who is an ally of Vice President Al Gore announced today that she was going ahead with plans to hold a fund-raiser on Tuesday at the Playboy mansion in Los Angeles, despite pleas from Mr. Gore's campaign and Democratic leaders to move the event. Ms. Sanchez said Mr. Gore's staff had encouraged her to switch sites, but after consulting with the board of directors of her political action committee she decided today to keep her 600 invited guests and donors at the mansion. Playboy executives and Ms. Sanchez's aides say the event will be sedate. Aghast at the image that the fund-raiser at Hugh Hefner's house would project, no matter how stodgy the actual party, Mr. Gore's campaign and Democratic leaders have tried for weeks to persuade Ms. Sanchez to move the event. Mr. Gore, who has accepted $1,500 for his campaign this year from Mr. Hefner and his daughter, Christie, voiced his displeasure early, and this week party leaders stepped up the pressure by threatening to cancel her speaking slot at the convention, which they did today. Democratic officials said they might also push to remove her as vice chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, a position for which she had been picked by Mr. Gore, and that he might withdraw his  support for her re-election. Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary, said Mr. Gore had made it clear that he disapproved. ''Al Gore is not participating, supporting, condoning or giving his imprimatur in any shape, way or form to this event,'' Mr. Lehane said. ''We've conveyed our thoughts in every way we can. Obviously, we're reaching the end of the line.'' ''Al Gore's campaign team suggests they're embarrassed by the idea of having a Democrat fund-raising event held at the Playboy mansion,'' said Jim Nicholson, the chairman of the Republican National Committee. ''They may not like talking about it, but they sure do enjoy that Playboy money.'' For Mr. Gore, the quandary comes at a most inopportune time. Just this week, he selected Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, a reserved Orthodox Jew who publicly excoriated President Clinton for his affair with a White House aide.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, surrounded by centrist Democratic governors from Southern states, delivers speech in Atlanta emphasizing importance of South in presidential election; Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman play up Lieberman's Jewish religion and civil rights history, calculating that South has changed, that vice-presidential selection will excite minority voters, and that ticket's centrism and religious faith will appeal to white Southerners (M) Vice President Al Gore surrounded himself with centrist Democratic governors from Southern states today and delivered a stem-winding populist speech in an effort to demonstrate that the South was still in play in this year's election. Alongside Mr. Gore, a Middle Tennessean and a Southern Baptist, stood his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Yankee and an Orthodox Jew whose introduction to the South came in 1963 when he helped register black voters in Mississippi. Vice President Al Gore surrounded himself with centrist Democratic governors from Southern states today and delivered a stem-winding populist speech in an effort to demonstrate that the South was still in play in this year's election. Alongside Mr. Gore, a Middle Tennessean and a Southern Baptist, stood his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Yankee and an Orthodox Jew whose introduction to the South came in 1963 when he helped register black voters in Mississippi. That would not have always been an alluring resume to many of the independent white Southerners whom Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman must capture in order to win states like Georgia this year. But the Democrats played up Mr. Lieberman's religion and his history today, calculating that the South had changed, that Mr. Lieberman's selection would excite minority voters, and that the ticket's centrism and religious faith  might appeal to white Southerners. ''Today,'' Mr. Lieberman said, ''I am so proud to stand before you as the first Jewish-American lucky enough to be a major party candidate for vice president of the United States. And when I look at Al Gore, the man who made it possible, and I think about the courage and character that went into making this decision, once again I see a glimpse of how good our nation can be.'' The most recent polls, some of which are dated, show Mr. Gore trailing his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, in every Southern state except for his native Tennessee, and the race appears closer than expected there. But Gore campaign officials say Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Florida, North Carolina and Tennessee remain in play. Republican strategists expressed confidence today that the resurgent appeal of statewide Democratic candidates in the South would not transfer to a national election, and that Mr. Gore would not replicate President Clinton's success in winning four Southern states in 1992 and 1996. Gov. Roy Barnes of Georgia said the choice helped by demonstrating Mr. Gore's independence. ''Look,'' he said, ''we Southerners are not aliens from another planet. Attitudes have changed and the stereotype of the South of 50 years ago is not the South of today. And, remember, populism was born in the South.'' Mr. Gore embraced that populist tradition today when he told the crowd he would raise the minimum wage, provide prescription drug benefits for the elderly, lower school class sizes and ''take medical decisions away from bureaucrats who work for H.M.O.'s.'' ''Pitiful, you are exactly right,'' Mr. Gore said. ''We had $300 billion annual budget deficits. That bunch had quadrupled the national debt in little over a decade. We were broke. High unemployment. We'd had the worst recession since the 1930's. We saw crime rising, families breaking up at a higher rate. All the problems were worse.'' Mr. Gore said President Clinton and he had changed things, and reminded his audience that Mr. Bush said in his nomination acceptance speech that the Democrats had ''coasted through prosperity'' and taken the path of least resistance. ''I wish there had been less resistance,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I cast the tie-breaking vote after all the ones on the other side voted no for the change that was so needed. I wish there had been less resistance when they shut down the government, not once but twice. I wish there had been less resistance when we brought about the changes that have now led to a dramatic transformation in our economy.'' Mr. Gore was joined today by Governors Donald Siegelman of Alabama and Paul E. Patton of Kentucky, along with Mr. Barnes and Mr. Hunt.
 American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, leading supporter of Vice Pres Al Gore, has quietly created group American Family Voices, which is televising advertisment harshly critical of Gov George W Bush; neither group's ad nor its Web site disloses its relationship with union; organization, created in July after Congress closed legal loophole known as Section 527, is chartered under Section 501(c)4, tax code provision that allows it to engage in political activity with minimal financial disclosure (M) Turning to a second legal loophole after another was closed, one of the nation's largest unions, a leading supporter of Vice President Al Gore, has quietly created a group that this week is televising an advertisement harshly critical of Gov. George W. Bush. Turning to a second legal loophole after another was closed, one of the nation's largest unions, a leading supporter of Vice President Al Gore, has quietly created a group that this week is televising an advertisement harshly critical of Gov. George W. Bush. Afscme, which has 1.3 million members, endorsed Vice President Gore last autumn, months before he sealed the Democratic presidential nomination. They are reminiscent of secretive groups set up under Section 527. Sam Wyly, for instance, a wealthy benefactor of Mr. Bush, created a group called Republicans for Clean Air that ran television advertisements during the primaries attacking the environmental record of the Texas governor's chief rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona. The advertisement against Governor Bush, which is running this week in Philadelphia, Detroit, St. Louis and Washington, attacks him for vetoing patients' rights legislation, weakening nursing home regulations and opposing government-guaranteed prescription drug benefits under Medicare. It links his policies to large contributions from the insurance, nursing home and drug industries.
 Bush and McCain Out West  Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain, who battled bitterly during the primary season, joined forces on the campaign trail. Big Union Finds a Loophole  The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees has used a legal loophole in creating a group that is broadcasting a television advertisement harshly critical of Gov. George W. Bush without mentioning the union's affiliation.
 Aug 7 article about opposition to the execution of mentally retarded prisoners misstated timing of execution of Mario Marquez in 1995 on day George W Bush was inaugurated as governor of Texas; execution occurred before the inauguration, and clemency petition was rejected by Lt Gov Bob Bullock after he consulted with Bush's aides A front-page article on Monday about growing opposition to the execution of mentally retarded prisoners misstated the timing of the execution of Mario Marquez in 1995 on the day George W. Bush was inaugurated as governor of Texas. The execution occurred in the morning, before the inauguration, not in the evening. Mr. Marquez's petition for clemency was rejected by Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock after he consulted Mr. Bush's aides. A front-page article on Monday about growing opposition to the execution of mentally retarded prisoners misstated the timing of the execution of Mario Marquez in 1995 on the day George W. Bush was inaugurated as governor of Texas. The execution occurred in the morning, before the inauguration, not in the evening. Mr. Marquez's petition for clemency was rejected by Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock after he consulted Mr. Bush's aides.
 Thomas L. Friedman (column, Aug. 4) suggests that most Americans care less about foreign affairs than about the economy. The electorate is fickle. Even a 90 percent approval rating of President Bush's handling of the Persian Gulf war wasn't enough to get him re-elected. Thomas L. Friedman (column, Aug. 4) suggests that most Americans care less about foreign affairs than about the economy. The electorate is fickle. Even a 90 percent approval rating of President Bush's handling of the Persian Gulf war wasn't enough to get him re-elected. Gov. George W. Bush's campaign team understands this voter mentality. The failed Middle East peace talks, coupled with leadership changes in Syria and Jordan, demand that the next administration have a foreign policy ''A-team.'' To argue that Governor Bush ''has no reassuring economic wise men'' is off the mark. One of Mr. Bush's top advisers is George P. Shultz, who has a Ph.D. in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and has held four cabinet positions. The Republicans are covering all of the bases.
 Mr. Weiner's company sells Gore campaign stickers and other paraphernalia through its Web site, www.goregoods.com. A single bumper sticker is $4 plus $4.95 for shipping; another site, www.goregear.com, sells stickers for $1 plus $2 shipping. This year, sticker orders indicate enthusiasm for the Republican ticket, said Ted Jackson, owner of the Spalding Group in Louisville, Ky., the sole licensee for the George W. Bush campaign. ''This is like 1984, the Reagan re-election,'' said Mr. Jackson, adding that demand is far stronger than it was for the Dole candidacy four years ago. His company's web site, www.georgewbushstore.com. sells stickers in minimum orders of 25 at 75 cents each; one comes free with every order of other goods, like Bush polo shirts or bottled water.
 The more attention the squabbling attracts, the more the Reform Party may affect the fortunes of the Republican ticket. The more visibility that Mr. Buchanan gains, the greater the effect he may have on George W. Bush and Dick Cheney, especially if he can get into presidential debates. Nonetheless, the complaint represents the opening gambit in what could be a long administrative and legal process before the commission releases the money to anyone. The party is eligible for the federal money because Mr. Perot surpassed a threshold of 5 percent of the popular vote in the 1996 election. Both campaigns said that money would play a huge role in getting the candidate and his issues before voters -- even though the amount paled in comparison with the $67.5 million that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore each received as the nominee of a major party.
 They are as up-to-the-minute as television's ''West Wing,'' which continues to gain momentum as the season's biggest success, and as prescient as ''The Best Man,'' the Broadway revival of Gore Vidal's 1960 play. They include post-Lewinsky cultural criticism, as trenchant and enduring as that in Philip Roth's novel ''The Human Stain'' and as vapid and already dated as that in Joe Ezsterhas's fantasy memoir ''American Rhapsody.'' All reveal something about the changing image of the president and national politics and about the influence of the Clinton impeachment.
