 Robert A. Mosbacher, chairman of the Mosbacher Energy Company, was commerce secretary under President George Bush.
 Mr. McCain's examination here came on the final day of the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, from which both Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Joseph I. Lieberman, wished him well. Their sentiments echoed many others that aides to Mr. McCain said he had received over the last two days, including those from Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, as well as scores of friends and other leading Republicans. Earlier this week, Mr. McCain had toured Western states with Mr. Bush, and he had planned to resume campaigning next week. But his schedule is now uncertain, pending the treatment of his skin cancer.
 Chris Laurence letter disputes David Margolick's August 12 Op-Ed article on selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as Vice Pres Al Gore's vice presidential running mate Gov. George W. Bush was leading Vice President Al Gore by as many as 18 percentage points in the polls before Senator Joseph I. Lieberman was chosen as Mr. Gore's vice-presidential running mate. This after eight years of getting to know Mr. Gore. Any closing of that gap might well be attributed to Mr. Lieberman. Gov. George W. Bush was leading Vice President Al Gore by as many as 18 percentage points in the polls before Senator Joseph I. Lieberman was chosen as Mr. Gore's vice-presidential running mate. This after eight years of getting to know Mr. Gore. Any closing of that gap might well be attributed to Mr. Lieberman.
 In his morning meetings, Mr. Lieberman continued what has been a weeklong effort to persuade the party's liberal base that he will be a loyal soldier to Al Gore, who is markedly left of Mr. Lieberman on several issues that are of deep importance to the liberal wing. Many education leaders bitterly oppose vouchers, and Mr. Gore himself has called them a threat to the nation's system of public schools. Mr. Lieberman told the leaders that while he would not hesitate to share his views with Mr. Gore in private, he would firmly support Mr. Gore's ultimate policy positions.
 Paul L Whiteley Sr letter comments on August 16 editorial on theme of populism in presidential campaigns of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush Re ''Warring Populisms'' (editorial, Aug. 16): I don't see how we can be critical of Vice President Al Gore's and the Democratic Party's raising and use of soft money when it is legal. Re ''Warring Populisms'' (editorial, Aug. 16): I don't see how we can be critical of Vice President Al Gore's and the Democratic Party's raising and use of soft money when it is legal. If the bill reached the desk of a President Al Gore, he would sign it immediately. Gov. George W. Bush opposes a ban on soft money. The McCain-Feingold bill would already be law if Republicans in the Senate had not prevented its passage.
 Advisers to Gov George W Bush say he is willing to participate in three presidential debates, announcement clearly intended to blunt criticism from campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore that Bush is trying to avoid such face-to-face contests; advisers leave open question of whether debates would be ones suggested by Commission on Presidential Debates, leaving room for some bargaining power over length, format and other aspects (M) Advisers to Gov. George W. Bush said today that he would participate in three presidential debates, an announcement clearly intended to blunt a drumbeat of criticism from the campaign of his opponent, Vice President Al Gore, that Mr. Bush was trying to avoid such face-to-face contests. But Mr. Bush's advisers left open the question of whether those debates would be the ones suggested by the Commission on Presidential Debates, which sponsored all of the post-primaries presidential debates since 1988. Advisers to Gov. George W. Bush said today that he would participate in three presidential debates, an announcement clearly intended to blunt a drumbeat of criticism from the campaign of his opponent, Vice President Al Gore, that Mr. Bush was trying to avoid such face-to-face contests. But Mr. Bush's advisers left open the question of whether those debates would be the ones suggested by the Commission on Presidential Debates, which sponsored all of the post-primaries presidential debates since 1988. In so doing, Mr. Bush and his advisers were obviously trying to retain either some bargaining power over the length, format and other aspects of the commission's debates or the option of looking to other sponsors for debates that better suited the campaign's desires. ''Governor Bush wants a thoughtful debate,'' said Karen P. Hughes, a top Bush campaign adviser, ''and we feel that as the nominee, he should have some input into the structure and format of the debates.'' Ms. Hughes pitched the announcement that Mr. Bush would participate in three debates and that his running mate, Dick Cheney, would take part in two vice-presidential debates as ''a modern-day record,'' noting that the pair's five debates would be the most in over 30 years. But several Republican strategists said the Bush campaign was clearly concerned about making sure Mr. Bush ended up in the debate formats that flattered him the most. They said this reflected both an awareness among Mr. Bush's advisers that debates were not necessarily his best showcases and the fact that the front runner, which polls show the governor to be, typically has more to lose than gain from debates. Chris Lehane, a Gore campaign spokesman, noted that Mr. Gore had long ago publicly agreed to all three debates suggested by the commission, and dozens of other debates.  ''The more, the merrier,'' he said. And the chairman of the Gore campaign, William M. Daley, released a statement late today saying that the campaign had told the debates commission it was ready ''to meet with them tomorrow.''
 News analysis: Vice Pres Al Gore faced daunting challenge of pursuing conflicting objectives as he tried to rally his decidedly jittery party in speech to Democratic National Convention; Gore presented himself as his own man, trying to distance himself from Pres Clinton's problems while also trying to take credit for helping to bring about successes of Clinton era; he tried to excite liberals who are essential to his victory without alienating moderates and independents; speech reflects difficulties Gore will face in fall campaign as he continues to try to please disparate constituencies; photo (M) Al Gore tried to accomplish a political feat so daunting tonight that even the maestro himself, President Clinton, might have had trouble pulling it off. Mr. Gore presented himself as his own man and virtually skated over his service as vice president as he sought to persuade the nation that he is more than the dutiful lieutenant. But he also tried to take credit for helping to bring about ''the biggest surpluses'' ever -- the grandest achievement of the Clinton era. Al Gore tried to accomplish a political feat so daunting tonight that even the maestro himself, President Clinton, might have had trouble pulling it off. Mr. Gore presented himself as his own man and virtually skated over his service as vice president as he sought to persuade the nation that he is more than the dutiful lieutenant. But he also tried to take credit for helping to bring about ''the biggest surpluses'' ever -- the grandest achievement of the Clinton era. He tried to embolden and excite liberals whose turnout are essential to his victory. But he also tried, though less aggressively, to embolden and excite moderate voters who are crucial to a victory in November -- and have shown an interest in Gov. George W. Bush of Texas that has alarmed Democrats. Mr. Gore's elaborate -- and often conflicting -- objectives tonight, and throughout this convention week, reflect the trying challenges he and the Democrats confront as they emerge from this convention. Forget the confetti and mirthful talk of harmony from the rostrum. For the Democrats, happy days are certainly not here again. They may not be panicked, but they are jittery about their standard-bearer. And they are jittery about November. ''It will be a difficult campaign,'' said James Patrick Leahy, a delegate from Ohio, even after four days of enforced partisan cheerleading. ''Gore has one of those personalities you have to develop a relationship with.'' The polls showing Mr. Gore behind, Mr. Leahy said, have dampened his enthusiasm. ''The polling has a psychological effect,'' he said. ''It's like when you go to the race track and look at the racing form and see your horse isn't supposed to do well.'' After eight years on the outside, even Republican delegates who were not pleased with the inclusive tone of their program were so desperate to return to power that it took little, if any, prodding to corral them behind Mr. Bush. Eight years ago, Democrats were also willing to put aside their differences in the name of the greater goal of helping Bill Clinton bring them back to power. Now, they are less accommodating. So the party tried to fire up the rank and file by jamming the stage this week with liberal icons like Senator Edward M. Kennedy and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and leaders of labor, abortion rights and gay rights groups. Even Mr. Lieberman, in his speech, retreated from his usual condemnation of the collapsed culture of Hollywood and instead played the partisan. And tonight, Mr. Gore aimed his message squarely at the party base -- and away from the broader messages of Mr. Clinton's two acceptance speeches -- by sounding traditional Democratic themes of abortion, affirmative action and government spending. More than one Democratic offical complained that the campaign this week seemed more focused on winning over the liberals who might back Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, than the bigger threat, Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore's address was carefully calibrated to offer a nod to the man with whom he has such a complicated relationship -- and to move on swiftly. In the 5,100-word text, the vice president mentioned Mr. Clinton only once, declaring, ''Millions of Americans will live better lives for a long time to come because of the job that's been done by President Bill Clinton.'' The unknowing listener would not have a clue of what arguably makes Mr. Gore best prepared to be president: that he has served the past eight years as vice president. The thinking of Mr. Gore's campaign is that no matter how active a political partner he was, voters will never give a vice president credit. Part of the problem is Al Gore. Whether it is his link to the scandals of Mr. Clinton, the unfavorable comparisons to the more politically adroit president -- or simply his personality -- Democrats here are just not as enamored of their new nominee. On this day four years ago, even the bombshell that Mr. Clinton's top strategist was having an affair with a call girl did nothing to disrupt -- and maybe added a little spice -- to the week of lock-step partisan harmony behind the president. Hours before his boss was to deliver the most consequential speech of his political career, one of Mr. Gore's top aides confessed that he was worried because the campaign was still roiled by squabbling factions. ''Bill Daley has not gotten the warlords under control yet,'' this campaign official said, referring to William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman. It was no accident, certainly, that Mr. Gore spewed out lots of policy tonight. He was trying to make the case that ''people deserve to know specifically what a candidate proposes to do.'' Mindful of polls showing that the public gives Democrats higher marks than Republicans on a range of issues, Mr. Gore's aides said they hope the campaign can be fought on that terrain. Before he can do that, Mr. Gore wants to neutralize Governor Bush's biggest advantage -- his appealing personality. That explains that footage in a film tonight lauding Mr. Gore for his Frankenstein disguise during a Halloween party. That is why all week Democrats, and the candidate himself, offered testaments to the fuzzy and decidedly un-vice presidential side of Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore made only glancing blows at the Republicans and he did not directly cite his opponent by name even once. But clearly acknowleding that Mr. Bush had the edge on charm, Mr. Gore said, ''The presidency is more than a popularity contest. It's a day-by-day fight for people. Sometimes, you have to chose to do what's difficult or unpopular. Sometimes you have to be willing to spend your popularity in order to pick the hard right over the easy wrong.'' Even then-Vice President George Bush, in his acceptance speech in New Orleans in 1988, did not face the difficulties of Mr. Gore. He, too, had the unfortunate fate of having to stand on his own after eight years in the shadow of a far more dexterous political performer. But Mr. Bush  never had such trouble untangling himself from Ronald Reagan. The symbolic transfer of political power was far smoother in 1988 when Mr. Reagan put forth a dignified and full-throated pitch for his No. 2. This week, Mr. Clinton was criticized for not making more of an energetic case for Mr. Gore in his speech here on Monday -- or in their joint appearance in Michigan the next day. The rub is that had he been more generous in his praise, Mr. Clinton might have been accused of injecting himself too much into the role of star performer giving an assist to his understudy. In his speech tonight, Mr. Gore seemed to borrow a bit from the playbook of the man whose son is standing in his way to the White House. He addressed the personality issue head on, saying, ''If you entrust me with the presidency, I know I won't always be the most exciting politician.'' But in what could be interpreted as a dig at Mr. Bush -- who is known as less engaged on the issues than Mr. Gore -- he pledged, ''I will work for you every day.'' Here's what Mr. Bush said in 1988: ''I may not be the most eloquent, but I learned that eloquence won't draw oil from the ground. I may sometimes be a little awkward, but there's nothing self-conscious in my love of country.''And, as Mr. Bush did 12 years ago, Mr. Gore sought to fasten himself to the economic successes of his administration. It could be that the appeal will work and, as happened with Mr. Bush, that people will entrust Mr. Gore to continue bringing the nation down the path of prosperity. But in a telling acknowledgment that the campaign ahead will not be easy, Mr. Gore's aides were already playing down the import of tonight. ''This is an important moment, a crescendo,'' said Tad Devine, one of Mr. Gore's top strategists. '' But there will be other big moments in this campaign, including the presidential debates.'' Sooner or later, though, Mr. Gore will run out of big moments. And tonight may have been his best opportunity to accomplish what he has tried again and again in this race for president: to reintroduce himself to the people.
 Nielsen Media Research reports that estimated 15 million people tuned into ABC, NBC and CBS to watch Sen Joseph Lieberman's address to Democratic National Convention, and 16.5 million watched Al Gore's acceptance speech; 14.1 million network viewers saw Dick Cheney's speech to Republican National Convention two weeks ago (S) But Wednesday night's network audience was smaller than the 16.5 million who watched Al Gore accept the nomination for vice president at the 1996 Democratic convention.
 Caryn James Critic's Notebook article says Vice Pres Al Gore, even in a speech declaring himself a man of the future, was conspicuously uncomfortable as a media candidate; says most effective view of Gore's human side came from short biographical film made for campaign by director Spike Jonze; photo (M) ''If you entrust me with the presidency, I know I won't always be the most exciting politician,'' Al Gore said as he ended his acceptance speech with what seemed, after months of wrestling with the issue, a defiant acknowledgment of fact. Even in a speech declaring himself a man of the future, he was conspicuously uncomfortable as a media candidate. Watching his acceptance was like watching the televised version of a stage play, the kind in which the cameras stand back and put the television audience in the position of distant voyeurs. Mr. Gore nodded as he looked out over the crowd, as if he could connect with individuals in that vast room; that was an effective performance in itself. Yet when he looked toward the camera, he actually seemed to be looking into the teleprompter. And a convincing performance once removed is not what a television campaign needs. ''If you entrust me with the presidency, I know I won't always be the most exciting politician,'' Al Gore said as he ended his acceptance speech with what seemed, after months of wrestling with the issue, a defiant acknowledgment of fact. Even in a speech declaring himself a man of the future, he was conspicuously uncomfortable as a media candidate. Watching his acceptance was like watching the televised version of a stage play, the kind in which the cameras stand back and put the television audience in the position of distant voyeurs. Mr. Gore nodded as he looked out over the crowd, as if he could connect with individuals in that vast room; that was an effective performance in itself. Yet when he looked toward the camera, he actually seemed to be looking into the teleprompter. And a convincing performance once removed is not what a television campaign needs. His one hour in prime time had been preceded by two days of character witnesses, as family and friends appeared in an endless loop of interviews on the morning shows, late shows and everywhere in between. More than once, Tipper Gore and Tommy Lee Jones blamed the office of the vice presidency for Mr. Gore's much-talked-about stiffness. He had been standing so loyally in the background, they argued, that of course he couldn't seem as lively as he was in private. In his speech last night, when he said his mother was from a town named Cold Corner, you could almost imagine them protesting, ''Don't say cold! He's not cold!'' Oddly, the most effective view of the human side of Mr. Gore came from a short biographical film made for the campaign by Spike Jonze, the director who got his start in music videos before making the sly film ''Being John Malkovich.'' Mr. Jonze is a master of meticulous films that create the illusion of looseness, and he used the intimacy of hand-held cameras, and smooth editing that looked tossed together, to recreate the Gore image. In the film, the vice president is seen with his family, walking through the woods of Tennessee, making funny faces (well, not that funny) at his grandson, and singing (off key) a jingle from one of his father's old campaigns. ''Vote for Gore, vote for Gore, He's wise and able, And he's just forty-four.'' Tipper Gore talks about their first date. ''Was I a little stiff?'' he asks. ''Not at all,'' she says and they kiss for the camera. That of course was the message, which Mr. Gore made explicit. ''I'm a lot more comfortable with the idea of rolling up my sleeves and making the system work than I am with campaigning,'' he said in the film. But the Jonze film was almost sneaked on the air at an especially off time, 7:30 Tuesday night, as if it were being tested. It was carried only by MSNBC and CSPAN, but clips popped up over the next 24 hours on ABC's ''Nightline'' and ''Good Morning America,'' and on CNN. Something similar in prime time might have gone a long way toward delivering on the promise of showing a new, warmer Al Gore. Instead, Tipper Gore introduced  her husband last night with a typically homogenized campaign film, loaded with sentiment and family photographs. The cable news channels, along with PBS and NBC, carried that film, while CBS and ABC replaced it with their own fuller reports, complete with references to the Buddhist temple incident. ''This campaign is not about the gestures I make in an interview,'' Mr. Gore said in the ABC report, but of course campaigning is largely about imagery. If not, his family wouldn't have worked overtime to  create the warm gestures for him. He needed that long smooch with Tipper on the podium last night to suggest a warmth he would never display on his own.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's speech at Democratic National Convention, written by Gore himself and then edited and polished by speechwriters and aides, reflects Gore's top-down approach to politics; photo (M) When  Al Gore sat down at his laptop to  write  no pressure, but everyone said it had better be the speech of his life -- he began by raiding some of his favorite speeches past, culling some material that had been written for him and some of his own stuff, like the eulogy he wrote for his father's funeral. When  Al Gore sat down at his laptop to  write  no pressure, but everyone said it had better be the speech of his life -- he began by raiding some of his favorite speeches past, culling some material that had been written for him and some of his own stuff, like the eulogy he wrote for his father's funeral. The top-down approach is not only the perfect reflection of the way Mr. Gore operates, but the mirror image of the way his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, worked on his recent acceptance speech. Mr. Bush, as is far more typical of presidential nominees, left the writing to the professionals and then fiddled with the text, asking for certain changes and adding some personal touches. That Mr. Gore would make the highly unusual decision to write his own words surprised no one who knows him well. After all, he wrote his own book, ''Earth in the Balance,'' and before running for office was a reporter for The Tennessean in Nashville, where his former editors fondly recall having to tear copy out of his hands as he kept right on reporting past deadline. Though Mr. Gore's first draft ran 12,000 words, he never intended to deliver a speech of that length, Mr. Eskew said. He wanted to introduce himself with some good biographical stories, telling about how his father, Senator Albert Gore, grew up poor in Possum Hollow, Tennessee and after living through the Depression ''entered public service to fight for the people, not the powerful.'' And how his mother, Pauline LaFon Gore, put herself through law school waiting tables in an all-night coffee shop. Yet he also wanted to get into policy details that he thought Americans ought to hear. ''He has the attitude that if people don't like that they should still know that's what they're getting, ''said Mr. Gore's oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff. Mr. Gore also felt strongly that he  wanted to use the speech to look to the future. ''He thinks people are not as interested in hearing what he did as vice president,'' Ms. Schiff said.. Mr. Gore took that version with him on his recent vacation in North Carolina. He kept putting various chunks that his aides had taken out back in -- again in contrast to Mr. Bush's impulse to pare down his speech. Late Thursday afternoon, Mr. Eskew said the speech was now down to 5,700 words, about 1,800 more than Mr. Bush's. He insisted Mr. Gore did not feel pressured by expectations.
 Rates at parking lot near Democratic National Convention provide informal poll of political star power; rates were $25 on day Pres Clinton spoke, $15 when Sen Joseph Lieberman spoke, and $5 when Vice Pres Al Gore spoke; other convention happenings noted; photos (Los Angeles Diary) (M) Can political star power be measured by parking lot rates? If so, Al Gore may have reason to worry. One of the outdoor parking lots closest to the convention has altered its rates on a daily basis. On the day President Clinton spoke, the lot charged $25. The Joseph I. Lieberman night resulted in a discounted parking rate of $15. Today, the biggest and final day of the convention, when the presidential candidate, Al Gore, spoke to the delegates, parking lot rates tumbled. All-day parking cost only $5. Can political star power be measured by parking lot rates? If so, Al Gore may have reason to worry. One of the outdoor parking lots closest to the convention has altered its rates on a daily basis. On the day President Clinton spoke, the lot charged $25. The Joseph I. Lieberman night resulted in a discounted parking rate of $15. Today, the biggest and final day of the convention, when the presidential candidate, Al Gore, spoke to the delegates, parking lot rates tumbled. All-day parking cost only $5. It was an hour before the biggest speech of Al Gore's life. The packed Democratic National Convention was pulsing with energy. The crowd waited. But then the convention's planners began an Oprah-style tribute to Mr. Gore. The stage presentation featured among others David Halberstam, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who talked about Mr. Gore's family and The Tennessean, the newspaper where both he and Mr. Gore once worked. There were also tributes to Mr. Gore as a mountaineer, a man of religion, a soldier, a friend. The tribute was designed to depict Mr. Gore as warm, gutsy and accessible. But it went on and on. Big Guy in Gore's Shadow Now that Al Gore is the Democratic Party's new leading man, what happens to the big guy still on stage in the White House? At a raucous reunion party late Wednesday in West Hollywood for past and present Clinton staffers, Joe Lockhart, the White House spokesman, said that the president would be out fund-raising for Mr. Gore ''a couple of times a week'' between now and the election. Beyond that, Mr. Clinton's role in the Gore campaign is undecided -- and a big source of debate here. Will Mr. Clinton's presence on the campaign trail strengthen Mr. Gore, or dwarf him? ''The president can raise money and raise issues, but otherwise he ought not to be out there campaigning,'' said Paul Begala, the former Clinton adviser, who turned up at the party at Manhattan Wonton Company, a restaurant on Melrose Place. ''He would tend to distract and overshadow.'' Mr. Lockhart said Mr. Clinton would do whatever the Gore campaign wanted, which, a Gore adviser said, will be trips to the South, to black communities and to California -- places where he is popular. Mr. Clinton is also speaking nearly every day to his old friend, William Daley, the Gore-Lieberman campaign manager. Offering political advice, yes? Mr. Lockhart wouldn't say, but Mr. Begala, a veteran of the 1992 Clinton campaign offered this: ''In 1992 there was always a creative tension between the people who were hired to run the campaign and the person who wanted to run the campaign.'' At the Republican convention in Philadelphia, the Democrats had a similar squad, but their members were sometimes harder to spot. The Republican group here wore pins reading: ''Bush/Cheney.''
 Michiko Kakutani reviews book The Prince of Tennessee: The Rise of Al Gore by David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima; photo (M) THE PRINCE OF TENNESSEE  The Rise of Al Gore  By David Maraniss  and Ellen Nakashima  323 pages. Simon & Schuster. $23. Scattered throughout David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima's flimsy new book, ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' are a few telling glimpses of the vice president: Al Gore, at age 10, asking a teacher during a field trip, ''Sir, is this the time to be rowdy?''; Al Gore, as a Harvard sophomore during the escalating debate over Vietnam, organizing a protest against the dining room's nightly servings of fried chicken and gravy and lobbying for less-fattening fare; and Al Gore, running for Congress in 1976, bulling his way through nausea and nervousness, to prevail through sheer will. Mr. Maraniss and Ms. Nakashima tell us that Al Gore was a tattletale as a boy, and that he always played a cowboy when he played cowboys and Indians. They tell us that he was a plodding but tenacious basketball player who invariably ended up in foul trouble; that Harvard classmates occasionally allowed him into their all-night poker games ''with the understanding that they would teach him how to play while relieving him of his money, a few hundred dollars at a time''; that he once contemplated writing a book called ''Salt III'' about ''the different ways sodium affects our lives.'' THE PRINCE OF TENNESSEE  The Rise of Al Gore  By David Maraniss  and Ellen Nakashima  323 pages. Simon & Schuster. $23. Scattered throughout David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima's flimsy new book, ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' are a few telling glimpses of the vice president: Al Gore, at age 10, asking a teacher during a field trip, ''Sir, is this the time to be rowdy?''; Al Gore, as a Harvard sophomore during the escalating debate over Vietnam, organizing a protest against the dining room's nightly servings of fried chicken and gravy and lobbying for less-fattening fare; and Al Gore, running for Congress in 1976, bulling his way through nausea and nervousness, to prevail through sheer will. Mr. Maraniss and Ms. Nakashima tell us that Al Gore was a tattletale as a boy, and that he always played a cowboy when he played cowboys and Indians. They tell us that he was a plodding but tenacious basketball player who invariably ended up in foul trouble; that Harvard classmates occasionally allowed him into their all-night poker games ''with the understanding that they would teach him how to play while relieving him of his money, a few hundred dollars at a time''; that he once contemplated writing a book called ''Salt III'' about ''the different ways sodium affects our lives.'' Unfortunately for the reader, the authors never pull together such anecdotes into a coherent portrait of Al Gore. A similar problem afflicted Mr. Maraniss's 1995 biography of Bill Clinton, ''First in His Class,'' but that earlier book seems a model of diligence compared to this hasty and perfunctory volume. ''The Prince of Tennessee'' grew out of a series of articles for The Washington Post, and it still has a hurried, improvisational air. Though the authors contend that ''many of the behavioral patterns of the figure who would run for president in 2000 are best explained by the boy he once was,'' their book hops and skips through Mr. Gore's youth, and it proves even more arbitrary and desultory in dealing with his political career. There is no serious assessment of Mr. Gore's record in Congress or his performance as vice president and no real grappling with such controversies as his involvement in the 1996 campaign finance scandals or his changing views on abortion. Any reader looking for a carefully considered appraisal of the vice president's life and career would be better off reading Bill Turque's biography ''Inventing Al Gore,'' recently published by Houghton Mifflin. Like Mr. Turque, Mr. Maraniss and Ms. Nakashima repeatedly use terms like ''cautious,'' ''self-righteous'' and ''competitive'' to describe Al Gore, adjectives that readily come to mind to anyone who has watched him on television or followed accounts of him in the press. Once again we are told about the pressures the young Al Gore faced in living up to the expectations of his father, Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee. Once again we hear about his halfhearted efforts to rebel against a destiny in politics. And once again we hear about his love of facts and his tendency to follow his head over his heart. In his writings on President Clinton, Mr. Maraniss has frequently spoken of his vacillation between idealism and opportunism, and in the case of Mr. Gore, he and Ms. Nakashima come up with a similar equation, arguing that the vice president has always moved between two poles: between ''farsightedness and caution, selflessness and self-aggrandizement,'' between ''principle and expediency,'' politeness and a ''studied viciousness.'' One of the keys to Mr. Gore's behavior, the authors suggest, is an insecurity that they say many of his former aides believe ''brought out his tendency to be bureaucratic, defensive about his turf, wooden in public presentation, prone to exaggerate his own accomplishments, impressed by resumes and the conventions of the establishment, and more timid than he wanted to be.'' Like so much in this sloppy book, this assessment of Mr. Gore is contradicted by other observations made by the authors. In an early chapter they write that Al Gore, unlike Bill Clinton, never seemed driven to win the approval of strangers: ''he had a high enough opinion of himself''; what set him apart from his prep school classmates, they write, was ''his air of supreme confidence.'' Later they suggest that overconfidence played a significant role in his failed 1988 run for the White House, a run fueled, they imply, by a hubristic desire to place himself in a grand 28-year historical cycle, going back to Teddy Roosevelt (1904), F.D.R. (1932) and John F. Kennedy (1960). Although the authors point out that ''there would be no great 28-year cycle,'' they add that Mr. Gore still shared a connection with the Kennedy tradition: ''Family tragedies. Prep schools, Harvard. Controversial fathers. Aggressive foreign/domestic policies. Expectations.'' This is not the only case in which they demonstrate a knee-jerk inclination to ratify Mr. Gore's view of himself or to rationalize criticisms directed at him by other journalists. They argue, for instance, that his tendency to overstate his accomplishments (like taking credit for the Internet) should be put in a cultural context, namely ''a country storytelling style that he inherited from his father, built on grandiosity and hyperbole''; in any case, they add, ''manipulating reality is an inherent aspect of politics.'' They note that Mr. Gore -- who wrote in his 1992 book ''Earth in the Balance'' that he was impatient with his own ''tendency to put a finger to the political winds'' -- has remained ''beholden to polls and conventional wisdom,'' ''relying on consultants to calibrate his image and message,''  but they nonetheless give him points for showing ''that he knew the person he wished he could be.'' As for his environmental record as vice president, a record criticized by reporters like Bill Turque for demonstrating ''a pattern of passivity and timidity,'' the authors point out that Mr. Gore decided to attend the 1997 global-warming talks in Kyoto, Japan, in the face of pressure not to go. Never mind that the White House did not even attempt to send the treaty to Congress amid opposition from Republicans in the Senate: ''for those around him who had seen the struggle between his idealism and ambition and who knew how his insecurity could hold him back,'' Mr. Maraniss and Ms. Nakashima write, ''this was a victory of a deeper sort. He had found his gut.'' This sort of reflexive eagerness to pat Mr. Gore on the back, combined with an unwillingness to assess his record rigorously, underscores the cursory nature of this book, a volume that in the end feels less like a real book than a patched-together production brought out to cash in on the fall campaign.
 Editorial says Vice Pres Al Gore's acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles was forceful address designed to humanize him to voters and accelerate drive to free himself from understudy's role; says Gore clearly did what he needed to do and impressed and perhaps surprised his audience in process; says he moved Democratic Party to full-throated support, and sharply defined battle lines for what could turn into close race over real policy differences (M) Vice President Al Gore accepted the Democratic presidential nomination last night with a forceful address designed to humanize him to the voters and to accelerate his drive to free himself from the understudy's role. Imploring Americans to take a fresh look at his life experiences and values, Mr. Gore issued a calculated declaration of independence from President Clinton. ''We're electing a new president, and I stand here tonight as my own man,'' he asserted, promising to fight against ''powerful forces'' on behalf of working Americans. And in a striking, unmistakable reference to the scandals of recent years, he drew a thunderous ovation by promising, ''I will work for you every day and I will never let you down.'' Yet the center of Mr. Gore's sales pitch invoked the Clinton administration's economic record and laid out a budgetary approach that will clearly be a main theme of his campaign against Gov. George W. Bush. The vice president repeatedly hammered Mr. Bush as someone who would squander the surplus on ''a huge tax cut for the wealthy.'' Just as ardently he portrayed himself, over and over, as someone who would ''fight for working families.'' Vice President Al Gore accepted the Democratic presidential nomination last night with a forceful address designed to humanize him to the voters and to accelerate his drive to free himself from the understudy's role. Imploring Americans to take a fresh look at his life experiences and values, Mr. Gore issued a calculated declaration of independence from President Clinton. ''We're electing a new president, and I stand here tonight as my own man,'' he asserted, promising to fight against ''powerful forces'' on behalf of working Americans. And in a striking, unmistakable reference to the scandals of recent years, he drew a thunderous ovation by promising, ''I will work for you every day and I will never let you down.'' Yet the center of Mr. Gore's sales pitch invoked the Clinton administration's economic record and laid out a budgetary approach that will clearly be a main theme of his campaign against Gov. George W. Bush. The vice president repeatedly hammered Mr. Bush as someone who would squander the surplus on ''a huge tax cut for the wealthy.'' Just as ardently he portrayed himself, over and over, as someone who would ''fight for working families.'' Mr. Gore did not enter the Staples Center in Los Angeles with Mr. Clinton's gladiatorial dash through the corridors. Instead he came down an aisle as a determined underdog with a clear tactical mission. His campaign hopes the traditional convention ''bounce'' will put him within a few points of Governor Bush just as voters start to focus on the issues. The paradox is that voters do side with Mr. Gore on many issues he emphasized last night, particularly the economy and social concerns like gun control, abortion rights and protecting the environment. But to the dismay of Democrats, their agreement has not translated into political dominance or public acclaim for him. The twin goals of Mr. Gore's acceptance speech were clear. He was inviting listeners to look beyond the candidates' personalities to the issues that would make them very different presidents. He also hopes that the voters will rethink the stereotype of him as an automaton more comfortable with abstractions than with the everyday worries that Mr. Clinton empathized with, almost to the point of self-parody. Trying to turn his political defects into virtues, the vice president acknowledged that ''sometimes people say I'm too serious.'' But one of his biggest ovations came when he declared: ''The presidency is more than a popularity contest. It's a day-by-day fight for people.'' In a kind of homage to his father's New Deal economic populism, Mr. Gore introduced members of the audience who he said deserved fairer, more caring treatment from a government that should not bestow undeserved tax-cut windfalls on the wealthy. After a week of the Democrats' hanging out at movie studios, it was striking how Mr. Gore tried to appeal to Americans alienated from the content of popular entertainment. Echoing the longstanding campaign of both his wife, Tipper, and his running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman, he declared that ''we must challenge a culture with too much meanness, and not enough meaning.'' It was said by Mr. Gore's staff that the vice president, a former newspaper reporter, had written his speech himself, and the address seemed to galvanize him. It drew waves of ovations from an audience that sometimes appeared impressed that he was trying -- often successfully -- to rise above his usual plodding delivery. Mr. Gore clearly did what he needed to do and impressed and perhaps surprised his audience in the process. He moved his party to full-throated support, and he sharply defined the battle lines for what could now turn into a close race over real policy differences.
 The senator, John Edwards, had come to praise Vice President Al Gore, but he managed to squeeze in a few words about himself, too. How the ''struggling farmers'' of Iowa reminded him of the struggling farmers of North Carolina, for instance. And how, as a trial lawyer, he once fought an insurance company on behalf of a boy who had been denied coverage. The senator, John Edwards, had come to praise Vice President Al Gore, but he managed to squeeze in a few words about himself, too. How the ''struggling farmers'' of Iowa reminded him of the struggling farmers of North Carolina, for instance. And how, as a trial lawyer, he once fought an insurance company on behalf of a boy who had been denied coverage. Few people at the Democratic National Convention here will say that they expect Mr. Gore to lose this year -- but plenty are preparing for the day he departs the national scene. And so this year, as in any other convention year, the party's would-be rising stars are strutting their wares, meeting the Democratic cognoscenti, raising some money and laying the groundwork for future campaigns. ''That's politics,'' Mr. Tully observed. ''In case the world comes to an end, and Al Gore and Joe Lieberman aren't elected, there will be people already working to fill the void.'' Mr. Edwards, 47, a first-term senator who gained national attention when Mr. Gore put him on his short list of potential running mates, logged a schedule this week of someone with plans to make plans for a national campaign. He made speeches to the delegations from Massachusetts, New York and California, a prime-time appearance on the convention stage, several appearances on national talk shows, and gave scores of news media interviews. Many Democrats have complained that their bench seems rather thin. By comparison, the Republicans had a deep pool of well-known, highly experienced governors who could have been the running mate for their nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. (That said, Mr. Bush chose a former congressman and defense secretary, Dick Cheney.) But other Democrats note that in 1996, when the Republican Party seemed in desperate need of new blood, Governor Bush was just mid-way through his first term and barely registering on most people's political radar screens. Among Iowa Democrats, there are widespread hopes that Mr. Vilsack will emerge, Bushlike, from the pack. An obscure state senator when he was elected governor in 1998, Mr. Vilsack offers what many Midwestern Democrats think their party needs more of: a folksy, earnest style coupled with a populist agenda.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, appearing for first time as presidential nominee, leaves no doubt that he is determined to present himself without Pres Clinton's shadow darkening his center stage; speaking unusually quickly, confidently, and even ebulliently at times, Gore seems determined to shake plodding pace and tone of condescension that often mark his formal speeches; virtually races through litany of causes and issues dear to core Democratic constituencies, drawing roars of applause from convention floor (M) If Bill Clinton's backstage walk to valediction on Monday was a heavyweight champion's last indulgent moment in the sun, Al Gore's arrival in the Staples Center tonight was a dogged contender's first chance to enter the arena alone. He strode through a sea of pennants down a side aisle with a posse of seconds trailing humbly in his wake. By the time Mr. Gore had climbed the gray-carpeted steps of the podium and wrapped his wife, Tipper, in a sweeping embrace and a long kiss, the giant arena was shaking as if struck by a California earthquake, strobe lights were flickering, tears were streaking delegates' faces, and the crowd was utterly his. If Bill Clinton's backstage walk to valediction on Monday was a heavyweight champion's last indulgent moment in the sun, Al Gore's arrival in the Staples Center tonight was a dogged contender's first chance to enter the arena alone. He strode through a sea of pennants down a side aisle with a posse of seconds trailing humbly in his wake. By the time Mr. Gore had climbed the gray-carpeted steps of the podium and wrapped his wife, Tipper, in a sweeping embrace and a long kiss, the giant arena was shaking as if struck by a California earthquake, strobe lights were flickering, tears were streaking delegates' faces, and the crowd was utterly his. Speaking unusually quickly, confidently, even ebulliently at times, Mr. Gore seemed determined to shake the plodding pace and the tone of condescension that often mark his formal speeches. He virtually raced through a litany of causes and issues dear to core Democratic constituencies, from health care to civil rights, affirmative action, public education, and abortion rights, with perhaps the biggest applause line of all that ''the last thing this country needs is a Supreme Court that overturns Roe v. Wade.'' After eight years of loyal service to a consummate, intuitive political performer, Mr. Gore left no doubt from the start tonight that he was determined to present himself without Mr. Clinton's shadow darkening his center stage. When he said, ''I stand here tonight as my own man, and I want you to know me for who I truly am,'' his young speechwriter, Eli Attie, and his image-meister, Carter Eskew, watching from just below the podium, slapped a high-five in satisfaction. Nearly 50 minutes later, at the end of his speech, Mr. Gore even found his own formulation of Mr. Clinton's 1992 pledge to stay with the voters of New Hampshire until the ''last dog dies,'' by vowing: ''If you entrust me with the presidency, I know I won't always be the most exciting politician. But I pledge to you tonight: I will work for you every day, and I will never let you down.'' As they climbed the aisles to the press section afterward, Mr. Gore's aides took particular satisfaction at the way he had defined himself and made his argument for election, as when he said: ''This election is not an award for past performance. I'm not asking you to vote for me on the basis of the economy we have. Tonight I ask for your support on the basis of the better, fairer, more prosperous America we can build together.'' The vice president's aides also expressed surprise that Mr. Gore had finished his speech far faster than in any of his repeated rehearsals with a teleprompter. Notably, for a candidate with proven skill at cut-and-thrust, Mr. Gore made not a single direct mention of his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and very few indirect ones. This was a convention week in which conventional wisdom held that Mr. Gore needed to knock one out of the park tonight. Only time will tell how he touched the television audience, which matters most, but many  delegates here, perhaps in reflection of the glittery, giddy high of the moment, said he had done just that. Marcia Hale, a longtime Clinton aide who came back this season to help manage the convention for Mr. Gore, flashed a thumbs-up sign as she passed journalists on deadline. ''I think he showed his own persona,'' she said, ''and he told his own story and he said it clearly and with emotion.'' Afterward, as star-shaped mylar balloons, and red, white and blue rubber ones, and gold and silver confetti fired from air cannons filled the air, the newly minted nominee was  joined on stage by a pantheon of the Democratic family, winners and losers, past and present alike, from his primary rival, former Senator Bill Bradley, to John J. Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. When Mr. Gore finally made his way through the tunnel off the speaker's platform, delegates were straining to shake his hand or snap his picture, and a new aura surrounded him. By the time Mr. Gore's wife was introduced by their daughter Kristin an hour later, there was pandemonium. Mickey Hart, the old Grateful Dead drummer, beat a tom-tom on stage, and Mrs. Gore, radiant in powder blue, shook and boogied, clapped and high-fived. What seemed like an ocean of round red, white and blue signs reading ''Tipper Rocks'' bobbed in the hall. Mrs. Gore, an accomplished amateur photographer, narrated pictures from a family album interspersed in a video that paid tribute to Mr. Gore's service in Vietnam, his journalism career and his virtues as a family man. She concluded over stirring music, ''To me, for all the past accomplishments and future promises, he's still the man I fell in love with in high school.''
 Barely an hour after Vice Pres Al Gore issues call for reforming campaign financing, he heads back to fund-raising circuit for concert that raises $5.2 million for Democratic Party; party officials are quick to note that event raises only 'hard' dollars, money party can use directly for Gore's candidacy, as opposed to unrestricted contributions known as soft money that are focus of most reform measures; concert is only fundraiser held by Democratic National Committee during convention, but candidates and congressional fund-raising committees courted contributors ceaselessly all week in soft-money extravaganza underwritten by scores of corporations that have already contributed millions of dollars and from which party hopes to reap millions more; entertainment and telecommunications industry have largest presence (M) Barely an hour after Vice President Al Gore issued a call for reforming the ways political campaigns are paid for, he headed back to the fund-raising circuit for a concert that raised $5.2 million for the Democratic Party. In his acceptance speech tonight, Mr. Gore vowed to ''get all the special-interest money -- all of it -- out of our democracy'' and promised to make legislation to reform campaign financing the first bill he would send to Congress as president. Barely an hour after Vice President Al Gore issued a call for reforming the ways political campaigns are paid for, he headed back to the fund-raising circuit for a concert that raised $5.2 million for the Democratic Party. In his acceptance speech tonight, Mr. Gore vowed to ''get all the special-interest money -- all of it -- out of our democracy'' and promised to make legislation to reform campaign financing the first bill he would send to Congress as president. And they noted that the concert tonight, also starring Whoopi Goldberg and Enrique Iglesias, raised only ''hard'' dollars, money collected in amounts from $150 to $20,000 that the party can use directly on Mr. Gore's candidacy -- as opposed to the large, unrestricted contributions known as soft money that are the focus of most reform measures. They entertained members of the House and Senate commerce committees, their legislative overseers, at Dodger Stadium on Tuesday evening. Among the sponsors of Dodger Day 2000 was the United States Telecom Association, a trade group whose president, Roy Neel, is a former chief of staff for Mr. Gore. Peter Knight, another former chief of staff for Mr. Gore and now deputy chairman of the Democratic National Committee, has lobbied on behalf of two telecommunications companies, Bell Atlantic and Leap Wireless.
 * Transcript of Vice Pres Al Gore's acceptance speech before Democratic National Convention, as recorded by The New York Times Following is the acceptance speech prepared for delivery last night by Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee for president, at the Democratic Convention in Los Angeles: Following is the acceptance speech prepared for delivery last night by Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee for president, at the Democratic Convention in Los Angeles:
 Mr. Cuomo insisted that his top concern here was not tending to any hope he might have to become the second New York governor named Cuomo, but rather advancing the campaign of Vice President Al Gore. So Mr. Cuomo's schedule of events is 23 pages long for the week, taking him today to the empty convention floor for an interview with Gabe Pressman of WNBC-TV, Channel 4 in New York, and to meetings with New York delegates. There he argued that the success of George W. Bush to date was proof that Mr. Cuomo would not be weighed down by his own father, who was defeated for a third term in 1994, should he run for office. For Mr. Cuomo, the high point today was his speech to the convention, an event that inevitably recalled the memorable keynote speech Mario M. Cuomo delivered in 1984 to Democrats in San Francisco. (It seemed that the four words Mr. Cuomo heard most often today were, ''I loved your father.'') But the younger Mr. Cuomo blanched at the suggestion that his speech invited comparisons to his father, quickly noting that his mission was limited to talking up Mr. Gore.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's convention speech contained many promises that would cost billions of dollars and others that would cost little or nothing; listing of specific proposals and their costs; photo (M) In his speech tonight, Vice President Al Gore made many promises that would cost billions of dollars and many others that would cost little or nothing. In his speech tonight, Vice President Al Gore made many promises that would cost billions of dollars and many others that would cost little or nothing. *Universal health insurance for all children by 2004. A plan Mr. Gore offered last year would cost more than $24 billion over five years. *More education spending to guarantee a qualified teacher in every classroom. The Gore campaign has said Mr. Gore would spend $115 billion more on education over the next decade.
 Mr. Cheney is by no means the only politician whose public life has been complicated by his or his family's investments. Vice President Al Gore has become the object of environmentalists' wrath for his mother's stake in the Occidental Petroleum Corporation -- a holding worth between $250,000 and $500,000, according to government filings. And the income earned by Mr. Gore on land he leases for zinc mining has raised eyebrows.
 Soft Money Still Flowing  Vice President Al Gore called for an end to soft money, but his party's convention, like the Republicans', has still been heavily underwritten by corporations. Soft Money Still Flowing  Vice President Al Gore called for an end to soft money, but his party's convention, like the Republicans', has still been heavily underwritten by corporations.
 Vice Pres Al Gore makes his debut as Democratic presidential nominee with vow to work for all Americans; speaking to Democratic National Convention and the nation beyond, Gore distances himself from Pres Clinton, saying 'I stand here tonight as my own man'; lays groundwork for a fall campaign in which he will identify himself as friend of the little guy and Gov George Bush as candidate of the rich, powerful and influential; Gore lays out his position on range of issues in speech with few rhetorical flourishes or unexpected policy departures; promises to enact tax reforms targeting working families, preserve abortion rights, oppose school vouchers and support affirmative action; says comprehensive campaign spending reform bill will be his first order of business if elected; photo (M) A deputy no more, Vice President Al Gore made his debut as the Democratic presidential nominee tonight with a vow to work for all Americans, ''especially those who need a voice, those who need a champion, those who need to be lifted up so they are never left behind.'' Speaking to the Democratic National Convention that nominated him on Wednesday night and to the nation beyond, Mr. Gore said, ''I stand here tonight as my own man'' -- a clear rejoinder to the Republicans who have sought to picture him as a cut-rate version of President Clinton. [Transcript, Page A21-22.] A deputy no more, Vice President Al Gore made his debut as the Democratic presidential nominee tonight with a vow to work for all Americans, ''especially those who need a voice, those who need a champion, those who need to be lifted up so they are never left behind.'' Speaking to the Democratic National Convention that nominated him on Wednesday night and to the nation beyond, Mr. Gore said, ''I stand here tonight as my own man'' -- a clear rejoinder to the Republicans who have sought to picture him as a cut-rate version of President Clinton. [Transcript, Page A21-22.] The vice president told a whooping crowd at the Staples Center on the fringe of downtown Los Angeles that he would give working families ''a full range of targeted tax cuts,'' including an early end to the so-called marriage penalty and a reform of the federal estate tax. But his proposals stopped well short of those made by his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. In a pointed reference to Mr. Bush's promise to cut federal income taxes by more than $1.3 trillion over 10 years, Mr. Gore said, ''I will not go along with a huge tax cut for the wealthy at the expense of everyone else and wreck our good economy in the process.'' Trailing Mr. Bush in the polls, faced with an uphill fight in the Midwestern and Mid-Atlantic swing states that will decide the outcome, Mr. Gore seemed to be laying the groundwork for a fall campaign in which he would identify himself as the friend of the little guy and Mr. Bush as the candidate of the rich, powerful and influential. ''I'm happy that the stock market has boomed and so many businesses and new enterprises have done well,'' Mr. Gore said. ''This country is richer and stronger. But my focus is on working families -- people trying to make house payments and car payments, working overtime to save for college and do right by their kids.'' The economy is in many ways Mr. Gore's greatest asset on the stump. Given its strength, he should be doing much better, by normal standards. Candidates of parties that hold the White House usually fare well when the economy is strong and the country is involved in no foreign war. Even in this most important hour of Mr. Gore's career, the shadow of Mr. Clinton fell across his path. It was disclosed in Washington that a new grand jury has been convened to consider whether the president should be indicted after leaving office for having lied under oath about his affair with a White House intern. Some weeks ago, Sam Popkin, a professor at the University of California at San Diego who is working in the Gore campaign, defined the goals of the two candidates at their respective conventions. Mr. Bush, Professor Popkin said, needed to show some gravitas, while Mr. Gore needed to show some levitas. In other words, one needed to show he was not a lightweight, the other to lighten up. Mr. Gore's speech had few rhetorical flourishes or unexpected policy departures and fewer flashes of humor. Speaking more quickly than usual, Mr. Gore poured out a flood of words; sometimes he sounded like a man with his car double-parked. But he gestured more than Mr. Bush had, and was altogether more animated. The speech, which lasted for 52 minutes, was a shopping list, and Mr. Gore acknowledged he may have sounded like a policy wonk. He even admitted, ''I won't always be the most exciting politician.'' ''Go, Al, go!'' the crowd chanted, waving blue-and-white ''Gore'' signs. Mr. Gore, continuing his string of promises, said that as president he would provide universal child health insurance by 2004, universal preschool education of a high quality by 2010 and use federal funds to put 50,000 more police officers on the streets of American cities. Some in his camp still hope for a modest post-convention ''bounce'' in opinion polls about Mr. Gore's candidacy, but their ultimate goal is to turn the race around in the debates with Mr. Bush. The Texas governor agreed today to three debates with the vice president, starting in early October, as well as two between the vice presidential nominees. But the Bush campaign made no agreement as to the debates' length or format. Mr. Gore was preceded to the podium by a parade of speakers, including Kweisi Mfume, a former congressman who is now president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamente of California, the first statewide Hispanic officeholder in this state this century. Then, in the modern, made-for-television style, a parade of friends of the nominee extolled his virtues. Among the speakers were David Halberstam, the journalist and author, a family friend, and Robert Delabar of Seattle, who met Mr. Gore while both were stationed at Fort Rucker, Ala., in the Army. Mr. Gore served in Vietnam while Mr. Bush did not, a point Mr. Gore emphasized in his speech as he has done on the stump throughout the campaign. Tipper Gore, the vice president's wife, came on to introduce him. An amateur photographer, she called her husband ''a decisive leader with strong values'' and showed a series of shots from what she described as ''the family photo album.'' Mr. Gore entered through the crowd, high-fiving several delegates, then ascended the stage to give Mrs. Gore, dressed in a sky-blue silk dress and coat, a robust bearhug. There was in Mr. Gore's speech, much of which he wrote himself, an echo of Mrs. Gore's past attacks on popular music that features explicit sexual content. Among Mr. Gore's other themes was an openness to voters' views. Echoing John F. Kennedy, who announced the start of a national journey to a New Frontier when nominated here in Los Angeles 40 years ago, Mr. Gore urged his listeners tonight to ''set out on a new journey to the best America.''
 Robert W Ray, independent counsel investigating Pres Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky, impaneled grand jury on July 11 to consider whether Clinton should be charged with criminal wrongdoing once he leaves office; but existence of grand jury is leaked to media only hours before Vice Pres Al Gore's speech accepting Democratic Party's nomination, bringing angry reaction from White House; photo (M) The White House reacted angrily to the grand jury disclosure, which came hours before Vice President Al Gore was to accept the Democratic Party's nomination for president. Karen P. Hughes, communications director for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, called the timing unfortunate. ''We think the timing was wrong,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''It was simply not appropriate for this type of news to come out on Al Gore's big day. This election is not about the past and it's not about President Clinton.'' Aides to Governor Bush declined to speculate on the political impact of Mr. Ray's action. But one spokesman said that the development would be viewed by the public as a reminder of the caustic climate in Washington during the Clinton years. ''The American people are sick and tired of investigation and scandal,'' said Ray Sullivan, a Bush spokesman. ''The best way to change that and change the tone in Washington is to change administrations in the White House. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney aim to do just that.''
 Party leaders are concerned about such talk, doubly so since members of a group that makes up another pillar, black Democrats, have also expressed concern here about the party's ideological direction. The party bigwigs have spent much of the week scurrying from delegation to delegation trying to reassure disgruntled union members, lest union support flag for the Gore-Lieberman ticket, with grievous consequences on Nov. 7. Just this morning, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut met for the second time with Bob Chase, president of the National Education Association, to reassure members of the powerful teachers union that while he had supported experimental voucher programs in the past, he would now go along with Vice President Al Gore in opposing them. ''I'm with Al Gore and Joe Lieberman all the way, every step,'' said Clarice Squillace, a retired auto worker from Eastpointe. ''I'm not happy with the China trade thing but I'm resigned to it because it's a done deal. Rick Flynn, a National Education Association member from Sterling Heights, struck a similar note as he discussed how to turn out a big vote for the Gore-Lieberman ticket. ''Whatever you think on a particular issue or issues, the center is where you win,'' he said. ''I'm comfortable with Al Gore and Joe Lieberman. Why not? Ted Kennedy and Jesse Jackson got up there on the podium the other night and praised them to the skies. If it's O.K. with a pair like Ted and Jesse, it's sure as heck O.K. with me.'' For Lana Boldi, a United Auto Workers official from Grand Rapids, the China trade deal was a stinging blow. ''But as much as I disagree with that,'' she said, ''I disagree with George W. Bush even more on just about everything he stands for. You weigh it all out, and you go with Al Gore easily, whatever serious differences you may have with him. Until just before the convention opened here, the enthusiasm of the U.A.W. for Mr. Gore was considerably less than overwhelming. The union held back on endorsing him -- its president, Stephen P. Yokich, is a Michigan delegate -- until just about the last moment. And in an auto state like Michigan, which also happens to be one of the important Midwestern swing states in Election 2000, that hurt -- and still hurts. The latest Michigan poll has Mr. Gore trailing Governor Bush by eight points. Mr. Gore won the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. leadership earlier on though, again, there was much concern about his support for the China trade agreement. Another powerful union, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, still has not committed to a candidate. Its president, James B. Hoffa, is being heavily courted by both the Gore and Bush camps, as well as by Mr. Nader, who is drawing 5 percent to 10 percent of the vote in some big labor states, mainly at Mr. Gore's expense. ''Our base has not come home yet,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''We will have to work on that. The Republican base has accepted George Bush much sooner.''
 Mary Sara Salvania letter, commenting on August 12 article on Gov George Bush calling on Vice Pres Al Gore to denounce Pres Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky, says Bush has forgotten essence of his 'compassionate conservatism' In ''Bush Calls on Gore to Denounce Clinton Affair'' (news article, Aug. 12), Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Vice President Al Gore, says Gov. George W. Bush should talk about his policies, not about President Clinton's past. It is clear that Mr. Bush has forgotten the essence of his ''compassionate conservatism.'' In ''Bush Calls on Gore to Denounce Clinton Affair'' (news article, Aug. 12), Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Vice President Al Gore, says Gov. George W. Bush should talk about his policies, not about President Clinton's past. It is clear that Mr. Bush has forgotten the essence of his ''compassionate conservatism.''
 Mr. Kaster, who earned a law degree from the University of Florida after serving as a paratrooper in Vietnam, moved to Ocala in 1975 to work with Buddy McKay. Mr. McKay went on to serve as Florida's lieutenant governor under Lawton Chiles, then lost a bid for governor against Jeb Bush.
 Nina Shokraii Op-Ed article says Democratic vice presidential nominee Sen Joseph I Lieberman is closer to Republican presidential nominee Gov George Bush on issue of education than to Al Gore; discusses Lieberman's unsuccessful efforts to overhaul federal role in education (M) But the education establishment would have none of it. The National Education Association urged senators not to vote for the bill, and Ted Kennedy, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Education Committee, swatted it aside. Nor was Vice President Al Gore publicly responsive, though Senator Lieberman's office reportedly sent his proposal to Mr. Gore's campaign staff, according to a National Journal article in October 1999. The bill went nowhere. But Senator Lieberman may get another chance. Since the education law was not reauthorized this year, the next administration will have the opportunity to reconsider his plan. The only wrinkle: The presidential candidate who supports the Lieberman approach is George W. Bush.
 Gore Defines Himself And Outlines His Goals  Vice President Al Gore made his debut as the Democratic presidential nominee with a vow to work for all Americans, ''especially those who need a voice, those who need a champion, those who need to be lifted up so they are never left behind.'' Mr. Gore's delivery was uncharacteristically brisk as he reeled off causes and issues dear to core Democratic constituencies -- health care, civil rights, affirmative action, public education and abortion rights. Mr. Gore was headed back to the fund-raising circuit after his speech to the convention, as host of a concert to raise $5.2 million for his party. Bush Agrees to 3 Debates  Advisers to Gov. George W. Bush said he would participate in three presidential debates, an announcement intended to blunt criticism from the Gore campaign that Mr. Bush was trying to avoid such face-to-face contests. Editorials: Mr. Gore steps forward; Russia's unsafe nuclear submarines; privacy and parent notification.  Columns: Gail Collins.
 Op-Ed article by Harvard Law School Prof Charles Ogletree on poor record of Republican lawmakers in integrating federal bench; says it is hard to reconcile their opposition with image of inclusiveness projected at Republican National Convention; accuses Republican-controlled Senate of making mockery of principle stated by Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush that it has obligation to act promptly on judicial nominations, and that he would expect action in 60 days on any he made; says struggle for integration of federal courts has essentially stood still for past 20 years; photo (M) It is difficult to reconcile this opposition to integrating the federal bench with the image of inclusiveness projected from the Republican Convention. George W. Bush recently stated that the Senate has an obligation to act promptly on judicial nominations and that he would expect action within 60 days on any he made. The record of the Republican-controlled Senate makes a mockery of this standard. President Harry Truman began the process of desegregating the federal judiciary in 1949, by nominating William H. Hastie, but by 1976 only four African-Americans had been appointed to the federal appellate courts. President Jimmy Carter made dramatic strides during his four years in office, appointing nine African-Americans to these courts. When he left office, however, the tide reversed. Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush made only three African-American circuit court appointments during their combined 12 years in office -- a lower ratio of black appointments to courts of appeals than F.W. de Klerk had in his tenure as the last apartheid leader of South Africa, as Judge A. Leon Higginbotham noted at the time.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on Democratic National Convention likens it to birthday party being thrown by anxious family for kid who is not particularly popular; says Vice Pres Al Gore delivered acceptance speech that was true to himself: serious, partisan, issue-driven, estimable but 'no walk in the park' (M) But for the most part, the convention was all about Al Gore, and a lot like a birthday party being thrown by an anxious family for a kid who isn't particularly popular. The parents keep inserting themselves into the action, joshing nervously and trying to create the impression that all the fun is emanating from the rather lumpish guest of honor. This was a convention in which the presidential nominating speech focused on a story about how at Harvard, Mr. Gore once roasted a turkey in the dorm fireplace. ''We watched 'Star Trek' when maybe we should have been studying,'' Tommy Lee Jones assured the nation. The actor, who was Mr. Gore's roommate at Harvard, was part of a cast of thousands who marched onstage to hammer home the idea that the vice president is actually the life of the party. Last night Tipper Gore did everything but turn cartwheels to get the auditorium revved up on her husband's behalf, and the crowd practically levitated when he came into the auditorium. But by the time he got to ''the private sector, the engine that drives economic growth,'' you knew he was never going to master the trick of creating a sense of intimacy within a huge arena. He delivered a speech that was true to himself: serious, partisan, issue-driven, estimable, but no walk in the park. The curse of Al Gore's life is that he appears insincere, even when his heart is totally in it. We keep trying to find reasons for this in his upbringing, or his ambition, but perhaps the bottom line is that what we've got here is a perfectly O.K. person who's been cursed by fate with an unwinning smile and a tin ear that flattens out his speech. The convention also saw a 13-minute video about Mr. Gore's lighter side that was directed by Spike Jonze, of ''Being John Malkovich'' fame. Try to catch it if you get a chance -- this may be your only opportunity to see the candidate body-surfing, showing off the gas masks the security guys make him carry in the car, and cheerfully pointing out a nude self-portrait of his wife. The film does make Mr. Gore seem like a guy who's fun to be around, but you can't help noticing the amount of heavy lifting Tipper and the girls have to do to get him there. The vice president is good at playing the straight man, protesting mildly while his children make fun of the way he overmanages the family TV viewing. (When a video is on, Mr. Gore apparently stops the action whenever anybody leaves the room, and rewinds back to the F.B.I. warning when the lost sheep returns.) However, the real message you get is that it might be amusing to hang out with Karenna. Actually, Mr. Gore does have a sense of humor, but it's very dry. This year the Democratic ticket is carrying around a whole lot of wit that's on the arid side. If the American public ever puts out a call for irony, these guys are ready. The public's Gore aversion may be nothing more than a sense that the current team in the White House is like a TV series that's run its course. Even ''M*A*S*H'' got canceled eventually. ''Home Improvement'' ran out of steam after eight years, and the people on that were less stressful company than this administration. The whole point of the last four days was to prepare the American mind for the spinoff, to make people realize that Bill Clinton may be  ''Happy Days'' in its final season, but Al Gore is the first episode of  ''Joanie Loves Chachie.''
 URBAN BUSH WOMEN. Go down home with the Urban Bush Women, an all-female company that brings an urgent, unexpected poetry and humor to the most mundane -- and exalted -- of everyday events. Tonight at 7; free food will be served at 6. Free. La Plaza Cultural community garden, Ninth Street and Avenue C, East Village; reservations necessary: (212) 674-8194 (Dunning).
 The White House reacted angrily to the grand jury disclosure, which came just hours before Vice President Al Gore was to accept the Democratic Party's nomination for president.
