 The report also found that Texas, which has been on a record-setting prison expansion under Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, passed California as the state with the most prison inmates, though Texas has a much smaller population, 20 million people compared with 32 million in California.  At the end of 1999, Texas had 163,190 inmates and California, 163,067.
 Joyce Purnick Metro Matters column on the excitement and joy of Jewish New Yorkers at Al Gore's selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as his vice presidential running mate (M) AT least as interesting as Al Gore's calculations in choosing a conspicuous Jew as his running mate has been the emotional response of New York Jews of every stripe and station. AT least as interesting as Al Gore's calculations in choosing a conspicuous Jew as his running mate has been the emotional response of New York Jews of every stripe and station. IT is no accident that many Jewish New Yorkers never gave Mr. Lieberman a chance to be Mr. Gore's running mate. Too risky, they said. Too much anti-Semitism out there. That calculation may have been as personal as it was political, a reflection of what women feel sitting at an otherwise all-male meeting, what blacks, Latinos, Asians and gays feel when they are excluded. It's a sensibility reflected in debates about affirmative action, which continues to aggravate tensions between blacks and Jews. (Mr. Lieberman's spokesman, Dan Gerstein, said yesterday that the senator was ''in sync'' with Mr. Gore's support of affirmative action, but Mr. Lieberman said in 1995 that it was ''dividing us.'') That, I think, is why the Lieberman selection thrilled so many Jews, even in New York. It is validation. Just as the prospect of a President George W. Bush naming Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice to his cabinet would be validation for African-Americans (and legitimate, compared to that show in Philadelphia). Recognition does not come about passively. It happens through political calculation (Mr. Gore needed Mr. Lieberman's reputation for moral rectitude) and through policies like affirmative action; an imperfect tool, but one at least aimed at inclusion. The Gore ticket raises all sorts of political questions, from whether it will help Hillary Rodham Clinton (probably not; coattails rarely do), to whether Mr. Lieberman's nomination will mean much to Mr. Gore in the long run (how many people vote for vice presidents?).
 William Safire Op-Ed column holds Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore have chosen running mates, Dick Cheney and Sen Joseph I Lieberman, who are better equipped than themselves to become president; discusses whether choice of Lieberman will give Gore's ratings permanent lift and whether it will sway minority of Jews who are Republicans to vote for ticket George W. Bush, with no great grasp of world affairs, chose Dick Cheney to add experience. Al Gore, tainted by fund-raising scandals and association with a known president, chose Joe Lieberman in the hope that his ethical stature and famous denunciation of Clinton immorality would provide a quick rectitude fix. But Gore's selection adds the element of discombobulation: by placing the first Jew on a major national ticket, he confuses all polling and transforms what only yesterday seemed to smug Republicans like a sure thing for Bush into a close contest. Only in America can you turn to a Jew for your hail-Mary pass. Not content to let the historic shattering of an outdated taboo speak for itself, Gore likened his choice of a Jew in 2000 to the Democrats' choice of a Catholic named Kennedy in 1960. Lieberman hailed it as a kind of miracle, evidence of ''the courage and character and fairness of Al Gore.'' Their not-so-subtle idea is to make a vote for the Democratic ticket not only a vote for experience and rectitude, but a vote for tolerance. Will the choice of Lieberman -- not only Jewish but an observant exemplar of modern Orthodox Judaism -- give Gore's rating a permanent lift into hot contention, and not just the usual convention bounce? ''It changes things,'' says Jacob Neusner, professor of religion at Bard College and the most profound Talmudist I know. ''We are used to coping with dislike for the unlike that is directed against us. But how are we going to get accustomed to regarding being Jewish as a plus?'' (A longtime Republican, Neusner says he'll stick with Bush.) Lieberman will soon reduce the cognitive dissonance in Jewish Republicans by acting as a normal campaigner, denouncing Bush's team as he did this week as ''the Old Guard that created the problems.'' Perhaps ''the conscience of the Senate'' will assuage concerns about Gore's unconscionable Asian fund-raising. As Connecticut Joe smites the political foe at next week's convention, freeing Gore to join Bush in genteel Civilityville, he can expect return fire. It's no hypocrisy for him to play down previous disagreement with Gore on school vouchers; it's vice-presidential to fall in line. But that ''unpublished op-ed piece'' that just surfaced, pushing back the date to June of Lieberman's flip-flop on partial privatization of Social Security, was too clever by half. Gore's choice of the studious and inspiring Lieberman, like Bush's choice of the serious and solid Cheney, reflects well on both presidential candidates. And kangaroo tickets can surprise; both strong hindquarters of 1920 went all the way.
 Now comes Al Gore with his brand new running buddy, Joe Lieberman. At the moment they are sprinting away from Bill Clinton. No sex, please, we're religious. But their real mission is to convince voters that they are closer to the so-called mainstream than Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney, and that the reality of the G.O.P. is something other than moderate, tolerant, inclusive and kind. The biggest decision Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have had to make so far was picking a running mate, and a comparison of their choices is instructive. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman believe their views are in sync with the real American mainstream. But they will have a tough time trying to unmask this year's happy-face Republicans.
 Sharon Fleck Herman letter on Sam Brownback's Aug 9 article hails Vice Pres Al Gore for choosing Sen Joseph I Lieberman as running mate By selecting Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, Al Gore showed great courage and leadership. By selecting Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, Al Gore showed great courage and leadership. Mr. Brownback's party put on a good show in Philadelphia, but talking about being an inclusive party doesn't make it one. If Republicans truly want an inclusive and tolerant party, they would do well to follow Mr. Gore's lead.
 Pres Clinton and wife, Hillary, plan big fund-raisers at Democratic National Convention, Los Angeles for his presidential library and her New York Senate race; plan angers Vice Pres Al Gore's aides and senior Democratic fund-raisers, who fear Clintons will siphon off Hollywood money from Gore campaign at convention intended to let Gore step out of Clinton's shadow; some wealthy Southern California Democrats, showing signs of donor fatigue, complain about being bombarded with invitations to fund-raisers; Barbra Streisand will host fund-raiser for presidential library and sing at concert for Gore (M) Vice President Al Gore has for months been planning the Democratic National Convention as a coming-out party for his presidential campaign and a long-awaited opportunity to step out of President Clinton's imposing shadow. Vice President Al Gore has for months been planning the Democratic National Convention as a coming-out party for his presidential campaign and a long-awaited opportunity to step out of President Clinton's imposing shadow. Ms. Streisand will also lend her cachet to Mr. Gore's campaign, headlining a concert at the Shrine Auditorium next Thursday that is expected to raise at least $2.5 million for the Democratic National Committee. Ms. Streisand will sing three songs. Some Gore aides and senior Democratic fund-raisers are angry about the Clinton-heavy convention schedule, saying they are concerned the Clinton events will siphon off Hollywood money that would be better spent assisting the Gore-Lieberman ticket. ''This is Gore's convention, but there are two tributes to Clinton,'' said a Democratic strategist who insisted on anonymity. ''It's embarrassing for the Gores to have this huge event for the president that will raise money for Hillary. This convention is not about her.'' But, in fact, not only is there little coordination between the Gore presidential campaign and Mrs. Clinton's Senate campaign, but there is also competition between Mr. Gore and Mrs. Clinton for money and attention, most dramatically at the coming Democratic convention. The highly visible events spotlighting President Clinton and his wife in Los Angeles are not only troubling to the Gore forces because they drain money. They also put the Clintons at center stage just as the vice president and his ticket-mate are trying to occupy that territory and distance themselves from Mr. Clinton. Even one adviser to Mrs. Clinton said today that it might have been inappropriate for the first lady to use Mr. Gore's nominating convention as a venue to raise money for her Senate campaign. Several Gore allies said today that they were not worried about the money, but they acknowledged that the symbolism would be unmistakable: on the eve of Mr. Gore's national moment, all of Hollywood will turn out to honor Mr. Clinton, not once but twice. The host of the Saturday night concert is Stan Lee, the comic book publishing icon and creator of Spider-Man. Aaron Tonken, a consultant for Stan Lee Media who recruited the talent, played down the talk in Los Angeles that the concert would overshadow Mr. Gore's own concert on Thursday night. But he also acknowledged that Mrs. Clinton was sensitive about the event. Mr. Gore's event on Thursday night at the 6,000-seat Shrine Auditorium features a concert by Ms. Streisand, as well as appearances by Whoopi Goldberg, Baby Face, Boyz II Men and Gladys Knight. Tickets range from $150 to $20,000. A few $1,000 tickets are still unsold. ''From a practical standpoint, I told them they'd have to do it in a way that doesn't distract from other activities, including the salute to President Clinton on Monday and the concert for Gore and the D.N.C. Thursday night,'' Mr. South said. But a senior Gore adviser played down concerns about Mrs. Clinton's fund-raiser, saying: ''We welcome the event for Hillary. If any of our fund-raisers think we are being hurt by her events, they are just wrong. The phones are ringing off the hook. We are doing great.'' The adviser, who refused to be identified, acknowledged that there had been ''grumbling'' among fund-raisers, but added that fund-raisers often complained about the hard task of raising money. And Howard Wolfson, Mrs. Clinton's spokesman, also said his candidate was not draining resources from Mr. Gore. ''Thanks to the very strong economy created under the Clinton-Gore administration, there is more than enough to go around,'' Mr. Wolfson said. After leaving Los Angeles on Tuesday morning, the president will travel to Michigan for an appearance with the vice president at a symbolic passing of the torch. Mr. Gore will then depart for Los Angeles.
 This year, having received national attention with his condemnation of President Clinton for his affair with a White House intern, Mr. Lieberman published his memoir in defense of government service in an age of cynicism. Some reviewers  saw the book as a bid for the attention of Al Gore. But it is his memoir, ''In Praise of Public Life,'' that is the most revealing -- coincidentally because of the way that it allows Mr. Lieberman to be compared to another son of Yale, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee. At times the two men can sound uncannily alike. Like Mr. Bush, Mr. Lieberman says his service in state government taught him bipartisan consensus. And, like Mr. Bush, Mr. Lieberman condemns attack politics, ''the kind of negative campaigning and mudslinging that leaves both winners and losers dirtied and degraded in the public eye.'' But take a closer look at ''In Praise of Public Life,'' and it is as if Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Bush have actually lived in parallel universes. Mr. Bush, by contrast, has recalled Mr. Coffin telling him that the better man had won when Mr. Bush's father lost a Senate race in Texas. To Mr. Bush, Mr. Coffin became another kind of symbol, of an Eastern intellectual elite opposed to traditional values. The Texas governor's suspicion of figures like Mr. Coffin led Mr. Bush to a political philosophy that considered the 1960's a time of irresponsible ideas and rebellions. Mr. Bush last week largely attributed the practice of attack politics to Mr. Clinton, but Mr. Lieberman dated it back 30 years and gave both parties a share in the blame. Writing books can be risky in politics. Republicans have used Mr. Gore's book, ''Earth in the Balance,'' as fodder for criticism of the Democratic nominee.
 Stephen B Silverman letter on Aug 8 editorial on Sen Joseph I Lieberman scores Vice Pres Al Gore's failure to criticize Pres Clinton's conduct in Lewinsky scandal Your Aug. 8 editorial about Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate may not, as you suggest, provide Mr. Gore with ''insulation on the character issue.'' Mr. Lieberman had the courage to break with his party and his president and condemn Mr. Clinton's disgraceful conduct in the Lewinsky scandal. But Mr. Gore did no such thing. Your Aug. 8 editorial about Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate may not, as you suggest, provide Mr. Gore with ''insulation on the character issue.'' Mr. Lieberman had the courage to break with his party and his president and condemn Mr. Clinton's disgraceful conduct in the Lewinsky scandal. But Mr. Gore did no such thing. Mr. Gore's effort ''to separate himself from Mr. Clinton's personal shortcomings,'' as you put it, has come too late to do him any good. Moreover, although I much admire Mr. Lieberman (and prefer him to Mr. Gore), the vice president continues to make his decisions solely on the basis of political expediency.
 Stephan Lesher letter on Aug 8 article on Republican complaints that Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman disagree on some issues questions whether Gov George W Bush share's Dick Cheney's views Re ''Republicans Like Gore's Choice but Liken Him More to Them Than to Gore'' (news article, Aug. 8): The Republican complaint that Al Gore and Joseph I. Lieberman disagree on some issues would seem to suggest that George W. Bush and Dick Cheney, the Republican presidential and vice-presidential candidates, agree on everything. Re ''Republicans Like Gore's Choice but Liken Him More to Them Than to Gore'' (news article, Aug. 8): The Republican complaint that Al Gore and Joseph I. Lieberman disagree on some issues would seem to suggest that George W. Bush and Dick Cheney, the Republican presidential and vice-presidential candidates, agree on everything. Therefore, Mr. Bush, like Mr. Cheney, must also oppose Head Start, regulating cop-killer bullets and calling on oppressive regimes to allow political prisoners (like Nelson Mandela years ago) to be freed. Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton disagreed on several key issues (most recently, on the actions to be taken regarding Elian Gonzalez). If a vice president is to be a ''partner'' -- as Mr. Gore was to Mr. Clinton for eight years -- the freedom to disagree is implicit. The boss makes the call,  but a good boss first listens to dissenting views.
 Stamford, Conn, swells with pride as Sen Joseph I Lieberman comes home to campaign with Vice President Al Gore, top half of Democratic presidential ticket; photo (M) The old soda-pop hangouts, Lucy's Drive-In and the Cadillac luncheonette are long gone, and this once-quaint town is now a bustling corporate mecca, but Joe Lieberman is still wearing the same smile he did at graduation in 1960, friends say. And as he returned here tonight, riding triumphantly in the motorcade of Vice President Al Gore, the presidential candidate, all of Stamford seemed to swell with pride. The banner headline in this morning's issue of The Advocate, the local daily newspaper, was simply: ''He's Coming Home.'' And, although tonight's rally was by invitation only, people with tickets nevertheless started lining up at 3 p.m., four hours before Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Gore were expected to arrive at the Italian Center, a recreation complex and catering hall. The Gore campaign, seeking to emphasize the vice presidential candidate's roots, had hoped to hold tonight's rally at Stamford High School, where Mr. Lieberman began his political career by running for president of his ninth-grade class. But the building on Strawberry Hill Avenue was not available because of summertime construction and renovation projects. The crowd there roared gleefully when Mr. Gore introduced Mr. Lieberman as a ''son of Stamford'' and ''the next vice president of the United States.'' The excitement and preparations for tonight's rally began early Tuesday. While Mr. Gore was officially announcing Mr. Lieberman's selection at a rally in Nashville, local officials here were meeting with Secret Service agents and campaign personnel. The Democratic candidates flew north to Stamford after visiting Mr. Gore's hometown, Carthage, Tenn., earlier in the day.
 Eight years after the establishment of the Reform Party by Ross Perot, the party's machinery has apparently been seized -- or disabled -- by Patrick Buchanan, longtime scold on the Republican right. As a presidential candidate, Mr. Buchanan has little to offer the American public except the politics of resentment. But if he gets the Reform Party's presidential nomination this week, his tirades against free trade, affirmative action and abortion may draw votes away from Gov. George W. Bush, unless they help Mr. Bush by making him seem more moderate. In any case, it is enough to make one nostalgic for Mr. Perot, the eccentric Texas billionaire who founded the party. Eight years after the establishment of the Reform Party by Ross Perot, the party's machinery has apparently been seized -- or disabled -- by Patrick Buchanan, longtime scold on the Republican right. As a presidential candidate, Mr. Buchanan has little to offer the American public except the politics of resentment. But if he gets the Reform Party's presidential nomination this week, his tirades against free trade, affirmative action and abortion may draw votes away from Gov. George W. Bush, unless they help Mr. Bush by making him seem more moderate. In any case, it is enough to make one nostalgic for Mr. Perot, the eccentric Texas billionaire who founded the party. The high-water mark of Mr. Perot's candidacy occurred in the spring of 1992, when it seemed plausible that he could actually beat President Bush and the Democratic challenger, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. But Mr. Perot's odd tactical reversals -- dropping out of the race suddenly and, just as suddenly, jumping back in -- and his paranoid-sounding charges of conspiracies against him and his family did him in. Nevertheless, he brought a certain truth-telling to the 1992 campaign, warning of the dangers of federal deficits, the power of special interests and what he said was declining American competitiveness abroad. In his 1996 race he was far less credible as a candidate. When Mr. Buchanan walked out of the Republican Party last fall, Governor Bush lamented his loss to the G.O.P. In fact, the party was fortunate to be rid of his nasty brand of nativism and his divisive rants about cultural war and the ''Israeli lobby.'' In these generally prosperous economic times, it is fair enough for Mr. Buchanan to try to call attention to the problems of those not benefiting from the boom. But it is doubtful that his flame-throwing attacks on his ever-changing list of foreign and domestic enemies will elevate the race this year. The Reform Party would do better to nominate a candidate appealing to idealism rather than the paranoid fringe.
 Photo of Gov George W Bush campaigning in Oxnard, Calif
 Clinton Fund-Raising Plans Rile Some in Gore Camp  The Clintons' intention to spend considerable time raising money for her Senate campaign and his presidential library during the Democratic convention in Los Angeles is rankling some Democratic fund-raisers and aides to Vice President Al Gore, who express concern that the Clinton events will siphon off Hollywood money better spent assisting the Gore-Lieberman ticket. Mr. Gore and his new Democratic running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, introduced each other to their respective hometowns, Mr. Gore's Carthage, Tenn., and Mr. Lieberman's Stamford, Conn. Cheney Goes It Alone  Dick Cheney made his first solo campaign swing as the Republican vice presidential nominee, taking his ticket's message of ''compassionate conservatism'' to an inner-city homeless shelter in St. Louis and promising that a Bush administration would expand federal support for church-based social service groups.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and his new running mate, Senator Joseph I Lieberman, make joint visits to Carthage, Tenn, Gore's boyhood home, and Stamford, Conn, where Lieberman lives; Gore says he and Lieberman will not level personal attacks on Gov George W Bush and Dick Cheney; Bush campaign reacts skeptically; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore and his new Democratic running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, introduced each other to the folks back home today in a pair of appearances that sought to  ground two men with disparate stories in the common embrace of family and community. The day began in Carthage, Tenn., the picturesque town on the Cumberland plateau that was one of Mr. Gore's two boyhood homes -- the other being Washington, D.C. Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, gave Mr. Lieberman and his family a tour of the house they have owned in Carthage since 1973 and then dropped by the farm where he spent his childhood summers and where his 87-year-old mother, Pauline, still lives. Vice President Al Gore and his new Democratic running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, introduced each other to the folks back home today in a pair of appearances that sought to  ground two men with disparate stories in the common embrace of family and community. The day began in Carthage, Tenn., the picturesque town on the Cumberland plateau that was one of Mr. Gore's two boyhood homes -- the other being Washington, D.C. Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, gave Mr. Lieberman and his family a tour of the house they have owned in Carthage since 1973 and then dropped by the farm where he spent his childhood summers and where his 87-year-old mother, Pauline, still lives. Then, as campaign cameras recorded the scene for possible use in television commercials, longtime friends and constituents sang Mr. Gore's praises during a scripted gathering in an elementary-school gymnasium. This afternoon, the Gores and Liebermans flew to Stamford, where Mr. Lieberman returned the favor by joining the Gores at a raucous rally with local supporters. In Carthage, Mr. Gore vowed that he and Mr. Lieberman would not level personal attacks against Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, and his running mate, Dick Cheney. ''I will not say a single unkind word about Governor Bush or Dick Cheney,'' Mr. Gore said. Exactly how Mr. Gore will define ''unkind word'' remains to be seen, and his pledge was greeted skeptically by Mr. Bush's aides. They noted that Mr. Gore has used loaded terms like ''reckless,'' ''risky,'' ''irresponsible,'' ''smug'' and ''arrogant'' to describe Mr. Bush's policies. In a conversation with reporters aboard Air Force II en route to Connecticut, Mr. Gore said he had ''never made a personal attack against Governor Bush.'' He then said he had once ''slipped'' when, in May, he called Mr. Bush's Social Security proposals arrogant. Mr. Gore made a similar pledge in the primaries, saying he would not make any negative personal attacks against his Democratic opponent, former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey. But Mr. Gore proved quite skillful at casting Mr. Bradley in derogatory terms without calling him names, though he did call him a ''quitter'' for leaving the Senate. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said that ''if the vice president meant what he said it would be a breakthrough encouraging development.'' Mr. Gore, 52, was born in Washington, where his father served in the House and Senate, and he attended all but part of one year of his schooling there. But he spent summers on his parents' farm in Carthage and has returned there to kick off his campaigns. The event in Carthage was so prepackaged that, hours beforehand, Gore aides handed out biographies of the townspeople whom Mr. Gore had called on to speak. Many told stories of medical problems -- a child with cancer, a kidney transplant -- and paid tribute to Mr. Gore for riding to the rescue with helpful legislation during his 16 years in Congress. One man, Mark Thompson, of Cleveland, Tenn., told of riding his bicycle as a boy to deliver a letter to then-Senator Gore seeking help in securing Social Security benefits for his grandmother. And as Mr. Thompson credited Mr. Gore for fixing the problem, he incorporated the campaign's theme of the week -- ''going the distance for America's working families.'' Mr. Gore responded, ''We need to get you to come on the campaign trail'' -- as if that were not exactly where Mr. Thompson was today. Mr. Lieberman supports pilot programs that would provide federal money to the parents of poor children to pay for tuition at private schools, one of several areas in which he disagrees with Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman used the question to blunt Bush campaign attacks about their differences on various issues, as they have in several interviews in the last 24 hours. Mr. Lieberman said he would occasionally offer dissenting advice to Mr. Gore but would ''support him wholeheartedly'' once a decision was made. Then Mr. Gore jumped in. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman addressed another issue where they differ, parental consent and notification for minors seeking abortions, in a morning television interview. Mr. Gore, who also supports abortion rights, has always opposed parental-consent legislation, aides said, but he said today he had expressed ''a willingness to look at proposals'' that do not impinge on a woman's right to choose. Gore aides later said he was only discussing parental notification, not parental consent, and that he had never seen a notification bill with adequate protections.
 BUSH PULLS UP -- All year, California polls have shown Al Gore holding a comfortable 10-point lead in a must-win state for the Democrats. But a new  survey, finished as the Republican National Convention was ending last week, shows Gov. George W. Bush of Texas running almost even with Mr. Gore in California for the first time. The poll, by the Public Policy Institute of California, found Mr. Gore winning 40 percent of likely voters to 37 percent for Mr. Bush, and 8 percent for the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader. The poll of 998 likely voters was conducted July 28 to Aug. 4 and has a margin of sampling error of four percentage points. PRESSURE OVER A PARTY -- The Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights is asking Vice President Al Gore to use his influence to cancel a Hispanic political action committee's fund-raiser next week at the Playboy Mansion in Los Angeles. Mr. Gore announced several weeks ago that he would not attend the party or condone it. The gala by Hispanic Unity USA, whose chairwoman is Representative Loretta Sanchez of California, is expected to draw about 600 people. It is billed as a fund-raiser for Hispanic Unity USA, which promotes voter registration. Maria Meier, a Gore spokeswoman, said the event was not an official activity of the Democratic National Convention and that it was unfair for the Catholic group to suggest that Mr. Gore has the power to call it off. GUN FINDINGS -- The Violence Policy Center, a nonprofit group promoting gun control, released a report yesterday showing that 3,370 people with licenses to carry concealed handguns in Texas had been arrested for crimes since the state's law authorizing concealed weapons took effect in 1996. Center officials said the report refuted the National Rifle Association's contentions that only law-abiding people want the permits and that the law has reduced crime. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Gov. George W. Bush, who signed the law, said other studies had shown that people without the permits were more likely to commit crimes than people with permits. Ms. Edwards called the study ''partisan'' for singling out Texas. Center officials said they picked Texas because it had compiled better statistics. BUSH PULLS UP -- All year, California polls have shown Al Gore holding a comfortable 10-point lead in a must-win state for the Democrats. But a new  survey, finished as the Republican National Convention was ending last week, shows Gov. George W. Bush of Texas running almost even with Mr. Gore in California for the first time. The poll, by the Public Policy Institute of California, found Mr. Gore winning 40 percent of likely voters to 37 percent for Mr. Bush, and 8 percent for the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader. The poll of 998 likely voters was conducted July 28 to Aug. 4 and has a margin of sampling error of four percentage points. PRESSURE OVER A PARTY -- The Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights is asking Vice President Al Gore to use his influence to cancel a Hispanic political action committee's fund-raiser next week at the Playboy Mansion in Los Angeles. Mr. Gore announced several weeks ago that he would not attend the party or condone it. The gala by Hispanic Unity USA, whose chairwoman is Representative Loretta Sanchez of California, is expected to draw about 600 people. It is billed as a fund-raiser for Hispanic Unity USA, which promotes voter registration. Maria Meier, a Gore spokeswoman, said the event was not an official activity of the Democratic National Convention and that it was unfair for the Catholic group to suggest that Mr. Gore has the power to call it off. GUN FINDINGS -- The Violence Policy Center, a nonprofit group promoting gun control, released a report yesterday showing that 3,370 people with licenses to carry concealed handguns in Texas had been arrested for crimes since the state's law authorizing concealed weapons took effect in 1996. Center officials said the report refuted the National Rifle Association's contentions that only law-abiding people want the permits and that the law has reduced crime. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Gov. George W. Bush, who signed the law, said other studies had shown that people without the permits were more likely to commit crimes than people with permits. Ms. Edwards called the study ''partisan'' for singling out Texas. Center officials said they picked Texas because it had compiled better statistics.
 Re ''Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece'' (front page, Aug. 9): Re ''Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece'' (front page, Aug. 9): But given the results of a poll showing that Vice President Al Gore closed the gap with Gov. George W. Bush after choosing Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, the American people apparently don't think that there is a problem.
 And it could affect the presidential campaign. Vice President Al Gore has largely embraced the adminstration stand of building a limited land-based system. The Republican candidate, George W. Bush, favors a broader system that could include sea- and space-based arms.
 Dick Cheney visits homeless shelter, St Louis, in first solo campaign swing as Republican vice presidential candidate; pledges Bush administration would expand federal support for religious-based social service groups; muffles his attacks on Vice Pres Al Gore by praising his running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman; says Lieberman's Jewish faith should have no effect on race; will visit swing states, including Ohio and Kentucky; photo (M) In his first solo campaign swing as the Republican vice presidential candidate, Dick Cheney took his ticket's message of ''compassionate conservatism'' to a homeless shelter here today, and promised that a Bush administration would expand federal support for religious-based social service groups. Mr. Cheney also muffled his attacks on Vice President Al Gore by praising his choice for a running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut. In his first solo campaign swing as the Republican vice presidential candidate, Dick Cheney took his ticket's message of ''compassionate conservatism'' to a homeless shelter here today, and promised that a Bush administration would expand federal support for religious-based social service groups. Mr. Cheney also muffled his attacks on Vice President Al Gore by praising his choice for a running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut. Still buoyant from a three-day rail trip with Gov. George W. Bush across key battleground states last weekend, Mr. Cheney and his wife, Lynne, picked Sunshine Ministries, a century-old soup kitchen that now also counsels drug and alcohol abusers and provides after-school classes for poor children, as their first stump stop away from Mr. Bush. Mr. Cheney said that he would emphasize Mr. Bush's campaign themes -- education, Social Security, tax reform and rebuilding the military -- in a trip through swing states, including Ohio and Kentucky. The mission receives its entire $2 million annual budget from private contributions, Ms. Clarkson said, and symbolizes the kind of nongovernmental, community-rooted approach to social services and education that is a hallmark of the Bush campaign. ''Right now, only three federal social service programs allow religious organizations to apply for funding on the same basis as other providers,'' he said. ''Governor Bush and I believe faith-based groups, whether Mormon or Methodist or Muslim, ought to be eligible for public money to advance their good work.'' If elected this fall, Mr. Cheney said, a Bush administration would expand the federal charitable deductions for 80 million taxpayers who do not itemize their deductions, swelling the resources available to groups like Sunshine Ministries. A Bush administration would also broaden federal support for after-school programs. ''After school programs are vital in terms of reducing drug use, teen pregnancy and criminal behavior by providing young people things to do and places to be,'' Mr. Cheney said. When asked later how these pledges contrasted with a 10-year voting record in the House that included opposing the Head Start education program, Mr. Cheney sidestepped the question, saying that it ''probably squares as well as Joe Lieberman's voting record with Al Gore's.'' That response offered a glimpse into what is likely to be a Republican refrain from now until the election.  ''I think it's going to be tough for Al Gore to be as aggressively negative on some of Governor Bush's ideas which his own running mate supports, like school vouchers and ballistic missile defense,'' Mr. Cheney said. But Mr. Cheney said the contrasts between the running mates would stand out, including his tenure as White House chief of staff under President Gerald R. Ford and secretary of defense under President George Bush.
 Gov George W Bush again campaigns in California, in counties with relatively large percentages of moveable, malleable centrist voters; seeks to lure swing voters who tilted Democratic in last two presidential elections; photo (M) Making his seventh campaign trip to California since he won the state's Republican primary early this year, Gov. George W. Bush today spoke a little Spanish, described his education and tax proposals as efforts to help less affluent Americans and headed straight for counties with relatively large percentages of moveable, malleable voters in the center of the political spectrum. It was more than a glimpse into how Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, planned to challenge, or at least seem to challenge, Vice President Al Gore for California's 54 electoral votes. It also illuminated the Bush campaign's strategy from this point forward: to select the places that, and seduce the people who, tilted Democratic in the last two presidential elections but could be made to lean in the other direction this time around. Making his seventh campaign trip to California since he won the state's Republican primary early this year, Gov. George W. Bush today spoke a little Spanish, described his education and tax proposals as efforts to help less affluent Americans and headed straight for counties with relatively large percentages of moveable, malleable voters in the center of the political spectrum. It was more than a glimpse into how Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, planned to challenge, or at least seem to challenge, Vice President Al Gore for California's 54 electoral votes. It also illuminated the Bush campaign's strategy from this point forward: to select the places that, and seduce the people who, tilted Democratic in the last two presidential elections but could be made to lean in the other direction this time around. ''El sueno Americano es para todos,'' Mr. Bush said at the train station in Oxnard, north of Los Angeles, where he began a ride on the rails up the California coast. The Texas governor was saying that the American dream is for everybody. Mr. Bush has been doing that since the beginning of his campaign, but his trip to the West Coast this week, like the journeys he took in and out of the Republican National Convention, represents an especially pointed, carefully aimed restating of his message. California, where Mr. Bush planned to spend today and Thursday, and Oregon and Washington, where he was scheduled to travel later this week, are states where President Clinton prevailed in 1992 and 1996, but where demographic information and some early polling suggest that Mr. Bush stands a good, decent or at least plausible chance of victory. His itinerary this week reflects the Bush campaign's desire to look beyond the typical chain of Midwestern states that teeter between Democrats and Republicans and put new places into serious play. These places have in common an opportunity-rich supply of ''weakly linked Republicans, weakly linked Democrats and independent voters whose allegiances are up for grabs,'' said Karl Rove, the Bush campaign's chief strategist. And what the Bush campaign is doing is issuing a variety of invitations to these fickle political consumers. Over the weekend, as Mr. Bush rode the rails through Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and Illinois, he repeatedly praised the hard work of members of labor unions, made a point of having a former Democrat introduce him at one event and, at that same event, rendered a blunt, broad statement about just how big he wanted to spread his tent. ''This is a campaign that welcomes Democrats,'' Mr. Bush said on Saturday in Durand, Mich., southwest of Flint. ''Our message speaks to working people from all walks of life.'' Mr. Bush has found another way to express that sentiment this week: on Thursday through Saturday, he will campaign with Senator John McCain at his side. In the Republican primaries, Mr. McCain proved to be a powerful lure for moderate Republicans, independents and moderate Democrats, a centrist band of voters prevalent on the West Coast. ''McCain is reassuring to swing and independent voters,'' Mr. Rove said. ''Bush ultimately has to make the sale, but McCain helps.'' Mr. Gore, too, is reaching hard for the center, as his selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to be his running mate demonstrated. Mr. Bush spoke publicly for the first time today about that choice, and heartily praised it. ''I think he's man of integrity,'' Mr. Bush said on the tarmac at the naval air station in Point Mugu, where his campaign plane landed late this morning after a flight from Austin, Tex. When Mr. Bush was asked whether Mr. Lieberman's reputation for moral rectitude would make it more difficult for Republicans to link Mr. Gore to President Clinton's behavior in office, Mr. Bush implied that it would not. ''The race is between Al Gore and me,'' he said, directing the spotlight away from Mr. Lieberman and toward Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush also suggested that Mr. Gore would have to do more to separate himself from the president than choose a running mate who had harshly criticized Mr. Clinton. ''If Vice President Gore wants to say, 'I'm different from President Clinton,' let him explain how,'' Mr. Bush said. Later, in an interview with Fox television news, Mr. Bush fielded a question about whether anti-Semitism might hurt the Gore-Lieberman ticket by saying, ''I believe America has grown beyond that.'' ''There's going to be some people,'' Mr. Bush added, ''who are going to criticize Senator Lieberman because of his religion, and if they're in my campaign, I'll just ask them to leave.'' Mr. Lieberman is the first Jew on a major party's presidential ticket. In setting out for California this morning, Mr. Bush was trying both to end several days during which he ceded the news media spotlight to Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman and to crash, or at least pre-empt, Mr. Gore's imminent party here. The Democratic National Convention takes place Monday through Thursday in Los Angeles. Mr. Bush's desire to get at least some time on local television news broadcasts here was evident in the choreography of his event. Toward the end of the rally in Oxnard, someone released dozens of white doves into the air. Later in the day, Mr. Bush took a walking tour through Guadalupe, a tiny, dusty town whose Hispanic residents swarmed around him, seemingly in disbelief that a presidential candidate had come their way. In all his planned events this week, Mr. Bush will appeal strongly to swing voters by appearing in places where Republicans do not always go, tallying endorsements that Republicans do not always get and framing his proposals in populist terms, with so-called average Americans on hand to help him make his case.
 Re ''Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece'' (front page, Aug. 9): Re ''Gore and Lieberman Make Tolerance the Centerpiece'' (front page, Aug. 9):
 By that strategy, she said, Mr. Buchanan's popularity would begin to rise from as little as 1 percent in some recent polls to double digits, an ascent that would almost surely affect the fortunes of the Republican ticket of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney.
 With the exception of Florida, which is 4.3 percent Jewish, Vice President Al Gore was probably not expecting to convert any Southern states to his column with the selection of Mr. Lieberman. But both Jewish and non-Jewish leaders in the South agreed that the presence of an Orthodox Jew on the ticket was no longer a liability in the nation's most religiously conservative region. Of course, Alabama, like most of the Southern states, is still expected to vote heavily for Gov. George W. Bush, and Mr. Guin was not predicting any change. At the moment, Mr. Gore is thought to be a contender only in Florida, Tennessee and possibly Georgia. But Mr. Guin said Mr. Gore might actually improve his chances in Alabama by bringing Mr. Lieberman there a few times and campaigning hard.
 In the gush of excitement at Al Gore's choice of a Jewish man for his running mate (front page, Aug. 8), is it out of place to wonder how long we'll have to wait until a woman returns to the ticket?
 Aron P Goldfeld letter on Aug 9 editorial agrees Gore-Lieberman campaign should not adopt tone reminiscent of Republicans' courtship of religious right While I agree that Al Gore's choice of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate was a good one, I think you correctly point out that it is imperative that the Gore-Lieberman campaign and the Democratic Party not take on a tone that reminds voters of the Republicans' courtship of the religious right. While I agree that Al Gore's choice of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate was a good one, I think you correctly point out that it is imperative that the Gore-Lieberman campaign and the Democratic Party not take on a tone that reminds voters of the Republicans' courtship of the religious right.
 The N.R.A. has made no secret of its antipathy toward Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, vowing to throw its resources into defeating Mr. Gore this fall. The group, which has pledged to spend more than $15 million helping state and federal candidates this year, has yet to endorse Mr. Gore's Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush. But its leaders have made clear that they think Mr. Bush's record on gun issues in Texas is to their liking. And Mr. LaPierre asserted that Mr. Gore's support for strong gun laws would hurt him in several  swing states that have many hunters and gun owners. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said, ''The ad is misleading because we support Second Amendment rights and want to protect those rights for law-abiding gun owners and sportsmen, while promoting common-sense policies to keep guns away from kids and criminals.''
 ''You watch the Bush convention? What was the big song? 'God Bless America.' That's not a new song. I'm not crazy about it. Woody hated it. 'This Land Is Your Land,' it was originally called 'God Blessed America to Me.' '' Mr. Brand sings it the way he says his buddy Woody -- Mr. Guthrie, his name to you and me -- sang it on the radio: different, angrier lyrics, not the words you memorized as a child. ''He changed it afterward,'' Mr. Brand says.
 Re ''Lieberman Will Run With Gore; First Jew on a Major U.S. Ticket'' (front page, Aug. 8): Re ''Lieberman Will Run With Gore; First Jew on a Major U.S. Ticket'' (front page, Aug. 8):
 Former Yale University chaplain William Sloane Coffin Op-Ed article recalls Sen Joseph Lieberman's support for civil rights movement as Yale newspaper editor; notes neither Gov George W Bush nor Dick Cheney were among minority of Yale students who shared in action and passion of era Then came the 60's. At Yale, where I served as chaplain and where three of this year's presidential and vice presidential candidates were students (Joseph Lieberman arrived in 1960 and George W. Bush in 1964, and Dick Cheney was there briefly early on), a strong social consciousness was emerging. The 1955 bus boycott by blacks in Montgomery, Ala., had put that city on the moral map, and in 1960 I invited the movement's leader, Martin Luther King Jr., to speak in the Yale chapel. The church was packed. King emphasized social, not personal, morality. Quoting Paul Tillich, he declared, ''Since the law cannot be wholly internalized in the conscience of imperfect human beings, conscience must be externalized into law.'' Then came the 60's. At Yale, where I served as chaplain and where three of this year's presidential and vice presidential candidates were students (Joseph Lieberman arrived in 1960 and George W. Bush in 1964, and Dick Cheney was there briefly early on), a strong social consciousness was emerging. The 1955 bus boycott by blacks in Montgomery, Ala., had put that city on the moral map, and in 1960 I invited the movement's leader, Martin Luther King Jr., to speak in the Yale chapel. The church was packed. King emphasized social, not personal, morality. Quoting Paul Tillich, he declared, ''Since the law cannot be wholly internalized in the conscience of imperfect human beings, conscience must be externalized into law.'' I am sorry to say that during these years I knew only Mr. Lieberman, neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Cheney. It is also important to note that in all these activities only a minority played active roles. But a prophetic minority always has more to say than any majority, ''moral'' or ''silent.'' I am sure Governor Bush is right in criticizing the self-righteousness of many of us in the antiwar movement at Yale. It is hard to fight national self-righteousness without personal self-righteousness. But it is also sad not to share in the action and passion of your time. Often called a decade of student unrest, the 60's would be better termed a time of ethical unrest, a time that I hope will soon come again to disrupt our present complacency.
 Correction of Aug 9 article on Vice Pres Al Gore's introduction of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as running mate, which referred incorrectly to Gore's comparison to John F Kennedy A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's introduction of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman in Nashville as the first Jewish candidate on a major national party ticket referred incorrectly to Mr. Gore's comparison to John F. Kennedy. Kennedy was the first Catholic elected president; the first one nominated was Gov. Alfred E. Smith of New York, the Democratic candidate in 1928. A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's introduction of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman in Nashville as the first Jewish candidate on a major national party ticket referred incorrectly to Mr. Gore's comparison to John F. Kennedy. Kennedy was the first Catholic elected president; the first one nominated was Gov. Alfred E. Smith of New York, the Democratic candidate in 1928.
 Correction of Aug 9 picture caption, which misspelled surname of Vice Pres Al Gore's foreign policy adviser; he is Leon Fuerth A picture caption yesterday with a front-page article about the process of choosing Al Gore's running mate misspelled the surname of Mr. Gore's foreign policy adviser. He is Leon Fuerth, not Furth. A picture caption yesterday with a front-page article about the process of choosing Al Gore's running mate misspelled the surname of Mr. Gore's foreign policy adviser. He is Leon Fuerth, not Furth.
