 Alex Berenson Market Watch column investigates implications to economy and financial industry of election of either Al Gore or George W Bush to presidency; graph (M) This year would seem to be no exception. The Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, is offering enough treats to warm even Gordon Gekko's heart. Mr. Bush wants to end the estate tax, cut income taxes and give people a chance to invest some of their Social Security taxes in the stock market. Vice President Al Gore, on the other side of the aisle, prefers tough environmental regulations and adding a prescription drug benefit to Medicare, a step that the drug industry opposes. Yet Wall Street remains strangely tepid about Mr. Bush. What gives? But both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are eager to get their hands on the surplus for new spending programs and tax cuts. Either move would be a mistake, said Byron Wien, chief United States investment strategist at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter. In fact, if the new president is able to spend the surplus, the Federal Reserve will probably raise short-term interest rates, Mr. Wien said. That's because the Fed is already worried that the United States economy is growing too fast and increasing the risk of inflation, and that deficits (or lower surpluses) will further stimulate the economy in the short run. Mr. Johnson agreed. While the Street has a slight preference for Mr. Bush, it would be happiest if neither party controls both the White House and Congress next year, he said. ''I'd like to see a Republican president neutralized by a Democratic Congress,'' he said. ''Give us policy gridlock.''
 After investing more than $150,000 over two years to stoke the campaign of his good friend Al Gore, Jonathan Tisch may see his political agenda and his business interests collide. After investing more than $150,000 over two years to stoke the campaign of his good friend Al Gore, Jonathan Tisch may see his political agenda and his business interests collide.
 Dreaming of a convention gleaming with purity, Gore aides and Democratic officials bullied and blackmailed Representative Loretta Sanchez of California until she tearfully canceled her fund-raiser at the Playboy Mansion. Dreaming of a convention gleaming with purity, Gore aides and Democratic officials bullied and blackmailed Representative Loretta Sanchez of California until she tearfully canceled her fund-raiser at the Playboy Mansion. Pressuring the spunky lawmaker to switch to a less libidinous site, the Gore team held hostage her prime-time speaking slot at the convention and threatened to yank her credentials, fire her as the Democratic Party's general co-chairwoman and withhold support for her campaign. When Al Gore was a senator, he used to give metaphor dinners, at which participants would ponder the meaning of the metaphor. Clearly, the vice president has elevated the Playboy Mansion to a metaphor. Al Gore and Joe Lieberman are no longer satisfied with being hall monitors. The men who want to lead the party of free expression and civil liberties are scuttling away from the Playboy in Chief so fast they are charging into Cotton Mather territory. They are so determined to erase the memory of an X-rated president that they proselytize for everything to be G-rated. Perhaps Mr. Gore would be better off if he had held dinners to discuss the meaning of irony. Then he would understand how risible this seems. Mr. Gore may have dragged one congresswoman into line, but he'll never match W.'s disciplined convention. The Clintons are out of control, gluttonously and gracelessly gobbling millions for the Arkansas library and New York campaign that should go to the lagging Democratic ticket. Democrats had been pressuring Mr. Clinton to say in his convention speech that Mr. Gore should not be blamed for his wayward ways. Well, at least Mr. Gore crushed Ms. Sanchez. So he has one good Godzilla vs. Bambi moment under his belt.
 Article on Connecticut Sen Joseph Lieberman, whom Vice Pres Al Gore has chosen as his running mate; photo (M) That's Joe as in Joseph I. Lieberman, Stamford native, New Haven resident, United States Senator and, now, a member of Al Gore's presidential ticket, and Connecticut sure is proud of him. Even die-hard Republicans admit to a little surge in state pride. That's Joe as in Joseph I. Lieberman, Stamford native, New Haven resident, United States Senator and, now, a member of Al Gore's presidential ticket, and Connecticut sure is proud of him. Even die-hard Republicans admit to a little surge in state pride. Without taking too much credit away from Senator Lieberman and Vice President Gore, what helped Connecticut overcome these hindrances, political experts said, was time and technology. Even some prominent Republicans say they have felt a twinge of exuberance since Monday afternoon, when Mr. Gore asked Mr. Lieberman to be his running mate, even though it is certain to make their jobs much harder between now and Nov. 7. ''As a citizen of this state, I'm honored as everyone else is -- the significance of it is not lost on me,'' said Jay Malcynsky, a close ally of Gov. John G. Rowland and the organizer of George W. Bush's campaign in Connecticut. ''But I don't think it rises to the level of impetus for Republicans to vote for a Connecticut ticket. It's energized Republicans who are still intent on getting George Bush made president.'' NOW that Al Gore has picked Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate, 11 of the 13 original states have supplied a candidate to the presidential ticket of a major political party.
 Politics, more than ever before, is show biz. The Republican convention in Philadelphia, with its remote transmissions of Gov. George W. Bush talking to delegates from classrooms and historic sites, adn his wife, Laura, addressing the gathering with inner-city schoolchildren seated around her, was more of a set for the cameras than a platform for the issues. And with the Democrats set to commence their own four-day multi-media spectacle tomorrow in Los Angeles, what better time for show biz itself to get into the convention act?
 Political junkies, chew on this demoralizing fact: Al Gore and George W. Bush have already spent $150 million, and their campaigns get built-in coverage from the networks, yet not only have they failed to produce a spectacle as compelling as the World Wrestling Federation's ''SmackDown!'' they can't even muster the ratings of ''The King of Queens'' reruns. Political junkies, chew on this demoralizing fact: Al Gore and George W. Bush have already spent $150 million, and their campaigns get built-in coverage from the networks, yet not only have they failed to produce a spectacle as compelling as the World Wrestling Federation's ''SmackDown!'' they can't even muster the ratings of ''The King of Queens'' reruns. Several explanations for this dismal failure present themselves. The snobs' conclusion: American voters are stupid. Faced with weighty policy debates, the theory goes, the average stupefied citizen simply crashes. This is nonsense, of course. Anyone who believes the campaign is too smart for voters isn't following it. Gore and Bush spend a lot less time discussing Medicare Part B than they do posing with Latina grandmothers in front of American flags. The campaign isn't too hard. It's too dull. Others have argued that the candidates themselves seem too remote, their lives of power and privilege too far removed from the everyday people whose interest they are courting. Which is just as far off base as the snobs' argument. Modern politics is infested with a ridiculous, phony populism. The candidates -- the smartest, savviest pols in the nation -- prove their presidential fitness by wearing jeans, flipping pancakes, reading to schoolkids and generally wallowing in their own mundanity. Gore can't stop being dull. Bush willfully suppresses his charisma in order to seem serious. That kind of aversion to stardom and celebrity isn't just impractical; it's downright un-American. A more compelling argument is that the campaign ignores the three fundamental requirements of drama: conflict, uncertainty and a great story. Politicians like to pretend campaigns are mano-a-mano death struggles, but in truth they are eerily devoid of direct conflict. The guiding principle is not clash of the titans, but parallel play. The business of flinging mud and whispering accusations is outsourced to campaign spokespeople and, on occasion, to the candidates' family members. But the candidates themselves don't squabble or wrestle. Bush and Gore won't meet till the debates in October, and even those encounters will be carefully sterilized. This disengagement, say the pundits, gives them ''stature.'' The candidates are staying above the fray -- but as a result, there's no fray and little worth watching. Without conflict and uncertainty, a shapely narrative becomes crucial. Any tale that you care about arcs from beginning to middle to end. But the campaign doesn't manage to tell any story at all, and that is the fatal blow. This is a story: A young orphan discovers that he has magical powers and sets off to a school for wizards. He learns that the evil wizard who killed his parents is back, looking for a magic stone. Through a series of tests and puzzles, the orphan vanquishes his nemesis and is celebrated as a hero. This is not a story: Al Gore gives a speech in Clayton, Mo., on children's health; Al Gore gives a speech in Niles, Ill., on health care; Al Gore gives a speech in Bridgeville, Pa., on women's health. Wash, rinse, repeat till November. The Safety First campaign will win Gore or Bush the election, but at a cost. The nation lives by the agenda of sports and entertainment. A president who can't understand that risks irrelevance. He won't know how to speak to his constituents, and we won't take the trouble to listen. Maybe it's time for another movie star in the White House.
 In ''A Whole New World'' (column, Aug. 8), Thomas L. Friedman suggests that George W. Bush and his father's foreign policy advisers do not understand today's new global system. While that is true, the presidential election will not be won or lost over foreign policy concerns. In ''A Whole New World'' (column, Aug. 8), Thomas L. Friedman suggests that George W. Bush and his father's foreign policy advisers do not understand today's new global system. While that is true, the presidential election will not be won or lost over foreign policy concerns.
 WE must help protect our children, in our schools and streets, by finally and strictly enforcing our nation's gun laws,'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas declared in his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia. In other words, Mr. Bush was saying, we don't need more laws to do the job. WE must help protect our children, in our schools and streets, by finally and strictly enforcing our nation's gun laws,'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas declared in his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia. In other words, Mr. Bush was saying, we don't need more laws to do the job.
 ''It was a big no-no,'' said Ms. Thernstrom, whose next book is on the achievement gap. ''The fact that nobody is screaming when George W. Bush talks about the soft bigotry of low expectations, that shows how much the conversation has changed.''
 Vice Pres Gore's introduction at Democratic convention will play down his last eight years, even though Gore has been most productive, industrious vice president in modern times; photo; speakers will rattle on about Tennessee farm boy, Harvard student, Vietnam enlistee, reporter and senator, calculating that Gore needs to be seen as his own man; Gov George W Bush, perhaps unfairly, will claim leadership role although he is far less seasoned (M) NO matter whether you think Al Gore should be the next president, give him this much: He has transformed the vice presidency, the subject of generations of derision, into more than the butt of jokes. Not content to languish at state funerals, Mr. Gore has been the most productive and industrious vice president in modern times. Even Gov. George W. Bush, in a rare compliment to his rival, volunteered recently that Mr. Gore had been a good No. 2. NO matter whether you think Al Gore should be the next president, give him this much: He has transformed the vice presidency, the subject of generations of derision, into more than the butt of jokes. Not content to languish at state funerals, Mr. Gore has been the most productive and industrious vice president in modern times. Even Gov. George W. Bush, in a rare compliment to his rival, volunteered recently that Mr. Gore had been a good No. 2. So it is remarkable that Mr. Gore's political coming out here this  week has been designed not merely as the usual paean to the party's new standard-bearer, but also as a production that will neglect, obscure and even expunge his time in what he calls the ''Square Office,'' only 18 steps down the blue-carpeted corridor from the Oval Office. Instead, the program calls for speaker after speaker to rattle on about Al Gore the Tennessee farm boy, Al Gore the Harvard student, Al Gore the enlistee in Vietnam, Al Gore the reporter, Al Gore the House member, Al Gore the senator and -- blithely skipping the last eight years -- Al Gore, the man of the future. Forget that Mr. Gore championed an ambitious program to streamline the federal bureaucracy, or that he was the point man in relations with Russia, or that he bested Ross Perot in a debate, clearing the path for the North American Free Trade Agreement. Until he deletes the word ''vice'' from his title, the political calculation is that Mr. Gore will not be seen as his own man. Perhaps unfairly, Governor Bush, who presides over a single state (one in which the chief executive office is notably weak) and is far less seasoned in governing, can more easily claim the leadership mantle because he, at least, is in charge of something. In fact, voters are apt to say Mr. Bush is as experienced a leader as Mr. Gore. Asked in a poll taken in late March whether Mr. Gore's performance as vice president made them more or less likely to support him, 28 percent of registered voters said more likely, 27 percent said less likely and 43 percent said it made no difference. Mr. Gore's most aggressive move to submerge his vice presidency came last week when he named a No. 2 of his own. By making history in picking Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the first Jewish running mate of a major party, Mr. Gore succeeded in persuading at least some voters to take another measure of him as a decisive, imaginative leader. Yet in unveiling Senator Lieberman, Mr. Gore was so determined to shed his own service as No. 2 that he made no reference to the office itself or to his first-hand knowledge of why it is vital to have a capable second-in-command. The Gore campaign has been so determined to blot out the vice president from Al Gore that his title was intentionally not included in mentions of him  in the Democratic platform. Some strategists and academics argue that it is folly for Mr. Gore to flee from the governing credentials that would seem to be his most compelling selling point. If anything, they argue, six years after the Gingrich revolution that catapulted Washington outsiders into power, voters may be ready for tested steadiness. Gary Jacobson, a political science professor at the University of California at San Diego, said, ''His strongest suit is, 'You've never had it so good.' He needs to nail down the case that the good times we're all enjoying can be attributed to the Clinton-Gore administration.'' SCOFFING at the notion that Mr. Gore should be dwelling on his tenure in the White House, William Daley, the Gore campaign chairman, said: ''He'd be murdered by you all if he was trying to take credit for all he's done in the last eight years. People want to hear what you're going to do as president. They don't want to walk down Memory Lane.'' Memories may be the single biggest reason Mr. Gore refuses to embrace his vice presidency -- but those memories are of President Clinton. The belief among many Gore advisers is that the president's transgressions have so soiled the White House that recitations of Mr. Gore's accomplishments would immediately be tainted by association, or revive talk of the vice president's own lapses, like his attending a fund-raiser at a Buddhist temple. The one subject Mr. Gore is happy to recall, and may well underscore at the national convention, is his contribution to the longstanding economic boom. But there is far more at play than Mr. Gore trying to break free from his boss. His advisers say they realize through polling and focus groups that the vice president desperately needs to spruce up his image. ''They know Al Gore's been vice president, or they have an impression of stiff and boring,'' Mr. Daley said. ''But here's a guy who's had a full life.'' The desire to reintroduce Mr. Gore and play up his human side has been a constant in his campaign, and his career, often to little avail. If nothing else, campaign advisers say that when Mr. Gore takes center stage, they want voters to remember these facts: He opted to serve in Vietnam at a time when many young men were finding excuses not to. He is passionate about protecting the environment. He stood boldly on his own in the Senate and, over the objections of prominent Democratic leaders, voted for the use of force in the Persian Gulf war. He is such a family man that he thinks nothing of altering his schedule so he can watch his children play lacrosse. The Gore camp is playing up such biographical snippets to address the central paradox of the Gore candidacy: advisers fear the very skills that make Mr. Gore a successful sidekick -- he is disciplined, dutiful and loyal -- are not the qualities people look for in a president. The notion is that voters want an engaging leader who is not simply a loyal trooper. They do not think someone deserves the Oval Office simply because he has diligently climbed the rungs of power. ''You don't remind people what you were  when you're looking for a promotion,'' said Marla Romash, a longtime adviser to Mr. Gore. ''You want to convince them that you're up for the bigger job.'' ONLY three times in the last 80 years has a sitting vice president run on his own after eight years in office, and both Mr. Nixon and Mr. Bush had to struggle to get voters to stop thinking of them as junior partners. This is the problem that has now fallen to Mr. Gore, who knows full well that for every commercial his campaign runs that features the candidate surrounded by his family or extolling his vision, Republicans intend to portray him just where he does not want to be seen: in service to his country. ''He can not make the eight years vaporize,'' said Mark McKinnon, Mr. Bush's chief media strategist. ''They are there, and he has to live with them.''
 That last line is narrated over a photograph of Mr. Nader as a young consumer advocate. But the commercial overlooks Mr. Nader's latest public role: professional thorn in Vice President Al Gore's side. The Green Party standard-bearer, who polls show is likely to siphon off some liberal Gore supporters, was not the only third-party candidate muscling his way onto television last week: the Reform Party, meeting to pick its candidate in Long Beach, Calif., broke into rival conventions. There were other distractions for the Gore campaign. In South Barrington, Ill., President Clinton faced 4,000 members of the Willow Creek Community Church on Thursday to speak about his life after an adulterous affair and the effect that event should not have on the man he wants to succeed him.
 Mr. Gore's New Challenge  Al Gore transformed the vice presidency from a stand-in role to a hands-on job. Now he must do everything possible to disassociate himself from the president.
 Vice Pres Al Gore says his acceptance speech to Democratic National Convention will embrace Pres Clinton's success on economy but send unmistakable message that he, Gore, is running on his own agenda, with his own voice and through his own experiences, interview; says speech will be loaded with policy specifics, to show public he has definite agenda to lead country; says his decision to speak in detail is a gamble, noting modern trend is to resort to vaguest of generalities; his implicit suggestion is that Gov George W Bush's acceptance speech at Republican National Convention was short on substance; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore said today that in his acceptance speech to the Democratic National Convention he would embrace President Clinton's success in presiding over the hardy economy but send an unmistakable message:  ''I'm running on my own agenda, on my own voice and through my own experiences.'' In the first extensive interview previewing his address to the delegates on Thursday -- the most momentous of his political career -- Mr. Gore also said the speech at the Staples Center here would be loaded with policy specifics, because he wanted the public to know he had a definite agenda to lead the country. Vice President Al Gore said today that in his acceptance speech to the Democratic National Convention he would embrace President Clinton's success in presiding over the hardy economy but send an unmistakable message:  ''I'm running on my own agenda, on my own voice and through my own experiences.'' In the first extensive interview previewing his address to the delegates on Thursday -- the most momentous of his political career -- Mr. Gore also said the speech at the Staples Center here would be loaded with policy specifics, because he wanted the public to know he had a definite agenda to lead the country. Mr. Gore spoke by telephone from Pittsburgh on the last weekend of campaigning before joining the stream of delegates heading to the first convention in this city since John F. Kennedy was nominated in 1960. Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was already here, said today that she and the president would stay just long enough to proclaim their support for Mr. Gore, then drop ''out of sight.'' [Page 23.] Vowing to ''speak very concretely,'' Mr. Gore said he would outline his plan for cutting taxes for middle-class families and altering the Social Security system, his championing of the environment and his role ''in efforts to set time limits and reform welfare.'' His implicit suggestion was that Gov. George W. Bush's acceptance speech in Philadelphia had been short on substance. Mr. Gore made clear that his proposal for town meetings was intended to help address what some of his advisers say has been his central vulnerability: that he is not personally appealing to the public. ''It will be the centerpiece of the way I conduct an open, continuing, candid, no-holds-barred dialogue with the American people throughout the Gore-Lieberman administration,'' said Mr. Gore, who was known for holding endless public sessions when he was a young congressman from Tennessee. He said he welcomed the comments this week by Mr. Clinton that the vice president should not be tarred with any scandals of the Clinton years. ''I appreciate what the president said,'' Mr. Gore said. ''He repeated what he said in the past and what many others have said: This campaign is about the future.'' Dismissing worries among some Democratic officials that the Clintons were looming over the proceedings here and distracting attention from him, Mr. Gore repeated: ''This election is about the future. It is about the choice that has to be made between Governor Bush and myself. Anyone who doubts that underestimates the desire of the American people.'' Yet some Democrats here expressed concerns that the Clintons have hardly slipped gently away as Mr. Gore's big week approaches. Recognizing, perhaps, that he has overwhelmed the news coverage in the run-up to the convention, Mr. Clinton abruptly canceled television interviews scheduled for this weekend. And White House officials said they called off an interview with The New York Times because they were furious about the newspaper's coverage of how the Clintons are the headline attractions at fund-raising events here that competed with Mr. Gore's. ''The reason I was able to sell him on Monday was the Titans-Rams game,'' Mr. Rendell said. ''I said, 'Look, we've got to get the maximum audience because there's nobody alive who can better explain why Al Gore should be president than you.' '' Mr. Gore said it would not be fair to compare his task to that of Vice President George Bush in 1988, who advisers said was essentially offering himself as the steward of a third term of the Reagan administration. Rather than merely continue with Mr. Clinton's achievements, Mr. Gore said his message would be that he could build on the economic successes of the last eight years. ''I will make a new start to include those who have not yet fully enjoyed the benefits of the progress we have made,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and upon which I can launch this new effort to connect the American people to the full spirit of our democracy: the open meetings.'' Mr. Gore's advisers said his speech would be a pivotal moment in his stepping out from Mr. Clinton. Asked if he would mention Mr. Clinton in his address, Mr. Gore replied: ''Sure. I will say that the last eight years have been years of such remarkable economic progress and progress in lowering the crime rate and welfare reform, in significant measure because of his dedication to trying to create a better future.'' Yet Mr. Gore also said he would put forth a new vision. ''He gave us a foundation upon which I will build, upon which I will make a new start to include those who have not yet fully enjoyed the benefits of the progress we have made,'' he said. The vice president said that while he would make contrasts with Mr. Bush and Dick Cheney, his running mate, on policy, he intended to keep his remarks upbeat. ''It will be positive, positive, positive,'' Mr. Gore said of the speech, which he drafted largely himself. ''And it will describe a time of tremendous hope and possibility. There will be no negative points about Governor Bush or Mr. Cheney, either overt or covert, either direct or implied. There will be direct comparisons of the approach Joe Lieberman and I take to the issues.'' His pledge to stay positive in his speech, Mr. Gore insisted, was not rooted in any concern that the Republicans would continue to portray him as having a relentlessly negative campaign style. ''Now that the American people are beginning to tune into this dialogue, most of them for the first time,'' Mr. Gore said, ''it is imperative that we elevate the tone of the campaign on both sides. I think there's a willingness to do that on the other side. And I hope the other side will see this convention and this speech as an opening of opportunities for them as well as for us.'' Despite Mr. Gore's assurances, several Gore advisers and convention officials said that while they were mindful that the program should not appear harshly negative, some speakers would not shrink from aggressively taking on Mr. Bush and the Republicans. The wide belief among leading Democrats is that the sharp-edge remarks against Democrats at the Philadelphia convention, particularly by Mr. Cheney, gave them an excuse to fire back. ''I don't think they have a lot of credibility left on that anymore,'' said Robert Shrum, one of Mr. Gore's top advisers. ''The Cheney and Bush speeches had a personally negative tone. Secondly, I think you can very respectfully discuss issues, and the differences you have on issues. People don't see that as a negative at all. They see that as something they're entitled to know.'' Asked if Republicans might trap Democrats by goading them into lambasting Mr. Bush, then condemning them as too negative, Mr. Rendell said: ''They had a chance but they blew that on Wednesday night. If they had run a sweetness-and-light convention on Wednesday night, it would have been difficult for us. We would have had to tread gingerly to even do issues comparatives without seeming negative.'' In the interview today, Mr. Gore said he was intent on reaching back -- to far before he became vice president -- for the public to understand what motivates him. Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster, said Mr. Gore had more to gain from the convention than his opponent -- and maybe more to lose -- because as close as the polls are, Mr. Bush is now ahead and the vice president needs to scramble the dynamic. ''The largest number of people,'' he said, ''are going to learn the most about Al Gore during the course of this convention.''
 Gov George W Bush enlists Sen John McCain to help him reach out to veterans and other Americans concerned about country's military might; two appear at rally in Everett, Wash; Bush repeats pledge to spend more on armed services, and McCain vouches for Bush's credentials on military issues (S) Having campaigned with Senator John McCain of Arizona to appeal to swing voters, Gov. George W. Bush enlisted him yesterday to try to reach out to veterans and other Americans concerned about the country's military might. At a rally at the Water's Edge in Everett, Wash., Mr. Bush, the governor of Texas, reiterated his pledge to spend more on the armed services. Having campaigned with Senator John McCain of Arizona to appeal to swing voters, Gov. George W. Bush enlisted him yesterday to try to reach out to veterans and other Americans concerned about the country's military might. At a rally at the Water's Edge in Everett, Wash., Mr. Bush, the governor of Texas, reiterated his pledge to spend more on the armed services. ''I wish I could turn to the soldiers on that ship,'' Mr. Bush said, erroneously referring to the sailors on an aircraft carrier in the backdrop, ''and I wish they could hear me: stay in the military, there's a new commander in chief coming.'' Mr. McCain, a former Navy fighter pilot and prisoner of war in Vietnam, vouched for Mr. Bush's credentials on the issue. ''I have total and complete confidence in a man whose father served this nation honorably, who served honorably in our National Guard,'' Mr. McCain said, alluding to Mr. Bush's Vietnam years, which were also spent as a fighter pilot, albeit in Texas.
 Editorial previews Al Gore's appearance as Democratic presidential nominee In political analysis, the conventional question to ask at this point in the electoral calendar is this: What does a presidential candidate need to get from his party's national convention? Past candidates have used conventions to show they are strong enough, wise enough or steady enough to lead the nation. But it is hard to think of an exact precedent for the problem confronting Al Gore as he prepares to accept the Democratic nomination. He will arrive in Los Angeles on Tuesday as a career politician who clearly outmatches his opponent in governing experience, depth of knowledge and empathy for those Americans most in need of a government that is both competent and caring. Yet the most fundamental task of elective politics -- connecting with people and making them like him -- seems to elude Mr. Gore. Perhaps it can best be summed up by calling it his authenticity problem. Voters understand that Mr. Gore is smart. But they also see his seeming inability to make the theatrical part of politics feel like a genuine civic and patriotic experience. They know he is a good protege, but wonder if he has a controlling inner authority. In political analysis, the conventional question to ask at this point in the electoral calendar is this: What does a presidential candidate need to get from his party's national convention? Past candidates have used conventions to show they are strong enough, wise enough or steady enough to lead the nation. But it is hard to think of an exact precedent for the problem confronting Al Gore as he prepares to accept the Democratic nomination. He will arrive in Los Angeles on Tuesday as a career politician who clearly outmatches his opponent in governing experience, depth of knowledge and empathy for those Americans most in need of a government that is both competent and caring. Yet the most fundamental task of elective politics -- connecting with people and making them like him -- seems to elude Mr. Gore. Perhaps it can best be summed up by calling it his authenticity problem. Voters understand that Mr. Gore is smart. But they also see his seeming inability to make the theatrical part of politics feel like a genuine civic and patriotic experience. They know he is a good protege, but wonder if he has a controlling inner authority. These doubts, plus the disciplined if deceptive salesmanship of Gov. George W. Bush, have combined to produce months of erosion for Mr. Gore. He has seen slippage in the polls, in the level of cooperation between his campaign and the White House, and in his confidence on the stump. If he is going to win the office to which he has aspired since boyhood, Albert Arnold Gore Jr. needs to have a very good convention on several fronts. The Clinton Problem. In order to create shooting space, a basketball player has to ''get separation'' from the nearest defensive player. Mr. Gore has to achieve a separation from President Clinton's conduct and personal reputation in ways that go beyond simply failing whenever possible to mention his name. Mr. Bush and the Republicans believe that words like ''character,'' ''integrity'' and ''dignity'' are guided missiles that fly straight into the Democratic bunker. Since defending the president against such attacks is politically impossible, Mr. Gore has to create alternative definitions for himself and his party on the issues of presidential decorum and clean campaign money. He signaled his desire to do so by putting Senator Joseph Lieberman on the ticket, but having a devout running mate is not enough. The real trick will be using Mr. Lieberman to promote policies that are distinctively superior to Mr. Bush's in the areas of campaign finance and opposition to special interests. Mr. Gore promised last spring to make campaign finance reform his No. 1 domestic priority. Senator Lieberman, having a cleaner history, can elevate that promise into a major attack weapon against a Republican ticket that is expected to raise more than $200 million in soft money from corporations and wealthy individuals. Proper use of this issue could help the Democrats pull the John McCain independents away from the Bush-Cheney ticket. If he could curb his desire for attention, Mr. Clinton could help Mr. Gore achieve the aura of independence. That means giving a convention speech that depicts Mr. Gore as something other than a vessel for the Clinton legacy. In 1988, President Reagan helped George Bush overcome the wimp factor by hailing him as ''someone who's big enough and experienced enough'' for the job. If Mr. Clinton is not truly ready for Mr. Gore to have his turn, his inner grump will be visible lurking behind whatever oratorical scrim he erects. The president, in sum, must convince America that he believes Mr. Gore has virtues beyond being more similar to Bill Clinton than George Bush is. A Crisp Agenda. Anyone who paid even marginal attention to the Republican convention came away with a clear idea of what Mr. Bush plans to do if elected. He will spend most of the surplus on tax cuts. He will strengthen the military and emphasize a new missile defense system. He will build a private-investment component into Social Security and take unspecified steps to improve education. Mr. Gore needs to leave an equally crisp paragraph in the heads of the voters after his convention. Senator Charles Schumer is right that Mr. Gore's paragraph has to be written around the concept of prosperity, forcing voters to acknowledge that American families are better off than they were under Mr. Bush's father or Mr. Reagan. Voters should know after Los Angeles that Mr. Gore would not risk Reagan-style deficits by spending the surplus on tax cuts. He would use it to secure Social Security and Medicare. He would aim some revenues at improving education and the environment. He would guarantee a Supreme Court that would not overturn the right to abortion. He would free the American political system from the corrupting influence of corporate money. Performance. As a member of the rock 'n' roll generation, Mr. Gore no doubt remembers the Big Bopper's tribute to being ''real loose like a long-necked goose.'' But the plain fact is, if the man could loosen up he would already have done it. Moreover, he will come to the lectern in Los Angeles trailing many unfortunate sound bites. His early waffling on gun control and abortion financing, his exaggerations about Mr. Clinton's place in history and his evasions about White House fund-raising all cast doubt on the steadiness of his convictions and identity. More than anything, Al Gore needs to use his convention to address those concerns, and he can do so through both style and substance. On the stylistic side, no one doubts that Mr. Gore is the best demolition orator in American politics. He will, if he chooses, demolish Mr. Bush's budget arithmetic as thoroughly as he dismantled Bill Bradley's health plan. The problem is that Americans do not really prefer a counterpuncher as their first choice for president. Further, it is a quirk of Mr. Gore's speaking style that the more right he is, the more he irritates people. In this speech, as in no other of his life, he needs to avoid pummeling Americans with his book learning and talk instead about what he believes. For if you hack through the sound-bite detritus of a 24-year electoral career, it is possible to find the theme of a conviction that animates the vice president. He does want a government that is caring and active without being intrusive or controlling. In speech after speech he has returned to his desire to be the protector of working families. Mr. Bush has grafted onto his classic corporate Republican politics the view that government ought to be something other than an impassive referee that watches while the economy sorts out the losers and winners. But that benign vision does not have to be grafted onto Mr. Gore's politics. It is root and branch of his philosophy, the healthier part of his inheritance from Albert Gore Sr. and Mr. Clinton. In the weeks and months ahead, Mr. Gore's political fate will be determined by his ability to convey that conviction without shouting, waving his arms or relentlessly flailing his opponent and the public with yet another bunch of impeccably bundled facts. In the end, when choosing between the guy with the smirk and the smartest boy in the class, the voters will go for the man who seems anchored from within by some core of incorruptible belief.
 Ms. Weisel said that after Mrs. Lieberman watched her husband accept Vice President Al Gore's invitation to become his running mate in Nashville last week, she got an e-mail message from her.
 Gore Preparing to Shift Focus to His Own Agenda  Vice President Al Gore says that in his speech to the Democratic National Convention he will embrace President Clinton for his success in presiding over the economy but leave no doubt that ''I'm running on my own agenda, on my own voice and through my own experiences. From his first days in Congress, Al Gore has distinguished himself by methodically researching issues and making them his own.
 Q. Is there a danger that what you and President Clinton are doing here could overshadow Mr. Gore's week here? Q. Is there a danger that what you and President Clinton are doing here could overshadow Mr. Gore's week here? A. No. We've talked about it. Everything we're doing has been coordinated with the vice president and Tipper and top levels of our staffs. We're doing everything we can to send a very clear message that if America liked the Clinton-Gore administration, they will like the Gore-Lieberman administration. And that there is a continuity here, a commitment to the same issues, a focus on the New Democratic philosophy. That's why the convention has been planned the way it is -- where we came early and we will leave Tuesday morning, and we will join the Gores and there will be an almost, I don't know how to describe it exactly, but a kind of passing on, that is, a very explicit statement by the president about his strong support for and affection for and admiration for the vice president. And then we're done. We're gone.
 Hillary Rodham Clinton says she and Pres Clinton will stay at Democratic National Convention just long enough to proclaim their support for Vice Pres Al Gore, then drop completely from sight, doing nothing that might steal attention from celebration surrounding Gore's presidential nomination, int; Gore's supporters have assailed both Clintons for embarking on vigorous schedule of pre-convention politicking and fund-raising that has distracted from climactic moment in Gore's career; Hillary Clinton discusses tangled ambitions and agendas of Pres Clinton, Gore, and herself; she says Gore faces different kind of opponent from one she faces in her quest for Senate seat from New York; says while Gov George W Bush is running explicitly as Republican, her opponent, Rep Rick Lazio, is seeking to obscure parts of his record to accommodate Democratic electoral terrain in New York; accuses him of deliberate obfuscation of his record and his votes in House; photo (M) Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she and President Clinton would stay at the Democratic National Convention just long enough to proclaim their support for Vice President Al Gore, and then drop completely from sight, doing nothing, she promised, that might steal attention from the celebration surrounding Mr. Gore's presidential nomination. Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she and President Clinton would stay at the Democratic National Convention just long enough to proclaim their support for Vice President Al Gore, and then drop completely from sight, doing nothing, she promised, that might steal attention from the celebration surrounding Mr. Gore's presidential nomination. ''We don't want there to be any attention -- anywhere -- except on Joe and Al,'' Mrs. Clinton said, referring to Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut senator Mr. Gore has chosen as his running mate. Mrs. Clinton, who said she was speaking for herself and the president, made her remarks at a time when Mr. Gore's supporters have assailed them both for embarking on a vigorous schedule of pre-convention politicking and fund-raising that has distracted from this climactic moment in Mr. Gore's career. Mrs. Clinton grew animated at the mention of the criticism, shaking her head vigorously to dispute the suggestion that the Clintons were overshadowing Mr. Gore. ''There is no more enthusiastic supporter of Al Gore than I am,'' she said. ''I just feel so strongly about his candidacy.'' She discussed the tangled ambitions and agendas of three of the nation's best-known Democrats -- Mr. Clinton Mr. Gore and herself -- in the course of an interview in which she talked at length about her campaign against Representative Rick A. Lazio, and how she hoped the convention in general, and her 10-minute speech on Monday night, would provide a lift both to her campaign and to Mr. Gore's. The first lady, gazing across a smoggy expanse of Los Angeles from a window on the 19th floor of the St. Regis Hotel, argued that Mr. Lazio was, largely, a different kind of opponent from the one Mr. Gore faced in Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Lazio, she asserted, repeatedly sought to obscure parts of his record to accommodate the Democratic electoral terrain in New York, while Mr. Bush has run more explicitly as a Republican. That fund-raiser was one of the events that drew some expressions of concern from Mr. Gore's supporters. Mrs. Clinton, though, asserted that she had taken pains to avoid any conflicts with Mr. Gore's campaign during their visits here. ''Everything we're doing has been coordinated with the vice president and Tipper and top levels of our staff,'' she said, referring to the vice president's wife, Tipper. Mrs. Clinton emphasized her point by gesturing with a hand loaded down with a charm bracelet. Asked if that meant that she would allow Mr. Gore's advisers to review her speech before she delivered it on Monday, Mrs. Clinton grinned and responded: ''Of course I would. I haven't written it yet. I worked on it this morning. But you know -- if they want to see it, I'd be more than happy to show it to them. It's only 10 minutes long.''
 For all the talk of the importance of average families in the election this year, it turns out to be a grand year for elites. The last time a presidential race featured a candidate from Harvard (Al Gore), Yale (George W. Bush) and Princeton (Ralph Nader) was 1912 -- the year of Woodrow Wilson, Teddy Roosevelt and William Howard Taft -- when the Ivy League was more clearly a place of privilege than it is today. For all the talk of the importance of average families in the election this year, it turns out to be a grand year for elites. The last time a presidential race featured a candidate from Harvard (Al Gore), Yale (George W. Bush) and Princeton (Ralph Nader) was 1912 -- the year of Woodrow Wilson, Teddy Roosevelt and William Howard Taft -- when the Ivy League was more clearly a place of privilege than it is today. With his reputation as a fun-loving fraternity president, Mr. Bush fits into a popular stereotype of Yale, dating from old New Yorker cartoons depicting the guy in a raccoon coat at a football game. But what I find striking about the candidates is their echo of a peculiar strain of political ambition combined with do-goodism rampant at Yale in the 1960's, when I was a student along with Mr. Bush and Mr. Lieberman and other budding politicians like Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Gov. George Pataki of New York. Back then Yale, like most campuses, was a hub of idealism, networking and, in retrospect, more than a little sanctimony. My years there were framed by two Kennedy assassinations and filled with civil rights activity and antiwar protests. ''There were moments when you weren't sure about the survivability of the country,'' says Roland Betts, one of my class's biggest champions of Mr. Bush. ''It was not like today, when kids go through college planning their careers and figure that everything will be all right.'' In recent decades, the struggle has taken place on both the left and right. The left of my day saw Yale as a tool of the establishment, whereas Mr. Bush says he recalls the condescension of the liberals, just as William F. Buckley had a generation earlier. Yet Mr. Bush is sending his daughter to Yale this fall, just as Mr. Buckley sent his son. Mr. Bush, by contrast, was believed to have no political ambitions. That memory came back two weeks ago, when about 18 of his classmates held a kind of class reunion at the Republican convention in Philadelphia. Everyone I talked to at the party was both proud and amazed that he had become such an extremely effective politician. In New Hampshire earlier this year, when I caught up with Mr. Bush, I found myself saying to him that I simply found it incredible that he was running for president. He laughed and said that all his classmates had the same reaction, but that it was absurd to say he never had any interest in politics. To me, in running a moral crusade, Mr. Bush seems more than ever like the child of Yale in the 1960's that he says he never wanted to be. It sounds strained, perhaps. But it is somehow reminiscent of Yale in the 60's that on both sides its graduates are convinced they are trying to save the nation's soul.
 The tale of Mr. Wyden bears retelling for those who reacted to the news of Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as a running mate with the queasy suspicion that this just cannot be good for the Jews. Will it awaken the sleeping giant of anti-Semitism, they asked themselves? Will Jews be the scapegoats if the Gore-Lieberman ticket is defeated?
 Vice Pres Al Gore, who has endorsements of major environmental groups, sees environment as issue on which he has decided edge over Gov George W Bush; Gore visits Springdale, Pa, homestead of Rachel Carson, and claims spiritual kinship with author of book that is widely regarded as founding document in environmental movement, Silent Spring; Gore's apparent strategy of blending rhetoric of environmental awareness with larger populist theme of 'fighting for the people' and taking on big business is aimed chiefly at Bush, but also at Ralph Nader, who, according to some polls, is eating into Gore's voter base with appeals to environmental advocates; photo (M) If there is an issue in which Vice President Al Gore feels he has a decided edge over Gov. George W. Bush, it is the environment. Mr. Gore has written a best-seller on the subject; he has the endorsements of the major environmental groups and, as he loves to note, Mr. Bush presides over a state that consistently ranks at or near the bottom for air and water quality. If there is an issue in which Vice President Al Gore feels he has a decided edge over Gov. George W. Bush, it is the environment. Mr. Gore has written a best-seller on the subject; he has the endorsements of the major environmental groups and, as he loves to note, Mr. Bush presides over a state that consistently ranks at or near the bottom for air and water quality. Today, with some polls showing him gaining ground on Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore stood on a ridge overlooking the Allegheny River and claimed spiritual kinship with the late Rachel Carson, who in 1962 wrote ''Silent Spring,'' widely regarded as a founding document in the environmental movement. Ms. Carson was born here, an Allegheny Valley town 12 miles northeast of Pittsburgh, and Mr. Gore came here intent on drawing parallels between her life's work and his own passion for the environment. Like Ms. Carson, he said, he spent time in his youth wandering his family's farm in Carthage, Tenn., ''looking for critters'' and learning to love nature. He recalled how, when he was a teenager, his mother bought a copy of ''Silent Spring'' and then spent the next few weeks over breakfast discussing with Mr. Gore and his sister, Nancy, the book's warning against pesticides and other chemicals. Where Ms. Carson had started studying the environment as a teenager, publishing her first article at age 14, Mr. Gore recalled studying at Harvard University under Professor Roger Revelle, a pioneer in researching the atmospheric effects of carbon dioxide. ''A long time ago,'' Mr. Gore told several hundred people gathered on the lawn of Springdale High School, ''I joined with the spirit of Rachel Carson in committing myself to a new springtime filled with the sounds of wild birds, with the sounds of children learning about and appreciating the environment.'' But her main findings about the dangers of pesticides and insecticides to the environment continue to have broad acceptance, and Mr. Gore again drew a parallel with his own 1992 book that warned against the dangers of global warning. Although much of Mr. Gore's performance here today amounted to a routine stump speech on a favorite subject, it also demonstrated something about his overall campaign strategy. Mr. Gore, several of his aides said, is determined to blend the rhetoric of environmental awareness with his larger populist theme of ''fighting for the people'' and taking on big business. It is a strategy aimed chiefly at Mr. Bush, whom the Gore campaign has accused of being a captive of big oil. ''Follow the smoke to the campaign contributions,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's campaign press secretary. But the strategy is also aimed at Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate and Green Party candidate who, according to some polls, has been eating into Mr. Gore's voter base with appeals to environmental advocates and union members, particularly in the Midwest.
 Oliver Cruz, a mentally retarded 33- year-old with an I.Q. of 64, was one of two men executed on Wednesday in Huntsville, Tex. ''The execution of persons who are mentally retarded serves no principled purpose and demeans our system of justice,'' Martha W. Barrett, the president of the American Bar Association, wrote to Gov. George W. Bush. The European Union also had called on Mr. Bush to spare Mr. Cruz, saying the execution of the mentally retarded violated international human rights norms. Oliver Cruz, a mentally retarded 33- year-old with an I.Q. of 64, was one of two men executed on Wednesday in Huntsville, Tex. ''The execution of persons who are mentally retarded serves no principled purpose and demeans our system of justice,'' Martha W. Barrett, the president of the American Bar Association, wrote to Gov. George W. Bush. The European Union also had called on Mr. Bush to spare Mr. Cruz, saying the execution of the mentally retarded violated international human rights norms.
 ''Right now the Republicans have been more successful with corporate money because they're in the lead in the presidential race and control the House,'' said Anthony Corrado, a campaign finance expert at Colby College in Maine. ''But I would expect we will see more corporate contributions to the Democrats after the convention. When Gore tightens up the numbers in the polls and Democrats look like they have a chance to take the House, I expect to see corporations hedging their bets.'' Labor likewise is a longtime stalwart of Democratic politics. And while it has had its publicized fights with the Clinton administration, notably on trade, it remains ideologically attuned to the Clinton-Gore agenda. The administration has supported minimum-wage increases, middle-class tax breaks, expanded benefits for retirees under Medicare and increased spending on child care and preschool programs, all policies supported by the labor movement. Organized labor has been highly critical of Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas on wages, labor rights, immigration, the environment and health care. Teachers unions, an important Democratic constituency, abhor Mr. Bush's support for school vouchers. And trial lawyers, put bluntly, despise Mr. Bush, who has made the trial bar a favorite whipping boy and has moved to limit awards in personal-injury and class-action lawsuits. The Clinton administration encouraged plaintiffs' lawyers to pursue multibillion-dollar lawsuits against cigarette companies which yielded huge fees to the lawyers. And Mr. Clinton won trial lawyers' undying devotion and financial support with his 1995 veto of a bill to curb shareholder lawsuits against companies with wildly fluctuating stock prices. Congress, in a rare act, overrode the president's veto, but the trial bar has not forgotten the president's act. Executives in the entertainment industry said that the relatively small increase in donations from Hollywood this year reflects two factors -- a certain complacency after controlling the White House for eight years, and a lower level of passion for Vice President Al Gore than for Mr. Clinton. Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Lieberman, an outspoken critic of the entertainment industry, as his vice-presidential choice has also dampened the ardor for the ticket in Tinseltown. ''There's always a different level of enthusiasm when you're trying to get back something; 1992 was a different dynamic because we were trying to get back the White House after 12 years,'' said Donna Bojarsky, a political adviser to several major Hollywood figures. ''Then there's Clinton as a phenomenon out here that Gore just can't match. He'll have the money he needs, but the level of enthusiasm is different.'' The trial lawyers have been more generous in their giving to Democrats and more explicit in the reasons. Governor Bush has harshly criticized what he calls the greed of the trial bar and tried to limit their fees for winning multibillion-dollar settlements from the tobacco companies. Mr. Bush's support for tort law changes and limits on settlements has made him anathema to plaintiffs' lawyers. Senator Lieberman has advocated revision of tort law and limits on damages that plaintiffs can receive in suits, a position at variance with Mr. Gore's. Some trial lawyers have privately raised concerns about Mr. Lieberman's views, but for most plaintiffs' lawyers the Democratic ticket remains vastly preferable to the Republican alternative. ''As a general rule, his record on civil justice issues has not been real strong,'' said Debbie D. Branson, chairwoman of the Texas Trial Lawyers Association. But she said Mr. Lieberman's presence on the ticket would not diminish trial lawyers' support for Mr. Gore. ''We know what Gore's commitment is, and we certainly know what the Bush agenda is,'' Ms. Branson said. ''We're quite confident that a Gore administration will support the civil justice system and protect American families.''
 Al Gore's Journey, 11th in series of articles about lives of presidential candidates, examines Gore's record during his 16 years in Congress, 8 in House and 8 in Senate; from his first days on Capitol Hill, Gore went methodically about task of identifying issues that he could make his own; he was strikingly effective at winning attention by championing just-over-the-horizon consumer-oriented causes such as toxic-waste dumping, genetic testing, global warming; he reveled in mastering arcana of issues average politician might find bloodless or simply too hard, then he tried to popularize issues with voters at large; his strategy was so effective, so media-savvy, that colleagues referred to him as 'Prime Time Al'; Gore's record on Capitol Hill remains vital part of his biography; debate over whether its hallmark was prescience or political expedience will rage over next three months, as he campaigns for presidency; photos (L) But even in this hotbed of ambition, Al Gore stood out. As former Representative Jim Cooper of Tennessee put it, ''Al was never a backbencher.'' Almost as soon as they arrived on Capitol Hill, members of the class of '76 began looking for ways to break out of the pack. Some, like Mr. Gephardt, played the inside game, building the personal alliances essential for rising in Congressional leadership. Others, like Mr. Gore, a young Tennessean with a famous political name, preferred the outside game. But even in this hotbed of ambition, Al Gore stood out. As former Representative Jim Cooper of Tennessee put it, ''Al was never a backbencher.'' Almost as soon as they arrived on Capitol Hill, members of the class of '76 began looking for ways to break out of the pack. Some, like Mr. Gephardt, played the inside game, building the personal alliances essential for rising in Congressional leadership. Others, like Mr. Gore, a young Tennessean with a famous political name, preferred the outside game. It was not his way to twist arms or trade favors. While he made friends, particularly on the basketball court in the House gym, backslapping was not his political strong suit. Instead, Mr. Gore, who was 28 when first elected, went methodically about the task of identifying issues -- many slightly obscure but all deadly serious -- that he could make his own. Throughout his 16 years in Congress, 8 in the House and then 8 in the Senate before becoming Bill Clinton's running mate, Mr. Gore was strikingly effective at winning attention by championing just-over-the-horizon consumer-oriented causes. Toxic-waste dumping. Genetic testing. Global warming. Today, as Mr. Gore moves toward Los Angeles to accept his party's presidential nomination at the Democratic National Convention next week, his record on Capitol Hill remains a vital part of his biography. And the debate over whether its hallmark was prescience or political expedience will rage over the next three months. His campaign strategists say most Americans are unaware of how Mr. Gore spent the years 1977 to 1992 -- the pre-Clinton years -- and they plan to highlight that era in convention speeches and films. ''Gore throughout his career has taken on important issues well before it was fashionable to take them on,'' said Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager for communications. Mr. Gore himself, when asked in a recent interview aboard Air Force Two to summarize his Congressional career, said the message was simple: ''I will not hesitate to take on any special interest that is operating to the disadvantage of the American people. And I'll never hesitate to take on any challenge, however complex or difficult.'' But the Bush campaign will portray Mr. Gore as a man who carefully crafted his Congressional career to maintain his political viability, a man with little grounding other than his own ambition. ''Al Gore's flip-flops on important issues, including guns and abortion, underscore why there's a leadership gap in this campaign,'' said Dan Bartlett, a Bush campaign spokesman. Clearly, Mr. Gore was engaged in a balancing act for much of his Congressional career. He chose issues that pushed him to the national stage, but he was compulsive about tending his district back home. He studiously avoided the kind of polarizing debates that ultimately contributed to the defeat of his father, Senator Albert Gore Sr., in 1970. The issues the younger Gore selected had the advantage of being virtually nonideological. There was right and wrong in Mr. Gore's positioning, but rarely was there right and left. It all left his political rivals with little room to maneuver. ''He picked out issues that unless Adolf Hitler was your idol you couldn't disagree,'' said Victor H. Ashe, the mayor of Knoxville, Tenn., and Mr. Gore's Republican opponent in his first Senate campaign in 1984. ''Organ transplant databases. More money for Alzheimer's research. Infant formula. I mean, who in their right mind is going to fight against those? He avoided any issue that could be divisive.'' Mr. Gore's ideological ratings by groups that monitor Congressional voting records typically group him as a centrist Democrat, particularly on foreign policy, with positions that grew somewhat more liberal as he moved toward his failed 1988 presidential campaign. His approval rating by the liberal Americans for Democratic Action, for instance, grew from 45 percent in his first year to 78 percent in 1990. But much of Mr. Gore's Congressional career was not spent in the middle of the ideological wars; his interests, his political instincts and perhaps the memory of his father pushed him elsewhere. The Democratic freshmen who entered the House in the post-Watergate classes of 1974 and 1976 expected to make a difference, fast, in contrast to their predecessors' long years of quiet back-bench servitude. Mr. Gore hoped to be on the Appropriations Committee, the seat of federal largess, but he lost out to his friend and fellow freshman Norm Dicks of Washington. He landed, fortunately enough, on the Commerce Committee. Mr. Dicks recalled saying he had done Mr. Gore a favor: ''I told him, 'Now you'll be on Commerce and on TV all the time.' '' Indeed, the Commerce Committee had purview over a wide array of consumer issues -- involving energy, the environment, health care -- and it gave Mr. Gore an invaluable forum. He got a seat on the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, and eventually became chairman of a similar subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Technology. From those perches, Mr. Gore quickly became known as a meticulously prepared, take-no-prisoners inquisitor, aided by his background in law and his five years as a newspaper reporter. The headlines from back home -- and some in Washington -- portrayed an aggressive young lawmaker standing up for consumers, whether he was charging monopoly practices among natural-gas pipeline companies or exposing an international uranium cartel: ''Gore: Thousands of Babies Drinking Harmful Formula?''  ''Rep. Gore Breaks Up a Monopoly.''  ''Gore Questions Contact Lens Solution Use.''  ''Gore Introduces Nationwide Transplant Organ Bill.'' Barely past 30, Mr. Gore was in the thick of the struggle for the passage of the Superfund Act of 1980, which established a fund to clean up toxic wastes. He was also an important member of the Congressional Clearinghouse on the Future. ''We'd bring in top scientists, top futurists who were looking at technological developments, their implications for society,'' Mr. Gephardt said. Much later, Mr. Gore would become the butt of late-night talk show jokes for his claim of having helped to create the Internet. But Congressional colleagues say he really was ahead of the curve in seeing the implications of new technologies, like computer networks and genetic testing. ''He understood the link between technology and development; he could see the future very well,'' said David E. Bonior of Michigan, now the Democratic whip. Mike Kopp, one of Mr. Gore's early aides, remembered him subscribing to scientific journals, ''obscure publications,'' at home, clipping out articles and bringing them in for his staff to review. He certainly had his detractors, who saw his hunger for the media limelight as extraordinary, even by Washington standards. Former aides say he was skilled at cultivating reporters, studying their interests and then catering to them. Still, by most accounts Mr. Gore fit happily into the culture of the House. His father cast a formidable shadow, but as another famous son of a famous Congressman, Representative John D. Dingell put it, ''It is not looked down upon in this place'' to have a family legacy. Mr. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who was the exceedingly powerful chairman of the Commerce Committee from 1981 to 1995, became something of a mentor to Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore could be a demanding, micromanaging boss, traits that have extended to his campaign. In his early days, he sorted the office mail himself and insisted on reviewing and editing the most pedestrian constituent letters. Former aides said he did not take well to criticism and was not particularly solicitous of advice from underlings. Though he was accessible, he avoided both small talk and confrontation. ''Typically,'' said Mr. Kopp, ''his reaction when you criticized him was he'd either walk away or get busy doing something else.'' But he also hung out with members of the House like Tom Downey of New York, most of them young men with young families, and was among the regulars in the freewheeling basketball games at the House gym. ''I had closer friendships in the House,'' Mr. Gore said, comparing it with the Senate. ''I just, I had more fun in the House.'' Still, even in the House gym, his competitive instincts showed. Mr. Bonior recalls walking into the gym one night to find Mr. Gore on his back at midcourt, trying to make an implausible shot that others could not match. (When asked about this in an interview, Mr. Gore said without a pause, ''Not trying.'') Midway through his tenure in the House, at the start of the 1980's, Mr. Gore began his move to a more national arena, obtaining a seat on the House Intelligence Committee and plunging into the most arcane field in Washington: arms control. It has become a highly burnished chapter in the official Gore story -- how he heard the persistent fears of nuclear war from the folks back home, how he embarked on a secretive yearlong tutorial on arms control with Leon Fuerth, today his national security adviser and then a top staffer with the Intelligence Committee. By 1982, with a major speech and an article in The New Republic, one of his many essays and op-ed articles on the issue, Mr. Gore came forth with his answer: an arms control strategy that would move from big multiple-warhead missiles to smaller single-warhead missiles, which could be easily scattered and thus much harder to target, thereby reducing the advantage of a first strike. In 1983, when the Reagan administration was trying to win Congressional approval for the big multiple-warhead MX missile, Mr. Gore and like-minded colleagues sought a compromise: limited deployment of the MX, development of the smaller single-warhead Midgetman missile and a new push toward arms control. In the end, when the Midgetman went undeveloped but the MX pushed ahead, some Democrats thought Mr. Gore and his allies had been used; others praised their search for a new path. ''It's not a black and white thing,'' said Michael Krepon, president of the Henry L. Stimson Center, an international-security policy group. ''If you take a longer-range view, the outcome that Gore was pushing -- take the warheads off these land-based missiles, that single-warhead missiles are the route to stability on land -- what Gore was pushing for became conventional wisdom 15 years later.'' What was clear was that Mr. Gore was playing at a very high level of the game. Even as he became a more prominent national figure, doing the Sunday talk shows and finding his name in assessments of presidential timber, Mr. Gore was careful to return to Tennessee whenever possible. His father's defeat by Bill Brock had provided the great political lesson of his life. As the Republicans gained a foothold in the South, the senior Mr. Gore became vulnerable because he had opposed the Vietnam War, supported civil rights (for the most part) and become a Washington fixture who did not go home much. The younger Gore would not make the same mistake. He started as a freshman, making the trip every weekend, driving maniacally down country roads in a Dodge Omni, staying for an hour or so regardless of whether he was speaking to 50 people or to 5. ''Whenever two or three people got together, Al would be there,'' said former Senator James R. Sasser of Tennessee, who served with Mr. Gore. One minute Mr. Gore would be jotting down the name of an elderly woman who needed help with her Social Security check. The next he would be using coffee-cup missiles to explain his arms control proposals. Those who watched him then said he seemed far more natural than he does now. To the extent that he could, Mr. Gore minimized opportunities for disagreement. In line with his district, he opposed both Medicaid financing of abortion and most forms of gun control, positions that he changed as he felt the lure of national politics. ''There's no doubt that I changed my position,'' he said, but he noted that many Democrats had evolved on such issues. Clearly, though, Mr. Gore had no interest in leading on divisive topics. ''On the abortion stuff, he was never out front,'' said former Representative Peter H. Kostmayer, a Democratic member of the class of '76 from Pennsylvania. ''I never noticed how he voted. He did it quietly. I was surprised to read that he had ever been antichoice.'' Mr. Gore called himself ''a raging moderate,'' and it worked. After a close first election, he ran unopposed in 1978, won with 79 percent in 1980 and was unopposed again in 1982. It seemed almost preordained when Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee announced his intention to retire from the Senate that Mr. Gore would take his seat. But Mr. Gore did not find the easy fit in the Senate that he had found in the House. He did find a way to pursue his interests. He played a major role in probing NASA after the Challenger disaster in 1986. He was an early voice warning about the dangers of global warming. He worked on legislation that promoted high-performance computing and networking projects, and was an early champion of the Internet. (Mr. Gore steps carefully around that accomplishment today, after overstating his role last year.) He maintained a high profile in national security matters, serving as a member, for example, of a Senate observer group for arms control talks in Geneva in 1985. And he continued his tutorials on various issues. ''He didn't show up in legislating, like Kennedy or the people I dealt with,'' said former Senator Simpson. ''He showed up in the news cycle.'' Critics saw political calculations everywhere in Mr. Gore's Senate years -- including his decision to break with his party and vote to authorize President Bush to wage war on Iraq. Mr. Gore described his vote as one of 10 Democrats to authorize the Persian Gulf war as ''excruciatingly difficult,'' indeed the toughest of his career. He dismissed those who viewed it as a political vote, saying that in fact it jeopardized his ability to win Democratic presidential primaries. ''It was anything but a political vote,'' he said. But Mr. Simpson asserts that Mr. Gore bargained with the Republicans over how much speaking time he would get -- and when -- before he made his decision, an assertion dismissed by the Gore campaign and other Democrats. George Mitchell, the majority leader at the time, scoffed: ''They've been trying to peddle that for eight years.'' The vote that seemed so politically dangerous at the time proved highly auspicious for Mr. Gore's political future, with the gulf war considered a resounding military success. But as the 1992 election approached, it seemed ever more apparent to Mr. Gore's aides that he would not run, at least not at the top of the ticket. He focused more and more on favorite issues -- notably global warming -- that had proven so hard to translate into a presidential campaign agenda in 1988. ''I was disappointed in myself in '88,'' Mr. Gore said, ''by the extent to which I responded to the deafening silence on those issues by muting my own discussion of them and shifting into sort of cookie-cutter issues.'' In the end, Congressional scholars say, Mr. Gore's time in Congress will be remembered for his persistence on those issues. ''If you were to pick the master coalition builders in Congress, Al Gore wouldn't be on that list,'' said Norman J. Ornstein, an expert on Congress at the American Enterprise Institute. ''But if you were to pick the master agenda setters, he definitely would.'' This much was clear, though. By the time Bill Clinton called, Al Gore had broken from the pack. This is the 11th in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future installments will examine Gov. George W. Bush's work in his father's White House and Vice President Al Gore's writings on the environment.
 These self-styled ''Astronauts'' are largely Democrats. They made their fortunes on Bill Clinton's watch and became natural allies of his centrist, pro-trade, ''New Democrat'' agenda. Of course, plenty of Internet entrepreneurs remain Republicans; George Bush has raised millions in Silicon Valley, and Republican congressmen like J.C. Watts of Oklahoma have made pilgrimages there to court high-tech supporters. But Witchel and his fellow PAC.com members share a Northern California ethos that makes them culturally out of tune with traditional Republican values. PAC.commers say they care about choice and the environment. They don't want the Ten Commandments posted in schools. They love making money and are perfectly comfortable doing it alongside homosexuals and foreigners. What they see in Gore and the New Democrats are politicians who will not only respect their style but who will also make sure that their industry stays as unregulated, un-unionized and untaxed as possible. PAC.com, for the moment, eschews soft-money donations -- the uncapped gifts to political parties rather than individual candidates -- but other high-tech figures have begun experimenting with the system. Marc Andreessen, the 29-year-old founder of Netscape, chairman of Loudcloud and ber-geek, is part of PAC.com's broader network. He has been hanging out with Vice President Al Gore for years and recently dropped a quarter of a million dollars on the Democratic National Committee. It is, Andreessen admits, ''a lot'' by the standards of politics. ''But in my world,'' he adds, ''if I invested just $250,000 in a new company, they might think I wasn't all that serious.''
 IN the exhaustive analysis of Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, one factor has been strangely overlooked: Mr. Lieberman's uncanny resemblance to Sam Jaffe. IN the exhaustive analysis of Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, one factor has been strangely overlooked: Mr. Lieberman's uncanny resemblance to Sam Jaffe.
 Clearly, this is a ''Pirates of Penzance'' not firmly anchored to the original. The Major General dresses like a World War I aviator; the Pirate King like the leather-clad leader of a motorcycle gang; various pirates in punk, in hip-hop, and in drag. There are references to President Clinton, Gov. George W. Bush, Representative Rick A. Lazio, Charlton Heston, Ivana Trump, Kosovo, Watergate, the legalizing of marijuana, cosmetic surgery, the Internet and even ''Kevin Kline in 1980 at the Delacorte,'' a sly allusion to the outdoor production of ''The Pirates of Penzance'' at the theater in Central Park, one that New Yorkers might be most familiar with.
 Graphs on most joked-about presidential aspirants in late-night television monologues; George W Bush leads (S) '...the dog ate it.'  ''It was one of the shortest speeches that Bush made. Very effective, but one of the shortest ever at a convention fro a keynote speaker accepting the nomination. George Bush today said he had a lot more stuff written down, but the dog ate it.'' Bill Maher  ''Yesterday on the campaign trail, Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman acknowledged that they do have some conflicting opinions. Apparently. Gore and Lieberman hold different views on school vouchers, social security and bacon.''
 Q. Do oil companies stand to gain if George W. Bush and Dick Cheney, both of whom worked in the industry, win in November? A. When push comes to shove, the parties would make geopolitical decisions about such things as imports and subsidies pretty much the same way. But Bush's would be a looser environmental policy, on offshore drilling, say, than Gore's.
