 For all of the major broadcast and cable outlets covering this year's Democratic convention, the biggest draw was Vice President Al Gore on Thursday night. His speech accepting the nomination for president was watched by about 21.8 million people. According to preliminary statistics, another 3.1 million watched the prime-time coverage of Mr. Gore's speech on PBS.
 Steve Recchia letter praises Vice Pres Al Gore's acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention (Aug 18 article) As an independent voter, I was impressed with Al Gore's acceptance speech (front page, Aug. 18) and his specific policy positions.  There is nothing ''stiff'' about Mr. Gore's proposals to help pay for prescription drugs for the elderly, raise the minimum wage for working families and help college students pay for their tuition. As an independent voter, I was impressed with Al Gore's acceptance speech (front page, Aug. 18) and his specific policy positions.  There is nothing ''stiff'' about Mr. Gore's proposals to help pay for prescription drugs for the elderly, raise the minimum wage for working families and help college students pay for their tuition. I am glad to see a reinvigorated Gore campaign and hope that voters look past petty personality traits and look to who can best lead our country.
 John T Dillon letter questions Vice Pres Al Gore statement about being his own man in accepting Democratic presidential nomination (Aug 18 article) It is hardly reassuring to hear a candidate for the presidency proudly announce ''I stand here tonight as my own man'' (front page, Aug. 18). Whose man has Al Gore been up to now, and whose man will he be tomorrow? It is hardly reassuring to hear a candidate for the presidency proudly announce ''I stand here tonight as my own man'' (front page, Aug. 18). Whose man has Al Gore been up to now, and whose man will he be tomorrow?
 Gov George W Bush takes his presidential campaign into Tennessee, Vice Pres Al Gore's home state, and accuses him of delivering a convention speech that sowed division and fomented class warfare among Americans; Gore, speaking in La Crosse, Wis, implies that some people are striving harder and less successfully than others and makes clear that he wants to be their champion; board paddle wheeler for a trip down the Mississippi; photos (M) Roaring into Vice President Al Gore's home state on the morning after the Democratic National Convention, Gov. George W. Bush accused Mr. Gore today of delivering a convention speech that sowed divisions and fomented class warfare among Americans. Roaring into Vice President Al Gore's home state on the morning after the Democratic National Convention, Gov. George W. Bush accused Mr. Gore today of delivering a convention speech that sowed divisions and fomented class warfare among Americans. ''The voters have a clear choice,'' Mr. Bush said at a rally in Bartlett, a Memphis suburb. ''They've got one candidate who wants four more years of finger-pointing and politicizing and blaming, a candidate who will pit one group of people against another, a candidate who wants to wage class warfare to get ahead.'' ''I've got a different vision of leadership,'' Mr. Bush added. ''A leader is somebody who finds common ground.'' But Mr. Gore, speaking in La Crosse, Wis., this morning before he shoved off on his boat trip, implied that some people were striving harder and less successfully than others and made clear that he wanted to be their champion. With their competing statements and viewpoints, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore were delineating what will undoubtedly be some of the sharpest battle lines between them this fall. There were distinct echoes of presidential elections past, in which Democrats tried, sometimes successfully,  to tag Republicans as the protectors of privilege. But Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore were also vying for the precious, fickle attention of voters as the conventions faded into memory and the candidates headed into the final 11 weeks of a race that many political analysts say will be extraordinarily close. Each candidate sought to make a statement with his itinerary today. Mr. Bush pointedly traveled to Mr. Gore's political doorstep, and the banner behind him on the stage at his rally said, ''Listen to People Who Know Them Best.'' It was a reference to the candidates' standings in their home states, Texas and Tennessee. Throughout the day, Mr. Bush's advisers mentioned that polls showed Mr. Bush in a tight race against Mr. Gore in Tennessee, while Mr. Gore trailed Mr. Bush by a double-digit percentile margin in Texas. Mr. Bush's advisers pulled out all the stops for his rally here in an enormous warehouse packed with thousands of wildly enthusiastic supporters. The singer Travis Tritt performed several songs before Mr. Bush took the stage, and Mr. Bush was flanked by his running mate, Dick Cheney, and by Tennessee's two Republican senators, Bill Frist and Fred Thompson. The end of Mr. Bush's remarks, which lasted only about 15 minutes, was punctuated with a blizzard of confetti. Mr. Gore, for his part, hopped aboard an old-fashioned paddle boat to head down the Mississippi, indulging in a bit of political theater that wrapped his journey in a populist aura and evoked the sturdy, timeless values of the American heartland. The vice president was determined to sustain whatever momentum he had wrung from his party's four-day jubilee in Los Angeles and from his political coronation on Thursday night. Mr. Bush was equally determined to stop it. The vice president was singling out a cluster of swing states that could prove decisive in the fall election. Mr. Bush was asserting, as he had with his campaign schedule over the previous four weeks, that his potent appeal to voters would enable him to compete in, and possibly win, states where the odds should be against him. Mr. Bush's comments at the rally in Bartlett and aboard his campaign plane as he flew to Memphis from Austin, Tex., represented his first public response to the Democrats' convention and his opening salvo against Mr. Gore following the event. It was aggressive and relatively unhampered by one of his campaign's central slogans, to ''change the tone'' in Washington. Mr. Bush expressed skepticism, for example, about Mr. Gore's vow on Thursday night to make an overhaul of campaign finance laws the first piece of legislation he would tackle if elected president. ''I don't think he's got credibility on the issue,'' Mr. Bush told reporters on his plane, reminding them of ''the Buddhist temple event'' that symbolized the ethical questions raised after Mr. Gore's aggressive fund-raising for the Democratic Party in 1996. Mr. Bush also said that the array of resolutions in Mr. Gore's convention speech, including pledges to shore up Social Security and expand Medicare to include a prescription-drug benefit for elderly Americans, was really a litany of unaccomplished goals during the seven and a half years Mr. Gore has been vice president. ''Last night we heard a laundry list of new promises, which I thought was an attempt to cover up old failures,'' Mr. Bush told the audience at his rally. ''As much as he tried to separate himself from the squandered opportunities of his own administration,'' he continued, ''the vice president's speech reminded us of the fundamental choice in this election: Will we prolong four more years of Clinton-Gore, or will we give America a fresh start?'' That question underscored one of the central gambles of Mr. Bush's campaign, which is betting that despite the country's extraordinary prosperity and President Clinton's high job-approval ratings, a majority of American voters wants a new party in the White House and a person in the Oval Office with no ties to the current president. Any lingering doubt that Mr. Bush was campaigning in large part against Mr. Clinton's moral behavior in office was dispelled by the comments that Mr. Cheney, Mr. Frist and Mr. Thompson made in introducing Mr. Bush at the rally today. They all spoke of the need to take integrity back to the White House, and they all praised Mr. Bush as the candidate who could best do that. In his own remarks, Mr. Bush dwelled longest on the topic of improving education for American schoolchildren, which he said would be his top priority in the White House. Mr. Bush plans to spend most of the next two weeks on the campaign trail talking about education, the issue on which he has long depended most heavily to reach out to independent and swing voters in the political center. It is also one of the issues with which he will seek to inoculate himself against contentions by Mr. Gore that he cares too little about those Americans struggling to build a better life. Many of the education proposals that Mr. Bush has made, and several more that he will make in the coming days, are aimed at -- or at least framed in terms of -- improving the education of poor children. On Saturday in New Mexico, for instance, Mr. Bush plans to outline a new educational initiative for American Indians. On his plane this morning, Mr. Bush said it was unfair that on the day of Mr. Gore's convention speech, news had leaked out about a new grand jury to investigate Mr. Clinton's affair with a White House intern. ''As we say in Texas, that wasn't right,'' Mr. Bush said, enunciating the word ''wasn't'' in a drawl. But Mr. Bush showed Mr. Gore less sympathy on other fronts, questioning whether there was enough fiscal restraint in all the spending the vice president had outlined in his convention speech and taking issue with some aspects of his populist oratory. ''It's hard to lead a nation by dividing, by pitting people against each other,'' Mr. Bush said. ''That's the rhetoric of the past.'' For all the firepower that Mr. Bush brought to his rally, it was the only public event on today's schedule, which ended in midafternoon so Mr. Bush could go running. Mr. Gore, by contrast, talked about health care policy aboard the riverboat and made stops for rallies for more than 12 hours.
 Democratic Party devises an offensive against Republicans and Gov George W Bush after a national convention in which it gave nation a generally positive look at itself and its candidates; messages on how to attack Republicans are interspersed with instructions to work hard and unite (M) After four days of giving a national television audience a generally positive look at itself and its candidates, the Democratic Party turned today to how to attack the Republicans and Gov. George W. Bush on a variety of issues, with a heavy emphasis on abortion. After four days of giving a national television audience a generally positive look at itself and its candidates, the Democratic Party turned today to how to attack the Republicans and Gov. George W. Bush on a variety of issues, with a heavy emphasis on abortion. On abortion, he said that Mr. Bush would replace retiring Supreme Court justices who supported abortion rights with judges hostile to abortion and that ''very soon, Roe v. Wade will be voted out.'' Then, he said, ''dozens of state legislatures will pass laws prohibiting abortion.'' Mayor Dennis Archer of Detroit said a victory by Vice President Al Gore was necessary to ''preserve a woman's right to choose.'' Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore's campaign manager, said Mr. Bush had nothing to offer to the ''poor in America without health insurance.'' The Rev. Jesse Jackson ridiculed Republican efforts to make it appear that African-Americans were a significant part of their party by using ''workers from concession stands sitting in delegates' seats at the G.O.P. convention in Philadelphia.'' Mr. Rendell said Democrats had to remind voters that while Mr. Gore wanted a prescription drug entitlement under Medicare and available to all elderly Americans, Mr. Bush had a plan that would only cover a third of them. ''We should carry Pennsylvania and Florida on this issue alone,'' Mr. Rendell said. Ms. Browner also hit the prescription drug issue and then attacked Mr. Bush over the environment. She said Houston had become ''the most polluted city in the country'' because Mr. Bush had chosen not to spend money on the environment, with Texas ranking 49th in environmental spending per capita. Because of those memories, he said, ''it scares me when people like George W. Bush and Dick Cheney have every opportunity to become president and vice president.''
 The reports that a new grand jury was reviewing Mr. Clinton brought an angry response on Thursday from Democrats and Republicans who described the leak as an apparent effort to embarrass Vice President Al Gore hours before he accepted the Democratic Party's presidential nomination. The reports that a new grand jury was reviewing Mr. Clinton brought an angry response on Thursday from Democrats and Republicans who described the leak as an apparent effort to embarrass Vice President Al Gore hours before he accepted the Democratic Party's presidential nomination.
 Newer Web sites like Speak out.com and Voter.com failed to even pull more than 150,000 visitors during the Republican convention, according to Media Metrix Inc., a company that tracks this data. SpeakOut.com, which has an online poll that records instantaneous reactions to podium speeches, keeps a daily posting of how different speakers fared. The Gore speech received a favorable rating of 79 percent among Democrats, 50 percent among independents and swing voters and 26 percent among Republicans, with women rating Mr. Gore's speech higher than men.
 Mr. McCain, 63, who abandoned a run for president in March, conceded that there was a chance doctors might find something more serious after conducting tests on the lymph nodes. But he played down any concerns, joking with reporters and predicting that he would return to the campaign trail on behalf of his party's presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and other Republican candidates by Labor Day.
 But that did not mean he was willing to leap to the Republicans. ''George Bush doesn't understand Indian affairs,'' said Mr. Smith, a member of the Navajo tribe. Going into the convention, he had been leaning toward Vice President Al Gore, as was Ms. Edgell; Mrs. Smith had not made up her mind, and Mr. Rosa, 22, planned to vote for Ralph Nader. By the time Mr. Gore took the podium on Thursday night, Mr. Smith was even more inclined to vote for him, as were his wife and Ms. Edgell; Mr. Rosa was still wavering between Mr. Gore and Mr. Nader. ''He really energized the activists by talking about Roe v. Wade, and hate crimes and racial profiling,'' Mr. Rosa said. ''Gore did it very well, and I was really impressed. He sold himself to me at the same time. Yeah, I'm going vote for him.''
 Group of friends watching Vice Pres Al Gore's acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention grumble that only Ralph Nader is bringing up the issues they consider central to this election: corporate power, the forces of globalization and widening divide between the rich and the poor, in US and around the world; photo (M) In one obvious sense, it would be hard to consider Martine Dedek or John Roderick ''swing voters'' in the coming presidential election. Young, unabashedly liberal, both proud participants in last fall's demonstrations here against the World Trade Organization, they both roll their eyes and offer a vigorous ''no way'' when asked if they would consider voting for the Republican candidate, George W. Bush. And yet, they will definitely go to the polls in November, they are still undecided, and they could be part of a hugely influential group in this election, especially in West Coast states where some polls suggest that as many as 10 percent of voters express a preference for Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee. They are among the voters who are still making up their mind between Al Gore and Mr. Nader. In one obvious sense, it would be hard to consider Martine Dedek or John Roderick ''swing voters'' in the coming presidential election. Young, unabashedly liberal, both proud participants in last fall's demonstrations here against the World Trade Organization, they both roll their eyes and offer a vigorous ''no way'' when asked if they would consider voting for the Republican candidate, George W. Bush. And yet, they will definitely go to the polls in November, they are still undecided, and they could be part of a hugely influential group in this election, especially in West Coast states where some polls suggest that as many as 10 percent of voters express a preference for Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee. They are among the voters who are still making up their mind between Al Gore and Mr. Nader. So as they followed the Democratic convention this week, gathering at a friend's house Thursday night to watch Mr. Gore accept the party nomination, they were willing to listen intently to the vice president's speech. They came away ambivalent -- suggesting that while Mr. Gore failed to dazzle or even much impress them with his speech in Los Angeles, he may have drawn enough of a distinction between himself and Mr. Bush to get their vote if the election seems close in November. The Gore speech left all the friends grumbling that only Mr. Nader was still bringing up the issues they considered central in this election: corporate power, the forces of globalization, the widening divide between the rich and the poor, here in this country and around the world. They scoffed at many parts, and Ms. Dedek, 28, who has worked as an advocate for battered women and for welfare recipients, at one point pronounced the whole speech ''so orchestrated, so predictable, so scripted.'' She nearly rose out of her chair at one point when Mr. Gore pledged to bring down the rising cost of prescription drugs. ''I mean, he's still not getting at any of the larger issues here,'' Ms. Dedek said. ''Why are prescription drugs so expensive?'' Mr. Roderick, a singer-songwriter and the piano player in a Seattle rock band, nodded in agreement, and worried aloud that a Gore victory might bring four more years of complacency. ''I'm not horrified about the idea of Bush winning this election,'' said Mr. Roderick, 31, who is about to graduate from the University of Washington with a degree in the comparative history of ideas. ''It could be the thing that reunites liberals around a common enemy, I guess, for lack of a better word. It could force liberals to see what their principles are.'' Another friend, Phil Campbell, a reporter for The Stranger, an alternative weekly newspaper in Seattle, said Mr. Gore still left him feeling uncomfortable. ''There's this obsession he has with his imperfections,'' said Mr. Campbell, 27, who covers criminal-justice issues, breaking into an imitation of Mr. Gore's voice as he watched the speech. ''I'm not popular; I'm not at ease with myself,' '' he intoned, as his friends laughed. ''It's weird. A little self-deprecation's fine, but this is ridiculous.'' If the election looks like a rout for either candidate of the two main parties, there was general agreement that a vote for Mr. Nader would be in order. But if the election looks close, the friends said, it could be a very different matter -- and here, their words may offer some salve to the Gore campaign, which has always insisted that in the end, many people will not want to ''throw away'' their vote on Mr. Nader. ''If it looks like Gore is clearly winning on Election Day, then you can send a vote for Nader, especially with the time difference'' on the West Coast, Mr. Campbell explained. ''If you know Gore's going to win, you can vote for Nader and contribute to that message being sent.'' But if it looks like a tight contest, he said, he will probably vote for Mr. Gore. Ms. Dedek, who has a job in public relations, reluctantly agreed, explaining that on one core issue raised by Mr. Gore, she thought there was a critical difference between him and Mr. Bush -- abortion rights. ''To me, knowing that Bush is so pro-life, that's just really scary,'' she said. ''Knowing that he could appoint all those Supreme Court justices. That is something that strikes me as a big difference'' between the two major-party candidates, she added. Ariella Robison, 26, a technical publisher for a software company, nodded in vigorous agreement. Mr. Bush, she said, gave her a ''serious case of the willies,'' with, among other things, his stated opposition to abortion. For that reason alone, she said, she was likely to wind up voting for Mr. Gore. Mr. Roderick, like the others watching with him, said he would wait to learn more from the debates, and said he would be  outraged if Mr. Nader was excluded. ''I did come into this situation feeling the only responsible vote was a vote for Nader,'' he said. Still, he said, the acceptance speech by Mr. Gore had ''put my vote back in play,'' because the vice president touched on important themes. ''I'm susceptible to that kind of Democratic rhetoric -- talking about the poor, about schools, about paying teachers what they're worth. As much as I believe those are the first things that always go out the window, he was talking about them.'' ''And yet'' -- and here Mr. Roderick smiled at himself for trawling back and forth again with his thoughts -- ''everyone seems to want to reduce this whole thing to Bush against Gore. And that's a condensation I don't want to participate in.''
 Democratic delegates and elected officials head home from national convention in Los Angeles confident that Vice Pres Al Gore has opened the minds of undecided voters with his convention speech, even if he might not have closed the sale (M) As they packed up their placards and headed home to where the hard work awaits, Democratic delegates and elected officials said today that they were confident that Vice President Al Gore had opened the minds of undecided voters with his convention speech on Thursday night, even if he might not have closed the sale. Mr. Gore's address had dual purposes: to mollify and energize party loyalists who have expressed concern about the centrist cast of the ticket, while also grabbing the attention of independent voters at home. In dozens of interviews, those who watched Mr. Gore from the floor said that he had clearly accomplished the first and had put himself in a position to compete with Gov. George W. Bush for swing votes. As they packed up their placards and headed home to where the hard work awaits, Democratic delegates and elected officials said today that they were confident that Vice President Al Gore had opened the minds of undecided voters with his convention speech on Thursday night, even if he might not have closed the sale. Mr. Gore's address had dual purposes: to mollify and energize party loyalists who have expressed concern about the centrist cast of the ticket, while also grabbing the attention of independent voters at home. In dozens of interviews, those who watched Mr. Gore from the floor said that he had clearly accomplished the first and had put himself in a position to compete with Gov. George W. Bush for swing votes. The speech may have been short on memorable lines, but many said that Mr. Gore had succeeded in establishing his own persona, in subtly reassuring voters that he would not repeat President Clinton's mistakes, and in turning his focus on policy into an asset. Frustrated for months by the perception that Mr. Bush is simply more likable than Mr. Gore, they responded particularly well to Mr. Gore's assertion that ''the presidency is more than a popularity contest.'' A number of those interviewed also said that Mr. Gore seemed authentic and completely in control of his message. They said his image was softened by the lingering kiss he shared with his wife, Tipper, and they applauded his simple declaration of independence from Mr. Clinton: ''I stand here tonight as my own man.'' Gus P. Bickford, a 37-year-old delegate from Westford, Mass., said that Mr. Gore had established himself by laying out his agenda in such detail. ''I was into it,'' he said, ''because he was saying, 'These are my priorities; this is my candidacy.' And in a subtle way he was saying, 'I'm going to take you on, George Bush. You can run against the previous administration, but we're talking about the future here.' '' Many in the convention hall said that Mr. Gore seemed looser than usual, and that he had disarmed the critics of his sometimes robotic style by acknowledging that ''sometimes people say I'm too serious.'' And yet there were those who, accustomed to Mr. Clinton's gift for connecting with his audience, felt that Mr. Gore still needed to show more emotion. Members of the party's liberal base -- minorities, trade unionists, women, teachers -- were pleased that Mr. Gore took strong stands for affirmative action, abortion rights, and hate crimes legislation and against school vouchers and Mr. Bush's proposed income tax cut. As for the undecided voters, the delegates here were convinced that Mr. Gore had started the process of reeling them in. His vows to protect Social Security, add a Medicare prescription drug benefit, take medical decisions away from health maintenance organizations, provide tax credits for college tuition, and reduce crime rates should all score, they said. ''The purpose of the speech was to open minds,'' Mr. Brodsky said. ''What he had to do here was begin the campaign, not clinch it.''
 Conversations with voters across the country finds a wide range of opinion about presidential race, but one predominant theme: that Vice Pres Al Gore's acceptance speech at Democratic convention was better than many unconvinced voters had expected and gave them cause to consider what he has to say; voters in Florida are typical; photo (M) The speech, confident and powerful, rang through the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles and, far across the country in South Florida, made Darren Gentry reconsider voting for George W. Bush. But that speech was President  Clinton's address on Monday night, three days before Vice President Al Gore took the microphone. The speech, confident and powerful, rang through the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles and, far across the country in South Florida, made Darren Gentry reconsider voting for George W. Bush. But that speech was President  Clinton's address on Monday night, three days before Vice President Al Gore took the microphone. Mr. Gentry, a registered independent who works as a fitness manager in Coral Springs, was leaning toward Mr. Bush when Mr. Clinton took that podium. As the president spoke of the prosperity the nation enjoyed during his presidency, Mr. Gentry, watching on television, began to doubt the wisdom of change. It was Mr. Gore's vote to lose, as he took his turn on stage on Thursday night. He did not lose it. He did not win it, either. His speech lacked real passion, Mr. Gentry said, repeating the criticism that has long dogged Mr. Gore. And, he said, Mr. Gore had made promises without saying how he would deliver. In other words, Mr. Gentry said, the speech lacked style and substance. As for Mr. Gentry, he is back where he started, in the middle. At least for Mr. Gore's sake, he no longer is leaning the other way. Mr. Gentry is not alone in his ambivalence, judging from conversations this week with a handful of voters across the country. The interviews, conducted here and in Denver, Seattle, Maplewood, N.J., and with convention delegates in Los Angeles, evoked a wide range of opinions. But if one theme predominated, it was this: that while Mr. Gore did not by any means clinch the race with his appearance at the convention, his speech was better than many unconvinced voters had expected -- good enough, at least, for them now to consider what he had to say. In vote-rich Florida, which has elected Mr. Bush's brother Jeb as its governor, the vast majority of Republicans have refused to even think about jumping across the party line and joining Mr. Gore. This convention seemed the vice president's best opportunity to cement his base with unexcited Democrats and, maybe, to sway independent voters here. Mr. Gentry, 25, liked what he saw in Mr. Bush's campaign coming out of the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia. Mr. Gore, going into his own convention, just seemed bland, Mr. Gentry said. But Mr. Gentry began to waver as he listened to Mr. Clinton. Though Mr. Gentry said he would have to listen to more campaigning before he firmly made up his mind, Mr. Gore had a chance at the convention at least to continue his advantage going into the speech. But Mr. Gentry said he did not do that. ''He is saying, 'I will, I will,' but he is not saying how,'' Mr. Gentry said of Mr. Gore's speech. ''I'd like him to tell me how he plans to implement his ideas.'' While Mr. Clinton's speech inspired traditional Democrats, Mr. Gore's speech seemed to comfort them. Adele Yuckman, 82, of Key Biscayne, watched Mr. Gore from bed. ''Of course he's dull,'' Mrs. Yuckman said, watching his speech, propped up on pillows, a book close by. ''But he isn't as dull as he usually is.'' Among Miami's Cuban-Americans, there seemed little Mr. Gore could say to win over a voting bloc that lands solidly, election after election, on the Republican side. The Elian Gonzalez case turned many here even more solidly against the Clinton administration. Mr. Gore's split with his party -- he said that family court should decide the custody -- has been dismissed by many voters here as a weak gesture, politically motivated. But in the slivers of that community where people have voted Democrat -- or at least considered it -- it was Mr. Clinton's speech, again, that made voters consider Mr. Gore. Raul Serrano, 58, a mortgage broker, watched the convention with his brother, Ruben Serrano, 56. They are both registered Republicans. ''The speech,'' Raul Serrano said of Mr. Clinton, ''reminded me of the good things the Democrats have done. I don't think it will be that bad with Gore, after all.'' His brother, a real estate agent, said he would have a hard time voting for Mr. Gore, but was also undecided. ''These conventions are just all-night parties that are not helping me at all,'' he grumbled. Mr. Gore's speech, to Ruben Serrano, was more of the same. ''A big show,'' he said. But Raul Serrano warmed to Mr. Gore during his speech. ''I think the guy needs to be given a chance,'' he said. ''I think he strengthened his position.'' The convention was far from a fixation for many people here in South Florida. But, because the Florida Marlins were off, the patrons at Nippers Bar in Boca Raton tuned a television to Mr. Gore's speech. ''If it ain't broke, don't fix it,'' said Geoff Klein, a 25-year-old stockbroker from Boca Raton who has made up his mind to vote for Mr. Gore.
 New Jerseyans find Vice Pres Al Gore more impressive than they expected in his acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention, but it remains to be seen whether he is succeeding in crafting an identity separate from that of Pres Clinton, his charismatic boss; photo (M) As the confetti fell and the delegates thundered in Los Angeles, there was a far more modest eruption of glee at the Corcoran home here, where three generations of women were watching Al Gore's long-awaited televised pitch to the nation. When Mr. Gore promised that his administration would serve the people, not the powerful, Lois Corcoran, 39, just home from her nursing job, whooped along with the ecstatic throng at the Staples Center. Her daughter, Amanda Orem, 18, who will vote this year for the first time, cheered, as well. As the confetti fell and the delegates thundered in Los Angeles, there was a far more modest eruption of glee at the Corcoran home here, where three generations of women were watching Al Gore's long-awaited televised pitch to the nation. When Mr. Gore promised that his administration would serve the people, not the powerful, Lois Corcoran, 39, just home from her nursing job, whooped along with the ecstatic throng at the Staples Center. Her daughter, Amanda Orem, 18, who will vote this year for the first time, cheered, as well. After weeks of doubting Mr. Gore and his ability to win over a crowd, Ms. Orem and her mother said they were pleased by his speech -- and relieved. Mr. Gore's presidential coming out may not have won over many rock-ribbed Republicans, but interviews with a dozen New Jersey Democrats and independents found that he had enough zest to turn them, at least, from tepid supporters into veritable stalwarts. Until Mr. Gore mounted the stage, many Democrats and independents spoke of the vice president as if he were a kindly, if somewhat insufferable, uncle. Jim Davis did not look entirely mesmerized as he sat in his living room watching Mr. Gore jab the air with his hands. Still, at least he did not join his wife, who dozed through the entire 52-minute speech. ''Obviously, Gore doesn't compare to Clinton,'' said Mr. Davis, 36, a medical recruiter from Bloomfield, ''but he was much more dynamic than I expected. There were a couple of times where he threw in some fake laughter, but everyone does it. Except Clinton.'' It remains to be seen whether Mr. Gore is succeeding in crafting an identity separate from that of his charismatic boss. After watching him speak, Georgianna Walsh, 55, an elementary school teacher from Montville, said she was satisfied that he would be his own man. But most of all, Mrs. Walsh thought he had shown Americans that he would spare them from the indignities of the Clinton years. But if Mrs. Walsh has been sold, her husband, Mike, has not. A construction worker, union loyalist and National Rifle Association member, Mr. Walsh, 55, is a registered Democrat who usually hopscotches his way through a ballot without regard to party affiliations. He voted for Ronald Reagan and George Bush, but he also voted for Mr. Clinton the second time around. Despite what he termed a decent performance by the vice president, Mr. Walsh said he had not been entirely impressed by Mr. Gore. ''I still might pick Bush or even Ralph Nader,'' he said. ''We'll see what happens.'' In a swing state like New Jersey, where half the voters are independents and where recent polls show the two candidates neck and neck, pulling in voters like Ms. Orem will be critical. But in his effort to play to the middle and the left, Mr. Gore runs the risk of turning off voters like Mr. Walsh, who sees Mr. Gore as too liberal. By contrast, die-hard progressives like Steven Cherry, 44, of Wayne, said Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, were too conservative. Despite the vice president's populist proposals for working-class America and Mr. Lieberman's efforts to recast his positions on affirmative action, Mr. Cherry was not swayed. ''Lieberman is too moralistic and Gore doesn't have any moral fiber,'' said Mr. Cherry, who edits engineering publications on the Internet. ''I'll vote for them, but I'll be holding my nose.'' Ms. Henry, who is black, said she resented Mr. Gore's emphasis on hiring more police officers, and she complained that the Democrats were not doing enough to ease racism, joblessness and the despair in her community. In the end, however, she said she would swallow her cynicism, vote for Mr. Gore and hope for the best.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush take starkly different positions on a host of issues, the most important being how the government will use the budget surplus over the next decade; Gore highlighted those differences in his acceptance speech, while Bush skipped lightly over them in his, focusing instead on the need for a new era of responsibility (M) When he accepted the Republican presidential nomination in Philadelphia two weeks ago, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas skipped lightly over a few issues -- taxes, Social Security, education, nuclear weapons -- and then got to his topic sentence: ''We must usher in an era of responsibility.'' In Los Angeles on Thursday night, Vice President Al Gore took the opposite approach. Declaring that ''the presidency is more than a popularity contest,'' he said, ''I am here to talk seriously about the issues.'' When he accepted the Republican presidential nomination in Philadelphia two weeks ago, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas skipped lightly over a few issues -- taxes, Social Security, education, nuclear weapons -- and then got to his topic sentence: ''We must usher in an era of responsibility.'' In Los Angeles on Thursday night, Vice President Al Gore took the opposite approach. Declaring that ''the presidency is more than a popularity contest,'' he said, ''I am here to talk seriously about the issues.'' On each of these issues, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are on opposite sides. And, as Mr. Gore pointed out, there is also a stark contrast in what may be the most important issue decided by this year's presidential election: how the government will use the budget surplus, projected by the Congressional Budget Office to be about $4.5 trillion over the next decade. Mr. Gore would use all this money to pay down the national debt, the theory being that this would improve the economy and make it easier to pay Social Security benefits after the baby boomers retire. Mr. Bush would use a big chunk of the Social Security surplus to cover the cost of creating private retirement accounts that would be invested in the financial markets. As for the rest of the surplus, Mr. Gore would spend most of it, and he described how in his acceptance speech: for universal health insurance for children, for prescription drug coverage under Medicare, for medical research, for hiring and training teachers and for environmental protection. Mr. Bush, by contrast, would use most of the money not set aside for Social Security for across-the-board tax cuts: lower tax rates for taxpayers at every income level, tax breaks for all married couples regardless of whether they now owe a penalty and a complete elimination of the estate tax, which is owed only on estates worth more than $675,000. Mr. Bush says he also favors prescription drug coverage for those on Medicare. But he has set no money aside for this initiative, which could cost $250 billion or more between now and 2010, depending on how generous the benefit is. In his speech, Mr. Gore derided the Bush tax plan. ''For every $10 that goes to the wealthiest 1 percent,'' the vice president asserted, ''middle-class families would get one dime. And lower-income families would get one penny.'' ''In fact,'' Mr. Gore went on, ''if you add it up, the average family would get about enough money to buy one extra Diet Coke a week, about 62 cents and change.'' (The text Mr. Gore was reading from said ''a Diet Coke a day.'') Those figures were developed by Citizens for Tax Justice, a labor-backed research organization. In 1999, the richest 1 percent of Americans were taxpayers with incomes over $319,000. The average income in this segment was $915,000, and the average tax cut under the Bush plan would be $46,072. Taxpayers with incomes in the middle 20 percent of all taxpayers (40 percent had higher incomes and 40 percent lower) had an average income of $31,100, and their average tax cut would be $453 (less than 10 cents for every $10 saved by the wealthy). By this reckoning, the daily tax cut would be $1.24 -- twice what Mr. Gore suggested, perhaps enough for a bag of chips with the Diet Coke. The Bush campaign accused Mr. Gore of missing the point. Under the tax plan, said Dan Bartlett, a campaign spokesman, a family of four making $35,000 would have its entire $1,500 tax bill wiped out. A family of four making $50,000 would have a tax bill of about $4,000 cut to about $2,000. And a family of four with an income of $75,000 would have a 25 percent cut, to about $7,500 from about $10,000. The Gore and Bush calculations are both accurate. The reason for the different emphases is that the Gore figures counted all taxpayers at particular income levels, single people as well as families. At middle-income levels, families would fare better under the Bush plan than individuals. Those who believe that the government should spend most of the surplus to provide better health and education programs will vote for Mr. Gore. And those who want to give the money back in tax cuts will vote for Mr. Bush. Over the last eight years, Democrats have succeeded when they have been able to reduce the political debate to this binary choice between tax cuts and spending for popular programs. That is exactly what Mr. Gore was trying to do in his acceptance speech, and what Mr. Bush was trying to avoid in his.
 Bush Says Gore Uses A Divisive Strategy  Gov. George W. Bush, campaigning in Tennessee, Vice President Al Gore's home state, said Mr. Gore's convention speech sought to sow division and foment class warfare. Mr. Gore, campaigning by riverboat on the Mississippi, said some people strove harder and less successfully than others and that he was seeking to be their champion. Leaders at a Democratic National Committee meeting turned to how to attack the Republicans and Mr. Bush on a variety of issues, with a heavy emphasis on abortion.
 Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman took to the Mississippi today, weaving the river's epic symbolism into a populist challenge against the political influence of oil corporations, health maintenance organizations and drug companies. Before boarding the Mark Twain riverboat for a four-day, 390-mile journey down the Mississippi, Mr. Gore stood at the bank here and promised, as he had done last night in accepting the Democratic presidential nomination in Los Angeles, to make campaign finance reform his first legislative priority. Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman took to the Mississippi today, weaving the river's epic symbolism into a populist challenge against the political influence of oil corporations, health maintenance organizations and drug companies. Before boarding the Mark Twain riverboat for a four-day, 390-mile journey down the Mississippi, Mr. Gore stood at the bank here and promised, as he had done last night in accepting the Democratic presidential nomination in Los Angeles, to make campaign finance reform his first legislative priority. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman, along with their wives and several family members, boarded the Mark Twain to a blast from the boat's air horn and a final spray of confetti. As the riverboat pushed off, Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman stood at the stern, positioned just under an American flag for the photographers, and waved to the crowds on the banks. ''Give 'em hell, Al!'' one man called out, and all along the roads that connect the small river towns on this part of the Mississippi, hundreds of people stopped their cars to wave and gawk and snap pictures. At one point this afternoon, as Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman led a somewhat stilted group discussion about Medicare on the riverboat's top deck, faint voices could be heard calling out from the distant river bank. ''Hi!'' Mr. Lieberman called back, ''Are there real people out there?'' And Mr. Gore, mindful of the beating sun, said that he and Mr. Lieberman had been admonished by their wives to wear sunscreen. ''If any of you did not put sunscreen on, we have some available,'' he offered, adding that Senator John McCain, undergoing treatment for malignant melanoma, was in his prayers. With that, Mr. Gore returned to his aggressive criticism of the drug industry and health insurers, accusing them of reaping profits and hurting ''working families'' by erecting ''a mighty wall of resistance'' to prescription drug benefits and a patients' bill of rights. Mr. Gore was joined in La Crosse by Russell D. Feingold, the Democratic senator from Wisconsin who, as a sponsor of the McCain-Feingold campaign finance reform bill, is one of the Senate's loudest advocates for eliminating unlimited, unregulated donations from corporations and individuals. But for all the populist fire, neither Mr. Gore nor Mr. Lieberman mentioned the millions of dollars the Democratic Party raised in Los Angeles this week, much of that from major corporations. Nor did Mr. Gore mention his own prodigious fund-raising in the 1996 campaign, when he made dozens of telephone calls to corporate executives to solicit five-figure donations. At a rally today in Memphis, the Republican nominee, George W. Bush, charged that Mr. Gore was ''a little short on credibility'' when it came to campaign finance reform, and accused him of conducting ''class warfare'' for political gain. Mr. Gore largely avoided direct criticism of Mr. Bush today. He called Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, ''honorable men,'' but then went on to suggest that their campaign was more about show than substance. ''I hope in the next two and a half months we can shift the focus away from sound bites and images,'' he said. Both Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman showed the effects of an exhausting week in Los Angeles. When the riverboat came upon a high school marching band waiting on the banks, Mr. Gore called over the public address system for them to play ''On Wisconsin,'' not realizing he was addressing Lansing, Iowa. Both candidates were having trouble with their voices, which were noticeably hoarse from speechmaking and lack of sleep. Mr. Gore sucked on lozenges, and Mr. Lieberman planned to get some extra rest after disembarking from the riverboat this evening to observe the Sabbath. He is expected to rejoin Mr. Gore on Sunday. Mr. Gore joked that he had taken extra rations of Diet Coke, and he was clearly determined to build from the momentum generated this week in Los Angeles. The candidates and their families flew out of Los Angeles long after midnight and landed here shortly after sunrise. They had time only to shower and change clothes before setting out for the river. Mr. Gore is a fan of using metaphors to communicate big ideas, and he and his aides missed no opportunity today to turn his river excursion into a traveling parable of broad campaign themes. There was, of course, old-fashioned political calculation behind the trip. The itinerary began in Wisconsin, a state long a hotbed of populist politics, and will take Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman through several important battleground states. River-bank rallies are planned in Dubuque, Iowa, and Moline, Ill., as well as Hannibal, Mo., the birthplace of Mark Twain, among other stops. Mr. Lieberman will not be at the Dubuque rally. ''We're going to touch a lot of important communities in key states that often end up deciding presidential elections, and we're going to have a good time in the process,'' Mr. Gore said. And as if to prove the point, he and Mrs. Gore took turns today steering the riverboat. Told by reporters that some postconvention polls now showed him holding a slight edge over Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore played it cool. ''I don't put much stock in the polls, although they seem to be gaining in relevancy,'' he said, tongue in cheek. He nonetheless pronounced himself pleased with his speech last night -- ''I had a good time'' -- and Mr. Lieberman offered the opinion that it was the finest convention speech he had ever heard. Mr. Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff spoke proudly of the long, lingering kiss her father had planted on her mother moments before his address.
 George Packer Op-Ed article says Vice Pres Al Gore's chances of being elected president rest on whether he can build on his acceptance speech at Democratic convention, focusing on the issues that separate him from Gov George W Bush, Democrats from Republicans (M) This election is not about ideology,'' Michael Dukakis declared in his acceptance speech at the 1988 Democratic Convention. ''It's about competence.'' The Republicans grinned, and George Bush went on to win by making sure that ideology ruled the campaign. This year, another George Bush is saying, ''It's not about ideology; it's about character.'' Al Gore, running behind, has little choice but to imitate the elder Bush and try to turn the race into an ideological debate. His acceptance speech on Thursday night began the process, and many observers thought that Mr. Gore finally sounded like a leader of genuine conviction.  Between now and Election Day he will have to build on that speech and sharpen his disagreements with Mr. Bush. But this puts Mr. Gore in a dilemma because the public perception is that the parties are alike. And he has done as much as anyone to dull the apparent differences. This election is not about ideology,'' Michael Dukakis declared in his acceptance speech at the 1988 Democratic Convention. ''It's about competence.'' The Republicans grinned, and George Bush went on to win by making sure that ideology ruled the campaign. This year, another George Bush is saying, ''It's not about ideology; it's about character.'' Al Gore, running behind, has little choice but to imitate the elder Bush and try to turn the race into an ideological debate. His acceptance speech on Thursday night began the process, and many observers thought that Mr. Gore finally sounded like a leader of genuine conviction.  Between now and Election Day he will have to build on that speech and sharpen his disagreements with Mr. Bush. But this puts Mr. Gore in a dilemma because the public perception is that the parties are alike. And he has done as much as anyone to dull the apparent differences. Al Gore has always seemed more a technician than a leader. He hasn't caught the popular imagination or inspired grass-roots activism on behalf of any cause. But he exudes competence. Until this week, he staked his claim to the presidency on being a manager of the good times. His campaign slogan might as well have been, ''First, do no harm.'' Mr. Gore, in his speech, practically admitted that Mr. Bush is the more likable candidate. So he has had to strain for some meaning in his own candidacy other than competence, and what he offered on Thursday was a fight for ''working families'' against powerful interests. Having destroyed Bill Bradley for his overly ambitious health care plan, Mr. Gore is now trying to make his own plan seem more ambitious than it really is. In fact, his list of proposals is largely defensive and incremental. In his speech the drop from populist rhetoric to modest policy kept producing an almost audible thud: ''For that waitress carrying trays, or a construction worker in the winter cold, I will never agree to raise the retirement age to 70.'' The positions in Mr. Gore's speech represent real differences between the two parties, but the limited government activism he offered does not produce sharp images or evoke large passions. An ideological candidacy needs an overarching theme, but having helped blur the edges of the Democratic Party for the past decade, Mr. Gore can't afford to embrace the most readily available one: liberalism. Moving to the left has not produced a Democratic winner in half a century. But the Republicans are trying to reoccupy the center, and Mr. Gore is squeezed for ground. Bill Clinton owned the center with the advantages of his own charisma and the alienation of much of the country from his opponents in Congress and their hard-right views. Mr. Gore's opponent, with his talk of ''compassionate conservatism'' and ''my heart,'' sounds more like Mr. Clinton than like Tom DeLay. Running behind in the midst of prosperity has entangled Mr. Gore in a  thicket of contradictions. Claiming credit for the boom, he also has to argue for the continued existence of the problems for which he can offer solutions. A Fortune 500 C.E.O. recently told me that the Clinton-Gore administration has been much more attuned to the interests of high technology than Presidents Reagan and Bush. Now Mr. Gore is making corporate America his whipping post. He is forced to run on a vision of ambivalence: ''Times are good, but not that good.'' Mr. Bush's message,  by contrast, is one of innuendo but not indecision: ''Times are good, but this administration is rotten.'' There is a chance that Mr. Gore's populist rhetoric will turn off middle-class swing voters, ''working families'' doing too well to want even an incrementally liberal president. But a greater risk for Mr. Gore is that no one will notice or care -- that the years of neutralizing the party's ideology have done their work too well, and the public will make this election the personality contest that Mr. Gore says it shouldn't be. Perhaps, like that other wooden, remote, cerebral Democrat, Woodrow Wilson, Mr. Gore, once in office, would  set the tone of high idealism promised in his acceptance speech. Perhaps he would show himself to be not a technician but a leader, willing to address the subtle corrosion in the Clinton years -- corporate dominance of politics, citizen apathy, persistent inequality, and the triumph of private interest over a vision of the common good. When the bill for these comes due, we will need more than competent bookkeepers. But the rationale for the centrist turn of the Democrats was always electoral victory. What will the party do if Al Gore loses?
 Msgr Harry J Byrne letter deplores Vice Pres Al Gore's rejection of school vouchers (Aug 18 article) In accepting his party's nomination (front page, Aug. 18), Al Gore promised to protect a woman's right to choose whether to give birth, a patient's right to choose a doctor, and parents' rights to choose the kind of entertainment they want for their children. But in his most forceful statement, he said he would never permit parents the right to choose the value-centered education they want for their children by way of school vouchers. In accepting his party's nomination (front page, Aug. 18), Al Gore promised to protect a woman's right to choose whether to give birth, a patient's right to choose a doctor, and parents' rights to choose the kind of entertainment they want for their children. But in his most forceful statement, he said he would never permit parents the right to choose the value-centered education they want for their children by way of school vouchers.
 Vice President Al Gore has frequently cited Dr. Hansen's work. In 1997, Mr. Gore played a major role in negotiations in Kyoto, Japan, on the proposed treaty. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has said the Kyoto proposals were ''inadequate and unfair to the United States.'' A spokesman for the Bush campaign, Ray Sullivan, yesterday called the new Hansen paper intriguing, adding that there were still questions to be answered. ''They said this could easily be interpreted as the guy who got Vice President Gore all excited about global warming now saying everything's fine,'' Dr. Watson said, adding: ''If this paper is viewed that way, it'd be a horrible distortion. If anything, our projections for warming are higher than they used to be, and we're seeing discernible changes in ecosystems that we can link back to climate.''
 Judith Lang Zaimont letter praises Vice Pres Al Gore's acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention (Aug 18 article) Re ''Gore, in Debut as a Presidential Nominee, Says, 'I Stand Here Tonight as My Own Man' '' (front page, Aug. 18): In Al Gore we have the genuine article, capable of speaking to the country in his own words. Almost everything he said in his nomination acceptance speech resonated, and he was unafraid to be specific -- and therefore potentially unpopular. Re ''Gore, in Debut as a Presidential Nominee, Says, 'I Stand Here Tonight as My Own Man' '' (front page, Aug. 18): In Al Gore we have the genuine article, capable of speaking to the country in his own words. Almost everything he said in his nomination acceptance speech resonated, and he was unafraid to be specific -- and therefore potentially unpopular. Mr. Gore's sober optimism is a tonic, and real. This election should be about substance, not show. We need a leader who thinks for himself.
