 Al Gore is committed to making Social Security safe and secure for more than half a century by using the savings from our current unprecedented prosperity to strengthen the Social Security trust fund in preparation for the retirement of the baby boom generation. We now have an extraordinary opportunity to maintain Social Security. In addition, we can reform it, not the wrong way, with proposals such as raising the retirement age, but the right way, with fiscal discipline and by making it fairer for widows, widowers and mothers. To build on the success of Social Security, Al Gore has proposed the creation of retirement savings plus -- voluntary, tax-free, personally controlled, privately managed savings accounts with a government match that would help couples build a nest egg of up to $400,000. Separate from Social Security, retirement savings plus accounts would let Americans save and invest on top of the foundation of Social Security's guaranteed benefit. Under this plan, the federal government would match individual contributions with tax credits, with the hardest-pressed working families getting the most assistance. The president should be able to negotiate trade agreements with the nations of the world and should include worker rights, human rights and environmental protections in those agreements, as well as market-opening initiatives. At the same time, Al Gore will challenge American companies to ensure labor protections and worker safety at their overseas operations. And United States representatives at the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank should also seek to advance fair treatment for workers internationally. We should create an environment in which electronic commerce can flourish globally as it has here in America. We are committed to supporting the rights of workers around the world. And we should vigorously monitor trade agreements to make sure other nations are not shirking their responsibilities. . . . Democrats believe Medicare is worth fighting for and worth saving. With the number of Americans on Medicare expected to double in the next 35 years, Al Gore has stepped up and taken responsibility by proposing a Medicare lock box that would ensure Medicare surpluses are used for Medicare -- and not for pork barrel spending or tax giveaways. We should also modernize Medicare by promoting competitive prices and remain vigilant against Medicare fraud. Al Gore is committed to restoring the Everglades, protecting the coasts of California and Florida and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge from oil and gas drilling and preserving our untouched forests, including the Tongass, from logging and development. With regard to public lands, Democrats believe that communities, environmental interests and government agencies should work together to protect our public resources, critical habitat areas and wildlands while ensuring the vitality of local economies. We will work together to find land-based alternatives and decontamination technologies that will permanently end the ocean disposal of contaminated dredge spoils. . . . In this year's presidential primaries, it became clear that the Republican establishment is violently opposed to John McCain's call for reforming our democracy. Al Gore supports John McCain's campaign for political reform. In fact, the McCain-Feingold bill is the very first piece of legislation that a President Al Gore will submit to Congress, and he will fight for it until it becomes the law of the land. Then he will go even further -- much further. He will insist on tough new lobbying reform, publicly guaranteed TV time for debates and advocacy by candidates and a crackdown on special interest issue ads. Most boldly of all, Al Gore has proposed a public-private, nonpartisan Democracy Endowment which will raise money from Americans and finance Congressional elections, with no other contributions allowed to candidates who accept the funding. This will let our politics be free from the influence of special interests and let Americans believe in their own democracy again. . . . Al Gore and the Democratic Party know that we must be able to meet any military challenge from a position of dominance. But Al Gore and the Democratic Party also recognize that there is a new security agenda -- threats that affect the entire world and transcend political borders. We reject Republican plans to endanger our security with massive unilateral cuts in our arsenal and to construct an unproven, expensive and ill-conceived missile defense system that would plunge us into a new arms race. Al Gore and the Democratic Party support the development of the technology for a limited national missile defense system that will be able to defend the United States against a missile attack from a state that has acquired weapons of mass destruction despite our efforts to block their proliferation. A decision to deploy such a system should be made based on four criteria: the nature of the threat, the feasibility of the technology, the cost and the overall impact on our national security, including arms control. The Democratic Party places a high value on ensuring that any such system is compatible with the Antiballistic Missile Treaty. We also support continued work in significantly reducing strategic and other nuclear weapons, recognizing that the goal is strategic nuclear stability at progressively lower levels.
 Nomination of Al Gore Remarks by Karenna Gore Schiff Roll Call on the nomination of Al Gore for president
 But no one could match the speech given by Bill Clinton the night before, which proved his mastery of political performance. He demonstrated that he can do what none of the presidential and vice-presidential candidates can: engage the camera and maintain a visceral connection with his audience even when he's saying something serious. Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman and George W. Bush can all manage that emotional contact in casual, close-up television appearances. (Dick Cheney has trouble with that much.) When making a serious point, though, their own eyes glazed over; imagine what happens to ours. But when Mr. Clinton said that it would be a mistake to underestimate American military strength, he looked into the camera, as if staring down an enemy. And if he, with his supreme mastery of television, can't do that, what hope is there for a media mortal like Al Gore? His iconic moment boomeranged yesterday. The uninspired passing of the torch from Mr. Clinton to Mr. Gore in Michigan left the vice president looking diminished. Mr. Clinton spoke briefly, then relinquished his place to Mr. Gore, who took off his jacket as he stepped forward. Maybe he was hot. But there has been so much publicity about the reconstructed Gore images that the move seemed calculated to show him in a more casual light and to distinguish him from the president. Mr. Clinton would have made such a gesture seem natural, even if it wasn't. Mr. Gore made it seem false, even if it was genuine.
 Sen Joseph Lieberman pledges to avoid 'nasty' partisan attacks and says he will use address at Democratic convention to start conversation with the American people; interview; says he will not hestitate to 'respectfully' point out policy differences with Republicans but will not play vice presidential candidate's traditional role as attack dog; calls Bush and Dick Cheney 'decent and likable people' who represent step backward for America (M) Pledging to avoid ''nasty'' partisan attacks on the Republican presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut said in an interview today that he would use his convention address Wednesday night to start ''a conversation with the American people.'' Pledging to avoid ''nasty'' partisan attacks on the Republican presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut said in an interview today that he would use his convention address Wednesday night to start ''a conversation with the American people.'' Later he said, ''It doesn't have to be nasty; it doesn't have to be partisan. I'm going to speak from the record of Al Gore, the record of George Bush and the plans they've described.'' Nevertheless, he described Mr. Bush and Dick Cheney, the Republican vice-presidential candidate, as ''decent and likable people'' who represent ''a step backward for America.'' ''I'm very proud of what he's accomplished,'' Mr. Lieberman said of President Clinton. ''And I feel I'm really able to work with Al Gore to continue the prosperity that he's built. But even though the Republicans seem to want to run against Bill Clinton, he's not on the ballot, and part of my role, and my opportunity here, is to sort of continue to talk about the smooth transition to keep the prosperity going.'' But his first task in his speech, he said, would be to introduce himself to the American public -- ''who I am, what my values are.'' He said he also planned to reintroduce Mr. Gore to the country. ''I believe in him,'' he said of Mr. Gore. ''I do think, certainly when I look at opinion polls, that a lot of people don't know Al Gore,'' he said. ''And I think the more they know him, the more they're going to like him. He's a person of great strength, honor and tremendously creative intellect.'' Through these themes, Mr. Leiberman said he hoped to foreshadow the role he sees for himself in the campaign. By talking about his values and his faith, he said he would try to help Mr. Gore reach swing voters at the political center. By vouching for Mr. Gore's character, he would try to neutralize the effects of the White House scandals. Eight days ago he and his wife, Hadassah, awoke to reports that he had been chosen as Mr. Gore's running mate. Even now, he said, the notion comes as a sort of surreal surprise, one that had seemed beyond reach. And yet on Wednesday night, Mr. Lieberman will stand before the nation and deliver the most important speech of his life, one, he said, that he hopes a lifetime in politics has prepared him for.
 Tom Lea, 93-year-old muralist, painter and author, is in national spotlight after George W Bush quotes from his book, A Picture Gallery, about living on side of mountain in El Paso; Lea is now enjoying modest renaissance outside Texas, where his work hangs in several museums; interview; photos (M) The muralist, painter and author Tom Lea is probably the only person, dead or alive, who can say he has been threatened by Pancho Villa, interrupted by Chiang Kai-shek and regaled by Franklin D. Roosevelt. Oddly enough, Mr. Lea was mostly forgotten until he was quoted this month by Gov. George W. Bush. The muralist, painter and author Tom Lea is probably the only person, dead or alive, who can say he has been threatened by Pancho Villa, interrupted by Chiang Kai-shek and regaled by Franklin D. Roosevelt. Oddly enough, Mr. Lea was mostly forgotten until he was quoted this month by Gov. George W. Bush. Like Mr. Lea, Mr. Bush was impressed with that mountain. Mr. Lea was spending an evening at home when the telephone rang from the Republican National Convention with the news that Mr. Bush planned to mention him in his speech. Mr. Lea switched on the television and watched the Texas governor quote a passage from his book ''A Picture Gallery,'' in which he wrote of living ''on the east side of the mountain.'' The Leas were introduced to Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, a few years ago by Ms. Margo. A friendship ensued, and Mr. Bush honored the couple at a dinner at the governor's mansion. Mr. Bush also quoted Mr. Lea's passage from ''A Picture Gallery'' in one of his State of the State addresses.
 Invoking the themes that her father offered here 40 years ago this summer, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg stepped out of her guarded private life and onto the stage of the Democratic convention tonight to lend the family name to Al Gore's presidential campaign and to thank the nation for its support through what had been another difficult year for the Kennedys. Invoking the themes that her father offered here 40 years ago this summer, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg stepped out of her guarded private life and onto the stage of the Democratic convention tonight to lend the family name to Al Gore's presidential campaign and to thank the nation for its support through what had been another difficult year for the Kennedys. Indeed, she alluded to the losses that her family has suffered through violence, saying: ''If we believe that we have seen enough gun violence in our land and in our lifetimes -- that guns should no longer take the lives of those we love -- then it is up to us. If we believe in these things, then it is up to us to elect Al Gore and Joe Lieberman.''
 Avi Goldstein letter comments on August 9 letter, which said there is double standard in focus on religious practices of Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Orthodox Jew who is Vice Pres Al Gore's vice presidential running mate An Aug. 9 letter suggests that there is a ''double standard'' in the focus on Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's religious practices. Why aren't born-again Christians, like George W. Bush, asked how they would carry out their duties on their Sabbath? The answer lies in the differences between the Sabbath of an observant Jew and that of an observant Christian. An Aug. 9 letter suggests that there is a ''double standard'' in the focus on Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's religious practices. Why aren't born-again Christians, like George W. Bush, asked how they would carry out their duties on their Sabbath? The answer lies in the differences between the Sabbath of an observant Jew and that of an observant Christian. As an Orthodox Jew, I do not write on Saturday. I do not drive or ride in a car. I do not answer the telephone. I don't turn on lights, cook or operate electrical appliances. A Christian is not proscribed from such activities on Sunday. While I am proud that a fellow Orthodox Jew has been chosen to run with Al Gore, I believe that the question about the Sabbath is legitimate.
 OLYMPIA DUKAKIS, who introduced her cousin, MICHAEL, in a folksy video at the Democratic convention in 1988, when he was nominated to run against George W. Bush's father, had no plans to attend the convention in Los Angeles. But Mr. Dukakis, who answered his own phone yesterday at Northeastern University in Boston, said he would leave for Los Angeles this afternoon. ''I've got students to teach in the morning,'' said Mr. Dukakis, who teaches public policy. OLYMPIA DUKAKIS, who introduced her cousin, MICHAEL, in a folksy video at the Democratic convention in 1988, when he was nominated to run against George W. Bush's father, had no plans to attend the convention in Los Angeles. But Mr. Dukakis, who answered his own phone yesterday at Northeastern University in Boston, said he would leave for Los Angeles this afternoon. ''I've got students to teach in the morning,'' said Mr. Dukakis, who teaches public policy. The cousins have not spoken since before the primaries. ''The first conversation we had,'' Ms. Dukakis said recently, ''he came out backing Gore right from the beginning, and I was backing Bill Bradley.'' He ''acknowledged we were doing something different and didn't go into it much,'' she said.
 Marcia Hale, a top aide to the Gore campaign overseeing convention planning who watched the clash here from the roof of the convention complex, said party officials supported the police response. ''We knew what they were doing,'' Ms. Hale said,  ''and we supported them.'' Arianna Huffington, an organizer of the gathering, said that no bomb was ever found, and that she had simply led her scheduled panel discussion featuring Gore Vidal into the street and made do.
 Editorial says Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore and Republican rival Gov George W Bush seem eager for renewed clash centered on competing brands of economic populism, noting oratory in both campaigns and recently at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; says while target presented by Bush may in one sense be irresistible, underlying reality is that Democrats do offer fairer approach to parceling out benefits of Clinton boom (M) running mate,' is irresistible (M) Depending on your point of view, it was either old-time religion night or dinosaur time at the Democratic National Convention. Two of the party's great roarers, Senator Ted Kennedy and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, were on hand to remind the faithful of the party's traditional New Deal values. John F. Kennedy's only surviving child, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, reminded voters of that golden era when Democrats like her father could depend on a solid base of blue-collar voters. Earlier in the day Vice President Al Gore was in Michigan, the heart of union country, to warn that ''the powerful interests are going to fight against us with everything they've got'' to prevent the Democratic ticket from defending working families. Even before Franklin D. Roosevelt's politically productive attacks on financial ''royalists,'' economic populism was a staple of Democratic campaigns. For years, when Democrats turned to their venerable themes of economic justice and fairer income distribution, the Republicans accused them of promoting class warfare, but to little avail. Then under the tutelage of Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, the G.O.P. learned to trump the Democrats' appeals to middle-class financial solidarity with their own appeals to Main Street in the form of a cultural populism built around a powerful set of patriotic, religious and racial symbols. Now both Mr. Gore and his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, seem eager for a renewed clash centered on their competing brands of populism. Depending on your point of view, it was either old-time religion night or dinosaur time at the Democratic National Convention. Two of the party's great roarers, Senator Ted Kennedy and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, were on hand to remind the faithful of the party's traditional New Deal values. John F. Kennedy's only surviving child, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, reminded voters of that golden era when Democrats like her father could depend on a solid base of blue-collar voters. Earlier in the day Vice President Al Gore was in Michigan, the heart of union country, to warn that ''the powerful interests are going to fight against us with everything they've got'' to prevent the Democratic ticket from defending working families. Even before Franklin D. Roosevelt's politically productive attacks on financial ''royalists,'' economic populism was a staple of Democratic campaigns. For years, when Democrats turned to their venerable themes of economic justice and fairer income distribution, the Republicans accused them of promoting class warfare, but to little avail. Then under the tutelage of Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, the G.O.P. learned to trump the Democrats' appeals to middle-class financial solidarity with their own appeals to Main Street in the form of a cultural populism built around a powerful set of patriotic, religious and racial symbols. Now both Mr. Gore and his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, seem eager for a renewed clash centered on their competing brands of populism. Although the apostate Clinton strategist, Dick Morris, argues that Mr. Gore is making a mistake to revive ''liberal'' economic themes, both Mr. Gore and President Clinton seem confident the Democratic ticket can win an argument over who gets the fruits of what Mr. Gore calls ''unprecedented economic abundance.'' In one sense, the target presented by Mr. Bush, with his old-money pedigree and his oil-patch running mate, is irresistible. He would spend billions on tax relief for investors, top earners and inheritors of large estates. His plan is a perfect setup for Mr. Gore's favorite pitch that he ''fights for working families'' while the G.O.P. remains the party of ''the wealthy, the well connected and the powerful.'' Mr. Gore's rhetoric, like that of Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Jackson, has a root system that dates back to William Jennings Bryan. Populism in its original form arose as a protest against the ability of agricultural, railroad and industrial interests to buy influence over government policy. Today's soft-money game is a lineal descendant of that form of corruption -- a fact that undercuts the purity of Mr. Gore's claim to be an opponent of special interests. In fact, the Democrats have been lapping up soft money from corporations and wealthy donors, having already passed $120 million before starting the fund-raising events associated with their convention. As John Broder and Don Van Natta Jr. reported in yesterday's Times, corporate donors and lobbyists play the money game at both conventions in what Senator Russell Feingold calls a ''system of legalized extortion and legalized bribery.'' The inescapable conclusion is that Mr. Gore, no amateur exaggerator, grossly exaggerates his party's independence of special interests. Even so, the convention oratory reflects an underlying reality that the Democrats do offer a fairer approach to parceling out the benefits of the Clinton boom. Mr. Gore's promise to take on the drug companies and health management organizations does have more credibility than Mr. Bush's less aggressive proposals. Moreover, should he carry out his campaign promise to outlaw soft money contributions that have tainted both conventions, Mr. Gore will have put some real muscle behind the Democrats' quadrennial exercise in ringing the century-old chimes of economic populism.
 Corporate America is wooing the Hispanic vote for the same reason Gov. George W. Bush has gone bilingual on the campaign trail. Indeed, if America were a corporation, Wall Street would be crying for a spinoff of its Hispanic subsidiary, its hottest growth prospect. Over the next 30 years, Hispanics, now 12 percent of the population of the United States, will account for 47 percent of its  growth, according to Census Bureau projections. Corporate America is wooing the Hispanic vote for the same reason Gov. George W. Bush has gone bilingual on the campaign trail. Indeed, if America were a corporation, Wall Street would be crying for a spinoff of its Hispanic subsidiary, its hottest growth prospect. Over the next 30 years, Hispanics, now 12 percent of the population of the United States, will account for 47 percent of its  growth, according to Census Bureau projections. It encompasses Mexican immigrants in Los Angeles, Puerto Ricans in New York and Cubans in Miami.  Among the latter, Governor Bush leads Vice President Al Gore by more than 50 points in recent polls. Among all Hispanics, Governor Bush's convention in Philadelphia, a veritable diversity feast, cut the vice president's lead from 34 to 18 points. Unfortunately for Democrats, however, they will face not Pete Wilson but George W. Bush in November. Governor Bush could not have adopted a more different tone than Governor Wilson towards his state's immigrant population. When he ran for re-election in 1998, his share of the Hispanic vote was more than twice as large as his party's share in California that year. This raises the question troubling Democratic Hispanic officeholders in Los Angeles: Will Mr. Bush be able to replicate this success nationwide? ''I think so,'' said Mayor Carlos Ramirez of El Paso, in a telephone interview. Elected as a Democrat, Mayor Ramirez opted to miss out on all the fun in Los Angeles and instead go to Philadelphia to nominate Mr. Bush, whom he calls an ''inclusive, moral leader.'' He says the governor's education policies have proven especially beneficial to Hispanics. He also believes Democrats have fallen short on traditional family values that Hispanics hold dear, by going too far on issues like gay marriage. Ms. Molina, the Los Angeles County supervisor, concedes that if Mr. Gore's campaign does not make a passionate pitch to the Latino voter,  Mr. Bush could make serious inroads and win as much as 35 percent of the Latino vote in California. ''I think,'' she said, ''there is a real danger that the Democratic Party will take our vote for granted.''
 A SYMBOLIC STOP -- President Clinton nudged Vice President Al Gore to center stage at a Michigan rally, literally and politically. A SYMBOLIC STOP -- President Clinton nudged Vice President Al Gore to center stage at a Michigan rally, literally and politically.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column says Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles should be celebrating Vice Pres Al Gore's role in creating happy, prosperous country, but that undercurrents of tension between Gores and Clintons could 'suck down a battleship' (M) Like an accordion player squeezing out a mighty chord on ''Lady of Spain,'' Mr. Clinton slowly pulled the two blondes into the TV frame -- as Al Gore growled at the crowd in a simulation of excitement -- to get that essential picture of One Big Happy Family. But in a moment, the two women managed to escape his embrace and sidle back as far stage right and stage left as they could manage. The Gore team had nightmares that the president would do a fake handoff, and say ''You got it!'' when the crowd chanted ''Four more years!'' Poor Gore. For years he paid a facilitator to come into his Senate office and the new Clinton/Gore White House and coach him and his staff on ''group dynamics.'' Just as Al Gore hits town to party, the trellis of competing ambitions and interlocking needs and dueling grievances has left everyone exhausted. Bill's mad at Al because Al chose Joe Lieberman, a Democrat who outdid plenty of Republicans in sewing a scarlet ''A'' on the president's polo shirt. Bill's also mad at Al because Al has been at his elbow for eight years and still can't give a speech. If Al can't give a speech, he can't beat W. And the Bushes as caretakers of the Clinton legacy is a chilling thought. And Bill's also mad at Al because the vice president paid tribute Monday to the notorious monogamist Jimmy Carter, who never felt he got the respect from Bill he deserved, and was delighted to go on zillions of TV shows and wag a finger at Bill's ''escapades.'' All of this familial angst is not what Al Gore needs. Because his problem is that he's so plodding, so insecure, always searching for the right look and sound, that it is tiring to watch him. You just know that Mr. Gore, who has grown more stiff lately appearing with Mr. Clinton, left Monroe a nervous wreck. Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, stopped his motorcade on the way out of town at a McDonald's for a crispy chicken sandwich and french fries.
 Los Angeles convention diary: photos; Robert Shrum, who has written some of most eloquent Democratic speeches of his generation, says Al Gore is writing his own acceptance speech; Hadassah Lieberman's staff prepares speech following Gore campaign's request that she nominate her husband for vice president; White House transcript clarifies Pres Clinton's closing sentence in speech to convention; Sen Robert Torricelli appears with onetime close friend Patricia Duff; fund-raiser Terry McAuliffe says Clinton 'has no interest in making money' after he leaves office; model Christie Brinkley, New York delegate, causes traffic jam on convention floor (M) Robert Shrum, the Gore strategist who has written some of the most eloquent Democratic speeches of his generation, said yesterday that Mr. Gore was ''literally, truly and unquestionably'' the author of the acceptance speech he will give to the Democratic convention tomorrow  night. With no help at all from Mr. Shrum, who wrote much of Senator Edward M. Kennedy's ''dream shall never die'' speech that ignited the 1980 Democratic convention in New York? ''He is writing his own speech,'' Mr. Shrum repeated by phone from Michigan, where he was traveling with the vice president. Mr. Shrum added that Mr. Gore, a former journalist, was ''an excellent writer --  he's got a very real sense of imaging and the sounds and balance of language.'' Robert Shrum, the Gore strategist who has written some of the most eloquent Democratic speeches of his generation, said yesterday that Mr. Gore was ''literally, truly and unquestionably'' the author of the acceptance speech he will give to the Democratic convention tomorrow  night. With no help at all from Mr. Shrum, who wrote much of Senator Edward M. Kennedy's ''dream shall never die'' speech that ignited the 1980 Democratic convention in New York? ''He is writing his own speech,'' Mr. Shrum repeated by phone from Michigan, where he was traveling with the vice president. Mr. Shrum added that Mr. Gore, a former journalist, was ''an excellent writer --  he's got a very real sense of imaging and the sounds and balance of language.'' Chaos reigns at Hadassah Lieberman's office at the Biltmore Hotel. Phones keep ringing. Calls are unanswered. An abrupt decision by the Gore campaign asking Mrs. Lieberman to nominate her husband, Joseph, as vice president at the convention has thrown her small staff into turmoil. Interviews are canceled or rearranged. Speechwriters work in the Lieberman suite. Mrs. Lieberman's role in the coming campaign is still under discussion by the Gore and Lieberman staffs. But, they say, she will probably move out alone on the campaign trail, without her husband, just like Lynne V. Cheney, the wife of Dick Cheney, the Republican vice-presidential nominee. Almost as soon as Mr. Lieberman was selected, the Gore campaign asked Sally Aman, who had worked more than four years as Tipper Gore's communications director, to serve in a similar role with Mrs. Lieberman. Before this, Mrs. Lieberman had never had a staff of her own.
 Pres Clinton pushes understudy Al Gore to centerstage with bear hug and slight nudge, relinquishing limelight at rally in Monroe, Michigan; photo of Clintons and Gores; famous show-stealer stops his motorcade on way out of town to enjoy crispy chicken sandwich and french fries at McDonald's (M) With a bear hug and a slight nudge, President Clinton pushed his understudy, Al Gore, to center stage today, relinquishing the limelight to the man he hopes will succeed him. It was a metaphoric ceremony that Vice President Gore has longed for as Mr. Clinton has effortlessly dominated news coverage and captured public attention -- and overshadowed Mr. Gore's efforts to  present himself as a leader in his own right. With a bear hug and a slight nudge, President Clinton pushed his understudy, Al Gore, to center stage today, relinquishing the limelight to the man he hopes will succeed him. It was a metaphoric ceremony that Vice President Gore has longed for as Mr. Clinton has effortlessly dominated news coverage and captured public attention -- and overshadowed Mr. Gore's efforts to  present himself as a leader in his own right. Mr. Clinton tried today to pass that torch to Mr. Gore here before a crowd of more than 15,000 people, the largest audience Mr. Gore has seen since he officially announced his candidacy more than a year ago. Vouching for Mr. Gore, Mr. Clinton, who was operating on three hours of sleep after delivering his valedictory speech in Los Angeles on Monday, added: ''I hope you'll take my word for this, because I spent most of my adult life studying economics and the development of our country. The things that have happened in the last eight years -- the good things -- are nothing compared to the good things that can happen in the next eight years. Nothing!'' Mr. Gore, who had been standing ramrod straight behind the president with Mrs. Clinton and Tipper Gore, Mr. Gore's wife, embraced Mr. Clinton and shed his jacket as he moved to the lectern. ''I want to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me a chance to serve my country for the last eight years,'' Mr. Gore said, ''by working to help strengthen your hand.'' He introduced his wife as ''the woman I love,'' and went on to tell the stories of several people whose lives had been improved by Clinton administration programs. He said that Mr. Clinton had built a strong foundation for the nation and that the  election was about whether voters wanted to build on that foundation or allow it to erode. Mr. Gore did not mention his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, but he did refer to the governor's proposal for an across-the-board tax cut of $1.3 trillion over 10 years. Mr. Gore has proposed tax cuts of about $500 billion. ''You know, Bill Clinton worked hard to get this economy right,'' Mr. Gore said. ''And I'm pledging to you here today, I am not going to let the other side wreck it and take it away from us. We're going to keep the prosperity going.'' It was not clear whether this ceremony would usher in for Mr. Gore a transfer of attention -- and an enhancement of his standing with the electorate -- or whether Mr. Clinton would continue to steal the show. As it was, Mr. Clinton upstaged Mr. Gore as soon as the symbolic ''passing of the torch'' was over . (No object was actually passed, as producers of television news programs had been led to believe might happen.) As Mr. Gore began speaking, eyes were diverted to Mr. Clinton who was draping his arms around Mrs. Clinton and Mrs. Gore. Monroe, a town of 22,600 people near Lake Erie, was chosen because it represents the challenge ahead for Mr. Gore. It is a swing district that includes both rural and suburban voters, both high-tech and low-tech workers and an equal number of Democrats and Republicans. It is a bellwether area of the state, having voted for winners in most presidential elections in modern history. A survey from earlier this month, after Mr. Gore picked Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, showed Governor Bush winning the support of 45 percent of those likely to vote and Mr. Gore 37 percent. ''If Gore can win here, he can win the state'' and the national election, said Ed Sarpolus, a pollster in Lansing. ''This is one of Gore's toughest audiences. His problem is still Bill Clinton, the person.''
 More senators, representatives and Congressional candidates are speaking at Democratic Convention than can be found on floor of either chamber most of the time; incumbents and aspirants are tracking Al Gore's campaign issues in hopes of winning back control of narrowly Republican House and perhaps even Senate; Republican convention, in striking contrast, consigned its lawmakers, especially controversial conservatives, to few moments of throwaway time (M) With the convention half over, 40 present and perhaps future lawmakers have spoken about everything from campaign finance legislation to the environment to the minimum wage to health insurance -- tracking the issues Vice President Al Gore is campaigning on -- and hoping to win back control of the narrowly Republican House, and maybe even the Senate. With the convention half over, 40 present and perhaps future lawmakers have spoken about everything from campaign finance legislation to the environment to the minimum wage to health insurance -- tracking the issues Vice President Al Gore is campaigning on -- and hoping to win back control of the narrowly Republican House, and maybe even the Senate. Today, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the minority leader, promised to work with Al Gore, as president, on legislation dealing with school construction, a Medicare drug benefit and a patients' bill of rights, among other things. And Representative Martin T. Meehan of Massachusetts, arguing for a ban on the largely unregulated party donations known as soft money, said gun control, patients' rights and tobacco legislation had been halted because of ''millions of dollars in special-interest money spent to stop them dead in their tracks.'' While Republicans said that was fine because it was Gov. George W. Bush's success that would help them retain Congress, it was clear that the Democrats thought political strength could trickle up as well as down. Michael Whouley, a senior political strategist who went to the Democratic committee from the Gore campaign, put it positively, saying that Congressional figures amplified Mr. Gore's message and helped focus the convention on legislative issues. Representative Stabenow said today, ''It's wonderful the way that Al Gore and Joe Lieberman are willing to share the stage.'' She said she valued the chance to ''show who I'm all about and who I'm fighting for'' in the race against the incumbent Republican, Senator Spencer Abraham. ''The values Al Gore and I will campaign on are American's values, your values,'' Mr. Nelson said.
 President Clinton symbolically ceded the stage to Mr. Gore. President John F. Kennedy's daughter, brother, niece and nephew recalled his legacy and linked Vice President Al Gore to it. DNA Does Not Clear Inmate  Ricky Nolen McGinn, 43, who received a stay from Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, was rescheduled for execution after DNA tests failed to exonerate him in the rape and murder of his 12-year-old stepdaughter.
 ''There is clearly an advantage when approaching possible clients to have a political bookend to my Democratic affiliations,'' said Lanny J. Davis, a Patton Boggs partner and former special counsel to President Clinton. Mr. Davis said recently that a new client was pleased that he and a Republican colleague -- Benjamin L. Ginsberg, a lawyer at the firm and the counsel to the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush -- would work together on a legislative issue.
 Ricky Nolen McGinn, only inmate ever granted stay of execution by Texas Gov George W Bush, is headed back to death chamber as results of DNA tests further incriminating him in rape-murder of 12-year-old stepdaughter; second Texas inmate, Roy Criner, is released after DNA tests prove he was wrongly convicted of rape (S) Ricky Nolen McGinn, the only inmate ever granted a stay of execution by Gov. George W. Bush, is headed back to the death chamber. Convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter, Mr. McGinn, 43, came within minutes of being executed on June 1 when Mr. Bush granted him a 30-day reprieve to allow for new DNA tests. But the results of the tests, made public today at a court hearing, further incriminated Mr. McGinn and prompted the presiding judge to reschedule the execution for Sept. 27. Ricky Nolen McGinn, the only inmate ever granted a stay of execution by Gov. George W. Bush, is headed back to the death chamber. Convicted of raping and murdering his 12-year-old stepdaughter, Mr. McGinn, 43, came within minutes of being executed on June 1 when Mr. Bush granted him a 30-day reprieve to allow for new DNA tests. But the results of the tests, made public today at a court hearing, further incriminated Mr. McGinn and prompted the presiding judge to reschedule the execution for Sept. 27. Mr. Bush, who has presided over 139 executions since taking office in 1995, the most of any governor in the nation, had never granted a reprieve until the McGinn case. Maurie Levin, one of Mr. McGinn's lawyers, credited Mr. Bush for allowing the DNA tests but disputed his belief that the results should be interpreted as an endorsement of the Texas death penalty system.
 Television viewers in suburban Chicago generally agree that Pres Clinton gave effective farewell speech at Democratic convention, with one voter wishing he could run again and doubting that Clinton can transfer charisma to Al Gore; all are relieved that scandal was not mentioned by President or Hillary Clinton (M) But although most of the half-dozen viewers who were interviewed seemed to feel warmth toward the Clintons, they were more subdued about their hopes for the Democrat vying to be his successor, Vice President Al Gore. Some even said the president's performance made Mr. Gore's task more difficult. ''Oh, I suppose I'll vote for Gore,'' Mrs. Wilson said with a labored sigh that spoke more ambivalence than enthusiasm. ''But my heart's not in it.'' ''He goes on and on about his wife and Gore, but it eventually comes back to himself, like it always does with this guy,'' Dr. Gose said. ''You watch him, and it's like he couldn't let go. He needs all this. I feel sorry for him.'' Whether these voters considered Mr. Clinton to be a star or a villain, it was clear that they saw him as the headline attraction, drawing attention from Mr. Gore. As Mr. Grimm saw it, ''Clinton is going to completely overshadow Gore.'' And despite the president's repeated mention of Mr. Gore as his full partner in the White House, these voters expressed skepticism that White House policies were much influenced by the second in command.
 Little has helped, except -- believe it or not -- the Republican convention, which  liberated me from my car. The gentle patter of happy-talk was an effective analgesic. Laura Bush's speech was like a gentle whirlpool, and by the time George W. Bush spoke, my Grand Old Piriformis felt 20 years younger. Even an encounter with Newt Gingrich didn't hurt. My muscle tightened only when Dick Cheney attacked the Democrats. My sciatic nerve is not Democratic, but, like the body politic, is irritated by negative campaigning.
 Sen Joseph Lieberman, Al Gore's choice for Vice President, makes surprise appearance on Democratic convention floor; photo (S)
 Grant Perry letter comments on August 11 article on displeasure among Hollywood's entertainment moguls over Vice Pres Al Gore's selection of industry critic, Sen Joseph Lieberman, as his vice presidential running mate; drawing (S) Re ''Moguls Rattled by Gore's Choice of Critic of Entertainment Industry'' (news article, Aug. 11):  Hollywood moguls may be rattled by Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to be his running mate, but many Democrats, myself included, are very comfortable with Mr. Lieberman because he has spoken out against the excesses of the entertainment industry. Re ''Moguls Rattled by Gore's Choice of Critic of Entertainment Industry'' (news article, Aug. 11):  Hollywood moguls may be rattled by Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to be his running mate, but many Democrats, myself included, are very comfortable with Mr. Lieberman because he has spoken out against the excesses of the entertainment industry.
 Re ''Clinton, Opening Convention, Says Gore Will Protect Legacy'' (front page, Aug. 15): Re ''Clinton, Opening Convention, Says Gore Will Protect Legacy'' (front page, Aug. 15):
 The United States Secret Service, which has been protecting Mr. Lieberman since he was chosen last week to be Vice President Al Gore's running mate, checked the records of calls to the station and traced the number to a house in Farmingdale, N.Y., where Mr. Franco lives with his father, who is also named Lawrence. Although Mr. Franco boasted on the air that he would have ''guns out the window'' if federal agents came to get him, members of the Secret Service who searched his bedroom found only a pellet gun.
 Karenna Gore Schiff, Al Gore's 27-year-old daughter and close political adviser, is writing her own speech introducing roll call that will formally nominate him for President; photo with her sister, Kristen, at convention event in Los Angeles (M) Karenna Gore Schiff reached into her purse and pulled out a clump of typewritten pages. They were pockmarked by harsh X's through several paragraphs, dashes through words and arrows to the margins. Karenna Gore Schiff reached into her purse and pulled out a clump of typewritten pages. They were pockmarked by harsh X's through several paragraphs, dashes through words and arrows to the margins. She will be there, on the podium at the Democratic National Convention on Wednesday night, because she is Al Gore's best witness. Because she lives in New York, where loads of Democratic money can be found, Mr. Gore makes frequent detours to the city. His daughter's Upper East Side apartment serves as an unofficial campaign headquarters, the scene of cocktail receptions and strategy sessions. Mr. Gore says his oldest daughter has ''perfect pitch, or very nearly perfect pitch.'' And that trust in her judgment has led to her involvement in most of the major decisions of her father's campaign, including the controversy over the high-priced hiring of Naomi Wolf, the feminist consultant and a friend of Ms. Schiff, and the selection of his running mate. But on at least one occasion, that pitch veered off-key, largely because of her uncritical devotion to her father. A senior Gore aide has said it was Ms. Schiff who urged her father in March 1997 to hold a news conference at which he said seven times that there was ''no controlling legal authority'' to prohibit making fund-raising calls from the White House. She has also been exposed to the chaos that can come from being so close to the action. One searing experience was in February at a hastily arranged meeting between her father and the Rev. Al Sharpton, whose political blessing Mr. Gore wanted, before the New York primary, but without pictures directly linking him to the fiery figure. Her ease of manner, the elastic band she slips around her wrist when she shakes out her ponytail, and her exuberance at extolling the virtues of the George Foreman grill, as seen on late-night infomercials, all lend her an air of authenticity that the campaign hopes rubs off on her father. The not-so-subtle thinking: If Mr. Gore can have a daughter who seems natural and appealing, he must be a good guy himself. One striking scene this year was when Ms. Schiff graduated from Columbia Law School and her father spoke at the ceremony. Mr. Gore shook hands with every graduate, and when his daughter strode across the stage, he formally stuck out his hand again. No, Dad. (Or, as he might say in one of his attempts to show he is with it: Hellllo?) She pulled him close and wrapped her arms around him. Ms. Schiff is also Exhibit A in conveying to working mothers that Mr. Gore understands them. He mentions his grandson in nearly every speech, and the campaign eagerly alerts reporters when Mr. Gore is baby-sitting. She also happily discusses the concerns of new mothers, like breast-feeding. ''I am totally supportive of nursing in public, or wherever the hell it's necessary,'' she recently told thatglow.com, an online pregnancy magazine. ''I remember nursing in Central Park and I fantasized about getting arrested and thrown in jail for nursing. Then I could lead a massive picket line of nursing mothers.'' And Ms. Schiff offers a made-for-the-media counterpart to George P. Bush, Gov. George W. Bush's 24-year-old nephew, who is storming the youth culture for the Republicans. As the granddaughter of a senator and the daughter of a man who has served in the House, the Senate and the vice presidency, Ms. Schiff can match the Bush political lineage, but talk of being her father's heir apparent makes her uncomfortable. Still, it was she who made the decision to take a public role in her father's campaign and who emerged as a natural political partner for her father. One sister, Kristin, 23, a comedy writer in Los Angeles, is tentatively following her lead and making a few public appearances at convention activities this week. But her other siblings, Sarah, 21, and Albert III, 17, remain in the background. Because Mr. Gore felt so directed from an early age by his father, friends and family say that he has studiously avoided exerting the same pressure on his own children.
 America's economic miracle -- which Bill Clinton claimed as vindication in his Monday speech, but George W. Bush insists was an act of God -- didn't begin when Mr. Clinton took office in 1993. And no, it didn't begin with Ronald Reagan either. In fact, it didn't really start until 1996 or so. In other words, this boom is still in its infancy; and like all infants, it remains vulnerable. Mr. Clinton's greatest achievement is that during his second term he avoided the fiscal irresponsibility that might have strangled our ''new economy'' at birth -- irresponsibility that his opponent in the 1996 election would have practiced. Will his successor emulate his example? America's economic miracle -- which Bill Clinton claimed as vindication in his Monday speech, but George W. Bush insists was an act of God -- didn't begin when Mr. Clinton took office in 1993. And no, it didn't begin with Ronald Reagan either. In fact, it didn't really start until 1996 or so. In other words, this boom is still in its infancy; and like all infants, it remains vulnerable. Mr. Clinton's greatest achievement is that during his second term he avoided the fiscal irresponsibility that might have strangled our ''new economy'' at birth -- irresponsibility that his opponent in the 1996 election would have practiced. Will his successor emulate his example? But we're talking analysis here, not poetic justice; and the truth is that growth from 1992 to 1996 -- like growth from 1982 to 1989 -- was just an ordinary business cycle recovery, with no sign of an upturn in the economy's sluggish long-term trend. And business cycles have very little to do with the administration that happens to be in office; they are determined mainly by the actions of the Federal Reserve, not the president. Jimmy Carter and George Bush got blamed for the recessions that happened on their watches, Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton got credit for the recoveries that happened on theirs; but neither the credit nor the blame was deserved. Did the Clinton-Gore administration create this miracle? Of course not. The best guess is that a long process of technological innovation finally reached critical mass, creating new opportunities that American business was uniquely ready to exploit. But the right question isn't whether the policies of this administration gave birth to the new economy; it is whether different leadership would have killed it. Not to put too fine a point on it: What would have happened if Bob Dole had won?
 Democratic party devotes much of day at convention to reassuring liberal base that has been grumbling about centrist tone of ticket and platform; vice presidential candidate Sen Joseph Lieberman, who has been critical of racial preferences, tells Black Caucus he supports affirmative action, whereupon Repr Maxine Waters vows wholehearted support; photo; Mayor Willie Brown suggests Al Gore visit black church every Sunday until Election Day; liberals who suspect Gore is taking them for granted also hear Cabinet members Rodney Slater and Alexis Herman and other blacks declare strong support; night's speakers include union leaders, environmentalist, gay rights and abortion rights activists, Bill Bradley and Rev Jesse Jackson; liberal lineup contrasts with Republican convention that kept conservative activists backstage (M) But other leading liberals continued to express doubts here today about Mr. Gore himself. ''The most important thing to me is that Gore is not emotionally in touch with the party's base,'' Mayor Willie L. Brown Jr. of San Francisco said in an interview. ''If he's smart, he'll go to a black church every Sunday from now until Election Day.'' It is difficult to gauge the depth of discontent among black voters, union members and other core Democrats with the ticket and its agenda. But Mr. Gore's selection of Mr. Lieberman, a Connecticut senator who has staked out centrist positions not only on affirmative action, but also on school vouchers, military spending and Social Security, seems to have crystallized their worries that Mr. Gore is taking them for granted. The Gore campaign moved swiftly today to address these worries, dispatching two black cabinet secretaries, Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater and Labor Secretary Alexis M. Herman, and other prominent black Democrats to declare their strong support for Mr. Lieberman. Discontent among core Democrats poses a potentially significant problem for Mr. Gore because black voters and union members are among the party's largest and most loyal constituencies. And while some of those voters might defect to Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, the Democrats' greater fear is that some base voters will stay home on Election Day, making it difficult to win swing states like Michigan and Georgia. The Democrats' liberal speaking lineup represented a sharp contrast from the Republicans, who carefully choreographed their convention two weeks ago to keep conservative activists backstage, making it easier for their presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, to reach out to moderate swing voters. By contrast, Mr. Gore reached toward the political center with his selection of Mr. Lieberman, the chairman of the party's leading centrist organization, the Democratic Leadership Council. And his aides rebuffed repeated efforts by liberals to insert language into the platform calling for universal health care, cuts in defense spending, a moratorium on capital punishment and increased spending on the poor. The Gore campaign's efforts today to reassure black delegates about Mr. Lieberman's record took place in typical Democratic fashion amid public displays of discontent and ego politics. His comments to black delegates were prompted, for the most part, by Ms. Waters' decision to voice her concerns about his record in public forums on both Sunday and Monday. Shortly after she showed up for this morning's caucus meeting at the Westin Bonaventure Hotel, she was cornered by Ms. Herman, one of the Gore campaign's leading emissaries to black Democrats. Almost immediately after Mr. Gore selected Mr. Lieberman last week, campaign aides began explaining those stands to minority group leaders. Just hours after word of the decision leaked on Aug. 7, they arranged a conference call between Mr. Lieberman and leading blacks in Congress. Ms. Waters did not participate in the call. Regarding vouchers, Mr. Lieberman said, as he has repeatedly in the last week, that he supported pilot programs aimed at providing alternatives for children in failing schools. But he added that he strongly supported public education and Mr. Gore's spending proposals to reduce class sizes. Some Democratic officials are particularly concerned that Mr. Gore's centrist agenda will dampen enthusiasm in swing states where a large turnout of blacks, who were Mr. Clinton's most loyal supporters during impeachment, and other core Democrats is vital. That agenda includes staunch support for global trade and the death penalty, increased military spending, an incremental approach to expanding health coverage and a focus on using the federal surplus for debt reduction, more than on expanding social programs. By and large, the party's progressive leaders said they planned to work hard for Mr. Gore's election. But their concerns about how the ticket is playing among rank-and-file Democrats were expressed in their tendency to focus on the perils of a Bush victory more than on the benefits of a Gore administration. But some liberals said a campaign built mainly on raising fears about the Republicans would fail to win over independent voters. ''That just conveys the idea that this is a lesser-of-two-evils election,'' said Tom Hayden, a state senator from California and Gore delegate. ''My recommendation is to reach out to the Nader constituency instead of trying to become more Republican. The Democrats are Republican enough.''
 Forty years after John F Kennedy accepted Democratic nomination, his daughter, brother, niece and nephew speak at another convention in Los Angeles, striving to revive liberal hearts by recalling Kennedy's legacy and tying Al Gore to it; parade of liberal stalwarts also includes Jesse Jackson and Bill Bradley, vanquished rival who offers lavish praise of Gore; Jackson photo (M) Forty years after John F. Kennedy accepted the Democratic nomination in this city, his daughter, brother, niece and nephew sought to revive the liberal hearts of his party tonight by recalling the slain president's legacy and tying Vice President Al Gore to it. While Mr. Gore has offered himself as a president for a new century, the Democrats, on the second night of their national convention, staged a festival of the past. It was a carefully choreographed program intended to reassure loyalists that despite Mr. Gore's overtures to moderates, their party was not drifting from its principles of inclusiveness and tending to the downtrodden. Forty years after John F. Kennedy accepted the Democratic nomination in this city, his daughter, brother, niece and nephew sought to revive the liberal hearts of his party tonight by recalling the slain president's legacy and tying Vice President Al Gore to it. While Mr. Gore has offered himself as a president for a new century, the Democrats, on the second night of their national convention, staged a festival of the past. It was a carefully choreographed program intended to reassure loyalists that despite Mr. Gore's overtures to moderates, their party was not drifting from its principles of inclusiveness and tending to the downtrodden. The evening featured a parade of liberal stalwarts -- from Senator Edward M. Kennedy to the Rev. Jesse Jackson to former Senator Bill Bradley, Mr. Gore's vanquished rival for the nomination -- all of whom stood in sharp contrast with the platform that the delegates approved tonight, a document that called for a more potent military, expanded global trade and more accountability in schools for student performance. Speaking of his brother, Mr. Kennedy said, ''How proud he would be of Al Gore and our party and the new barrier of bigotry we are breaking down with the choice of Joe Lieberman as the next vice president of the United States.'' Mr. Kennedy was introduced by his niece Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, who in her first speaking appearance before a Democratic convention said she was proud that Mr. Gore's running mate, Mr. Lieberman, had been inspired by her father to enter politics. For all the sentimentality, the symbols of the party's liberal wing were on stage to address one of Mr. Gore's most frustrating political problems: He is not particularly popular with the base voters of his party. As part of the Democrats' drive to enliven the party, several delivered intensely partisan speeches that repudiated Gov. George W. Bush's promise of compassion at the Republican convention in Philadelphia. Just as the Republicans put Mr. Bush's primary opponent, Senator John McCain, on center stage, the Democrats tonight gave a prime-time spot to Mr. Bradley. Offering some of his most lavish praise thus far for the vice president, Mr. Bradley said: ''I learned that Al Gore is a man of wide-ranging intellect, with a deep desire to serve, profound preparation for the job, a strong sense of loyalty, and a life infused with tolerance and roots in religious faith. What strikes me is that what we share is so much more than what we disagree on.'' For all the talk of the past, the keynote speaker tonight was only 30 years old: Representative Harold Ford Jr., from Mr. Gore's home state of Tennessee. Democratic officials said Mr. Ford was a perfect cap for the evening not only because of his youth, and because he is an African American who represents diversity, but also because he is a moderate. Kate Michelman, president of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, said, ''Because I am a woman, because I am a mother and a grandmother, because I am an American, and because I believe in the promise of this nation, I believe that women must have the right to choose -- and so do Al Gore and Joe Lieberman.'' Several delegates said they appreciated the tilt of the speakers. ''There is definitely a left-leaning message to young people like me and Democrats with a more idealistic agenda,'' said Allison Friedrich, 22, a delegate from Athens, Ohio. ''It says they're still fighting for us and that our vote is still important to Al Gore.'' Much of the evening was devoted to speakers' tales of attending the convention when John Kennedy was nominated. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. recalled that he was 6 years old at the time and likened his uncle's New Frontier to Mr. Gore, who he said ''will make history by validating our nation's legacy for world leadership and environmental responsibility.'' ''We will not achieve that dream unless we have a leader who understands the forces at work in our world,'' she said, ''and works to extend the blessings of prosperity to every American. That leader is Al Gore.''
