 P Buchanan Smith Op-Art depicts first day of Democratic National Convention as 'take one' of movie directed by Al Gore
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles says more is going to heard about Al Gore in coming days than one would think humanly possible, and absolutely nothing is going to happen without assistance of a famous entertainer; says country is moving into new territory with Pres Clinton's farewell speech, and next president, whoever he is, is not likely to shock, appall, mystify or interest us the way Clinton did Al Gore has been hovering outside California waiting for the Clintons to depart, like a host tapping his foot at the door while the longest-winded guest at the party launches into one last anecdote by the coat rack. But now the convention is his, his, his, and we are going to hear more about Mr. Gore over the next three days than you might have thought humanly possible. One of the major topics of speculation has been how many times the organizers can manage to remind voters that Mr. Gore served in Vietnam, unlike some presidential candidates we could name. The answer, it appears, is around fifteen jillion. They are, in fact, planning to devote an entire day to the salute to Vietnam veterans. Did we mention that Mr. Gore volunteered? Al Gore has been hovering outside California waiting for the Clintons to depart, like a host tapping his foot at the door while the longest-winded guest at the party launches into one last anecdote by the coat rack. But now the convention is his, his, his, and we are going to hear more about Mr. Gore over the next three days than you might have thought humanly possible. One of the major topics of speculation has been how many times the organizers can manage to remind voters that Mr. Gore served in Vietnam, unlike some presidential candidates we could name. The answer, it appears, is around fifteen jillion. They are, in fact, planning to devote an entire day to the salute to Vietnam veterans. Did we mention that Mr. Gore volunteered? Mr. Gore, who has so far failed to attract the great droves of female voters a Democrat needs to get elected president, is going for lots and lots and lots of women on the podium. And more power to him. As the candidate himself pointed out the other day, he was raised to believe ''that men and women are equal, if not more so.'' For the rest of this week absolutely nothing is going to happen here without the assistance of a famous entertainer. Mr. Gore began his march to the convention by introducing Joe Lieberman -- have we pointed out that he is the first Jewish candidate for vice president? -- with the help of the pop star Jewel, who is the proud owner of several platinum records and her own humanitarian foundation that attempts ''to inspire positive change on global, community and individual levels.'' The vice president spent part of last weekend in Ohio with Rob Reiner, who is trying to burnish Mr. Gore's reputation as a fun guy. At the convention (which features a health care symposium led by Jimmy Smits), his name will be put in nomination by Tommy Lee Jones. Mr. Jones was Mr. Gore's roommate at Harvard, a school he attended shortly before he went into the Army, where he served in Vietnam. Mr. Gore is not, of course, as close to the entertainment community as the Clintons are, but then the Clintons did not serve in Vietnam or pick Joseph Lieberman as their running mate. The president and first lady spent days here being feted and donated to by the Hollywood community. This is one of those aspects of being a politician that sounds like more fun than it actually is. If Mrs. Clinton gets elected to the Senate, she will have paid for it with the night she sat listening to Paul Anka sing a salute to the Mideast peace process. Now all eyes turn to Mr. Gore, a man who can make people sitting in his living room after dinner feel as if they're in a large audience, taking notes. From now on, the convention is going to be made in the vice president's image. There will be a lot of issues and many themes. Vietnam veterans' day will be Thursday, which is also ''visions of the future'' day, which is not to be confused with ''the promises of tomorrow'' day,  which happens to be today.
 Mr. Holbrooke said that in recent days both Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee for president, and his leading foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, have given public support to a strong bipartisan policy on Sierra Leone.
 Gov George W Bush will pardon 35-year-old Roy Criner, Texas inmate convicted decade ago of rape, after new DNA evidence convinced even prosecutors and law enforcement officials that he should be freed; will also pardon second inmate, Ronnie Mark Gariepy, who is on parole after conviction for sexually assaulting stepdaughter (S) Gov. George W. Bush said today that he would pardon a Texas inmate convicted a decade ago of rape, after new DNA evidence convinced even prosecutors and law enforcement officials that the man should be freed. Mr. Bush will sign the pardon of the inmate, Roy Criner, on Tuesday, clearing the way for his release after serving 10 years of a 99-year sentence for the rape of a 16-year-old in Montgomery County, north of Houston. The Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, which rarely approves pardons, today voted 18 to 0 in favor of pardoning Mr. Criner, who is 35. Gov. George W. Bush said today that he would pardon a Texas inmate convicted a decade ago of rape, after new DNA evidence convinced even prosecutors and law enforcement officials that the man should be freed. Mr. Bush will sign the pardon of the inmate, Roy Criner, on Tuesday, clearing the way for his release after serving 10 years of a 99-year sentence for the rape of a 16-year-old in Montgomery County, north of Houston. The Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, which rarely approves pardons, today voted 18 to 0 in favor of pardoning Mr. Criner, who is 35. ''I agree with the Board of Pardons and Paroles that credible new evidence raises substantial doubt about the guilt of Roy Criner and that he should receive a pardon,'' Mr. Bush said in a statement today. The governor also announced that he would pardon a second inmate, Ronnie Mark Gariepy, 41, who is on parole after being convicted of sexually assaulting his stepdaughter. Local officials endorsed the pardon after Mr. Gariepy's stepdaughter, who was 13 at the time she said she was attacked, recanted her story. The two pardons come a week after Mr. Bush approved the execution of Oliver Cruz, a convicted rapist and murderer deemed mentally retarded by defense psychologists.
 Much of the score has been rejiggered to reflect a variegated musical style that would have flummoxed, and possibly delighted, Sullivan; Elvis exerts his influence, as do the likes of Dion and the Belmonts, Snoop Doggy Dogg and Andrew Lloyd Webber. And Mr. Scheman's new lyrics, which reference Ivana Trump, Amadou Diallo, President Clinton, Gov. George W. Bush and Charlton Heston, onion rings, the war in Kosovo and the human genome project, are as shamelessly pointed and scattershot as a stand-up comedian's. He makes full use of the famous ditty ''Modern Major General,'' sung here by Gordon Stanley in an aviator jacket. A sample:
 Aaron Yunis letter defends George W Bush's intention of using experts to advise him on foreign policy if he is elected president (S) Thomas L. Friedman (''A Whole New World,'' column, Aug. 8) argues that although George W. Bush's advisers are foreign-policy experts, they are experts in a world that no longer exists. This may be true, but how can it be argued that the skills of people like Colin L. Powell and Dick Cheney will fail in the future? Moreover, it seems strange to argue that Mr. Bush's advisers are lacking because their only experience was gained in the past. How else can anyone gain experience? Thomas L. Friedman (''A Whole New World,'' column, Aug. 8) argues that although George W. Bush's advisers are foreign-policy experts, they are experts in a world that no longer exists. This may be true, but how can it be argued that the skills of people like Colin L. Powell and Dick Cheney will fail in the future? Moreover, it seems strange to argue that Mr. Bush's advisers are lacking because their only experience was gained in the past. How else can anyone gain experience? Mr. Friedman also makes the case that Mr. Bush has selected competent advisers because Mr. Bush is ignorant on matters of foreign policy. But to say this is to offer a subtle praise of Mr. Bush. A leader who recognizes his own limitations is always preferable to one who believes himself to hold all the answers.
 PRESIDENT CLINTON, on Vice President Al Gore. [A1] PRESIDENT CLINTON, on Vice President Al Gore. [A1]
 Joe Eszterhas, the screenwriter of ''Showgirls'' and author of ''American Rhapsody,'' wrote in Salon.com that Hollywood was of two minds about the nomination of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a well-known critic of violence and sex in movies, as Vice President Al Gore's running mate. Should they shun him for fear of their livelihoods, or embrace him as better than a Republican?
 Re ''For American Jews, Hope and Uncertainty'' (Op-Ed, Aug. 12), about Al Gore's choice of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate: Re ''For American Jews, Hope and Uncertainty'' (Op-Ed, Aug. 12), about Al Gore's choice of Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate:
 With Democrats trying to reach swing voters and undecided voters, Vice President Al Gore tried again, issuing an invitation last week to  Cardinal Mahony. Although the cardinal's anti-abortion message is antithetical to many Democrats, his words could be viewed as an effort to broaden the Democratic base.
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph Lieberman strike populist themes during campaign appearances in St Louis without mentioning Pres Clinton; photo (M) Without even a nod to President Clinton, who delivered his valedictory speech to Democrats in Los Angeles tonight, Vice President Al Gore struck populist themes today in two appearances and pledged to ''stand up for what's right'' for the country. Mr. Gore was introduced at a humid open-air rally here tonight within view of the city's landmark Gateway Arch by his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, as a ''decent and honest'' man. But neither referred to the president, whose administration's policies they have both generally supported and want to perpetuate, but whose private behavior they have both criticized. Without even a nod to President Clinton, who delivered his valedictory speech to Democrats in Los Angeles tonight, Vice President Al Gore struck populist themes today in two appearances and pledged to ''stand up for what's right'' for the country. Mr. Gore was introduced at a humid open-air rally here tonight within view of the city's landmark Gateway Arch by his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, as a ''decent and honest'' man. But neither referred to the president, whose administration's policies they have both generally supported and want to perpetuate, but whose private behavior they have both criticized. After the rally, Mr. Gore relaxed with his wife, Tipper, Mr. Lieberman, and his wife, Hadassah, in a hotel room as he listened to Mr. Clinton's speech. Asked how he reacted to the ''adulation'' heaped on Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore said, ''Appropriate and what you would think would happen.'' How could he expect in his own speech on Thursday night to top Mr. Clinton's? Mr. Gore's wife shot reporters an exasperated look as he blew past the question. While Mr. Lieberman flew on to Los Angeles tonight, Mr. Gore will meet Mr. Clinton in in Michigan on Tuesday for a symbolic ''passing of the torch,'' a ceremony that Gore aides hope will help shift the attention from Mr. Clinton. At the rally here, Mr. Gore focused on his many pledges -- to improve education, move toward universal health-care coverage, raise the minimum wage and enact anti-hate-crimes legislation. He framed the election as a choice between middle-class families and special interests like drug and insurance companies. In an earlier appearance today in Independence, Mo., Mr. Gore gave a flash preview of his coming convention speech, plunging into details of how he would shore up Medicare and Social Security and suggesting that his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, was hiding behind generalities on his tax-cut proposal that Mr. Gore argued would cut benefits and hurt other programs. Mr. Gore is hoping that his detail-laden speech on Thursday, when he accepts the Democratic nomination for president, will accomplish a couple of things: give him a political mandate to follow the course he is proposing, and portray the Republicans as speaking vaguely because their positions are unpopular. Mr. Gore's advisers say these detailed discussions, while not exciting, address the concerns of ordinary Americans and play to Mr. Gore's strengths, including his grasp of policy, and at the same time suggest that Mr. Bush is unprepared to grapple with such basic issues.  THE DEMOCRATS: THE VICE PRESIDENT
 Clinton Hails Gore As Guardian of His Legacy  President Clinton delivered a nostalgic and sentimental valedictory at the Democratic National Convention, savoring ''this moment of unprecedented good fortune'' and imploring Americans to protect his achievements by electing Vice President Al Gore to succeed him. Neither Mr. Gore nor Senator Joseph I. Lieberman mentioned Mr. Clinton while campaigning in St. Louis. Bill Bradley released his 390 delegates to the vice president, telling them that ''Al Gore will stand for the things we fought for in our campaign, and he deserves our support.'' Hillary Rodham Clinton, in her prime-time speech, celebrated her husband's years in office and expanded on a theme in his speech, suggesting that in addition to electing Mr. Gore president, sending her to the Senate would ensure continuation of Mr. Clinton's policies. DNA Frees Texas Inmate  Gov. George W. Bush said he would pardon Roy Criner, 35, who was imprisoned a decade ago for rape, after new DNA evidence convinced prosecutors and law enforcement officials that he should be freed.
 ''When in New Jersey, we're facing a significant opportunity to keep a Democrat in the Senate, to help Al Gore get elected with a significant plurality, everyone knows that we have to do it in concert,'' Senator Lautenberg said. ''So it's noted outside when a disruption comes along that is fundamentally divisive.
 Bradley Releases Delegates  In the last symbolic act of his failed presidential campaign, former Senator Bill Bradley released his 390 delegates to Vice President Al Gore, telling them that ''Al Gore will stand for the things we fought for in our campaign, and he deserves our support.''
 First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton celebrates husband's years in office and proclaims her faith in Al Gore to cheering audience of thousands at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; uses moment to advance bid for US Senate; frames praise for Gore and Democratic Party in ways that reinforce issues in her campaign and attacks against opponent Repr Rick Lazio; photo (M) Hillary Rodham Clinton celebrated her husband's years in office and proclaimed her faith in Al Gore to an audience of thousands of cheering Democrats tonight. She also used the moment to advance her bid for the Senate as she luxuriated in a level of attention unimaginable for a candidate conducting her first campaign for public office. Hillary Rodham Clinton celebrated her husband's years in office and proclaimed her faith in Al Gore to an audience of thousands of cheering Democrats tonight. She also used the moment to advance her bid for the Senate as she luxuriated in a level of attention unimaginable for a candidate conducting her first campaign for public office. But Mrs. Clinton was no ordinary surrogate, talking about the party's standard-bearer. Throughout her speech, she framed her praise of Mr. Gore and the Democratic Party in ways that served to reinforce the issues and attacks on her opponent in New York, Representative Rick A. Lazio. They were issues that she has raised over the summer in both campaign speeches and in her television advertisements. She discussed her support for raising the minimum wage, new gun-control laws, abortion rights and even her ill-fated advocacy of a national health care program. For the first time in the evening, the arena exploded with flash bulbs. Hardly a single Gore-Lieberman sign could be seen throughout her address. Mrs. Clinton took the podium to the sounds of the song ''New York, New York,'' and delegates in the hall sang along as Mrs. Clinton prepared to speak.
 Eleanor Randolph Editorial Observer says that Hillary Rodham Clinton was once again doing her dutiful first lady act at Democratic National Convention, performing a downbeat opening routine for her highly oratorical husband; says Mrs Clinton is but a few days away from shedding first lady role and, like Al Gore, moving into territory of the full-time candidate who will have to rely on her own talents and resources more than on borrowed charisma Like Vice President Al Gore, Mrs. Clinton has to move out more solidly on her own, holding onto the economic progress in the last eight years while shedding the sleazier stuff that is clearly a more complicated part of her life than the vice president's. Also like Vice President Gore, Mrs.  Clinton is enjoying the rush of support coming from his choice of Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate. A Democratic candidate in New York State usually needs about 70 percent of the Jewish vote. Before the Lieberman choice, only about half of the state's Jewish Democrats were supporting the first lady. ''It's hard to imagine a more helpful choice for her,'' said Victor Kovner, a New York City Democratic Party loyalist who sees the choice as a tie-breaker in this race. ''The Jewish community will come home to their party.'' While paying tribute to her husband and Mr. Gore, the first lady delivered what was essentially her own campaign speech. She has seemed determined to create a new aura of independence in Los Angeles -- not only at the fund-raisers but also in the many media interviews with anchors big-time and small. It was she, for example, who announced the pullback in the first couple's interview schedule when it became clear that their efforts to upstage Mr. Gore were turning into a public-relations disaster.
 Despite his wife's promise not to hog Vice President Al Gore's spotlight, Mr. Clinton did not exactly just pop into town to deliver his farewell. He flew here on Friday, arriving at the convention considerably earlier than did President Ronald Reagan and President Dwight D. Eisenhower, whose valedictory speeches in 1988 and 1960 Mr. Clinton's staff has been citing as a point of comparison for Mr. Clinton's appearance. White House aides said that Mr. Clinton has been so focused on the moment that he has had little time to get too sentimental. Aides said they expected that he might reflect on the symbolic passing of the torch to Mr. Gore after he returns to Washington and leaves next weekend for three days of vacation in Lake Placid, N.Y. Mr. Clinton, who was being rushed out of town by Gore aides one day earlier than he had originally wanted, arose early today and began scrawling new lines in the latest draft of his speech.
 News analysis of Pres Pres Clinton's appearance at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; his handoff of reins of Democratic Party to Vice Pres Al Gore was difficult, despite largely cordial relations; his words of praise for Gore was not emotional climax of his speech, which sounded at times more like State of the Union address than anything else (M) But before the reins of government can pass from one hand to another, party leadership must be transferred, in a process for which there is no set of statutes and no rule book. It has often proved difficult for sitting presidents, especially in the modern era, when vice presidents more or less automatically seek the presidency. So it has proved for President Clinton, despite largely cordial relations with Vice President Al Gore. But before the reins of government can pass from one hand to another, party leadership must be transferred, in a process for which there is no set of statutes and no rule book. It has often proved difficult for sitting presidents, especially in the modern era, when vice presidents more or less automatically seek the presidency. So it has proved for President Clinton, despite largely cordial relations with Vice President Al Gore. Tonight, Mr. Clinton sought to lift the Gore campaign onto a new, smoother road. He described Mr. Gore as ''a profoundly good man'' whom he had come to know well in eight years. But his words about Mr. Gore did not form the emotional climax of his speech. For better or worse, Mr. Gore takes over the leadership of the Democratic Party this week. That was decided when he saw off his rival, former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, in the primaries. But what remains to be decided is how thoroughly he can put his stamp on the party. Can he make it his own? Or will he be deemed only second-best by the party faithful? That was the subtext tonight as the president, wildly popular among his fellow Democrats through the ups and downs of the last eight years, appeared before the convention. The hard fact is, Mr. Gore needs help, most of all from Mr. Clinton. Paradoxically, he needs both the enthusiastic endorsement of the president and his help in escaping the long presidential shadow. In a speech that sounded at times more like a State of the Union address than anything else, Mr. Clinton was unstinting in his praise of his vice president. During ''the most difficult days,'' the president said, Mr. Gore ''was always there.'' The president added: ''More than anybody else I've ever known in public life, Al Gore understands the future and how sweeping changes and scientific breakthroughs will affect ordinary Americans' daily lives.'' But unlike Ronald Reagan, who promised at the 1988 convention that he would gladly serve as ''a foot soldier'' in George Bush's forthcoming campaign if needed, Mr. Clinton avoided a pledge to crisscross the country this fall for Mr. Gore. ''You know how I feel,'' he said. ''But it's not my decision to make. That belongs to the American people.  I just want to tell all of you gathered in this great arena a few things I know about Al Gore.'' All in all, the Clintons will have spent more than three days here by the time they leave on Tuesday morning. Before he spoke tonight, Mr. Clinton had delivered seven other officially announced speeches today, and no doubt some off-hand remarks as well. He and his wife, Hillary, who have raised money with a zeal unmatched by any other first family in history, apparently saw no need to deviate from their routine during Mr. Gore's big week here, even when people close to Mr. Gore gnashed their teeth in frustration. Months later, when Mr. and Mrs. Reagan again slipped offstage quickly and quietly, leaving Washington without even staying for the post-inaugural lunch at the Capitol, Elaine Crispen, Mrs. Reagan's press secretary, explained their attitude this way: ''It's a sense of what's right. It's their party. It's the Bushes' victory. Let them enjoy it.'' After initially giving a lukewarm endorsement, Mr. Reagan campaigned hard for George Bush, the father of this year's Republican nominee, emerging in the campaign's last days as Mr. Bush's main surrogate. He traveled 25,000 miles. Whether Mr. Clinton will do the same remains up in the air. Democratic state chairmen from New Jersey to Wisconsin to Oregon have been pressing Mr. Clinton to stump hard for Mr. Gore, in the hope that he could brighten a campaign that has often seemed inert and uninspired.  The White House has said it will let Mr. Gore make the decision, but the chairmen, by and large, think the president's presence on the trail is worth the gamble that he might well remind voters how much more exciting than his protege he can be. Delegates on the floor lustily cheered both Mr. and Mrs. Clinton tonight. But they were divided in another respect. Some, like Eleanor Sobel, a state representative from Hollywood, Fla., said Mr. Gore could carry the party banner as well as Mr. Clinton, and argued that it was time now for the president to move on.  Others, like Greg Salazar from Las Vegas, N.M., expressed concern that Mr. Clinton would overshadow Mr. Gore. But even Mr. Salazar said that if the race looked close, ''the president should come out in public and ask the people to vote for Al Gore.'' The tensions between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore never became as severe as those in some past administrations. But this handoff has not been without significant friction, and Mr. Gore can afford little of that.
 The official theme of the protesters' day was ''Human Need, Not Corporate Greed,'' but the placards, banners, puppets and armbands that swirled through the usually sterile streets of downtown Los Angeles embraced a dizzying range of causes and concerns. Demonstrators were on hand to protest everything from Vice President Al Gore's investments in an oil company that plans to drill near a Colombian Indian reserve to the influence of the World Trade Organization. ''Life Is Not a Commodity,'' read one banner. Another said, ''Al Gore = Corporate Eichmann.'' Perhaps the bleakest placard: ''All Government Is Bad.'' The morning began with a rally in Pershing Square, featuring the singer Bonnie Raitt, to protest Mr. Gore's family holdings in the Occidental Petroleum Corporation, which has rights to conduct exploratory drilling a few miles outside the legal boundaries of the U'wa Indian reserve in Colombia. Environmental groups have urged Mr. Gore to divest his family of the stock, worth some $500,000. The police moved the remaining demonstrators back to Pershing Square, where perhaps 2,000 people were gathered and still more rallies were scheduled. Just as the group reached the southwestern corner of the square, there was another tense few minutes as demonstrators again stood in the middle of an intersection, this one adjoining the grand old Biltmore Hotel, where top Democrats and aides to Mr. Gore are staying.
 Though the convention is intended as a crowning television moment for Vice President Al Gore, it was the president who weighed most heavily on the minds of editors and producers today. And after Mrs. Clinton finished her remarks, Mr. Clinton made his grand entrance in a manner reserved in American television culture for the best and the brightest, namely, late-night talk show hosts, movie stars and football heroes. ''We knew Thursday night how upset the Gore folks were with Clinton's confessional on Thursday and that would be the talk of our interview,'' Ms. Pitts said, adding that it was ''more than an assumption'' that the Clintons had dropped out to try to turn down the heat on them. Mrs. Clinton, however, did interviews tonight with anchors on all of the major broadcast and cable networks.
 US Repr Jesse L Jackson Jr, son of Rev Jesse Jackson, has given voice at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles to concern within party's left wing about its centrist ticket; has made it clear that he will aggressively support Gore-Lieberman slate, but has cast decision as one driven more by fear of alternative, namely electing Gov George W Bush and Dick Cheney; photo (M) It began on Saturday, at a forum at the University of Southern California, when Mr. Jackson, a third-term Democrat from Chicago, was asked whether people should vote for Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman. ''The only option is Al Gore,'' he responded. ''But if there was another campaign that was speaking to our issues that had the possibility and plausibility of winning, we should support that campaign.'' Today, at another forum, this one part of a shadow convention organized by a coalition of left-leaning groups, Mr. Jackson made it clear that he would aggressively campaign for the Gore-Lieberman ticket. But he continued to cast his decision as one driven more by his fear of the alternative: electing George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. At a news conference after the speech, Mr. Jackson said: ''I am supporting Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman, and I'm doing it as enthusiastically as I can. But Jackie Wilson is not on the ticket, and Elvis Presley is not on the ticket, so Mr. Excitement is not running for president. This is about pragmatism.'' Indeed, there has been low-level tension among Democrats, tension that has surfaced anew since Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate -- that pits centrists against Democratic liberals. While a moderate message is seen as necessary to win undecided independent voters, the party's left wing argues that a more traditional agenda is needed to excite minorities and other voters from the Demcrats' base. Some liberals have complained about Mr. Lieberman's support for federal vouchers to pay for private school tuition and about his statements in opposition to affirmative action. On Tuesday, Mr. Lieberman is expected to address some of those concerns at a meeting of black delegates here, and several Gore campaign officials have been acting as ambassadors to concerned black Democrats, assuring them that Mr. Lieberman's record is acceptable. Such concerns are something the Gore campaign could do without as it tries to generate enthusiasm for its candidate, and seeks to motivate a traditional base that include minorities, women and union members. Mr. Jackson said he would try to persuade disillusioned liberal Democrats against defecting to Ralph Nader and the Green Party. And he criticized the Gore campaign's recent emphasis on restoring the country's sense of morality, something Mr. Lieberman has emphasized throughout his career. ''When we start getting into this personal-life litmus test we are deep in Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson territory,'' the younger Mr. Jackson said, ''and that is unfamiliar Democratic real estate.''
 Joe Turner letter points out that voters who prefer George W Bush for president may well object to Democratic liberalism, not to Sen Joseph Lieberman's Jewish faith (S) David Margolick (Op-Ed, Aug. 12) states that Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate is ''not only a moment of triumph for American Jews. It is also a moment of truth.'' David Margolick (Op-Ed, Aug. 12) states that Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate is ''not only a moment of triumph for American Jews. It is also a moment of truth.'' Why can't that truth be that many voters are attracted to the Republicans and simply reject the liberalism of Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman?  JOE TURNER  Santa Fe, N.M., Aug. 12, 2000
 Pres Clinton delivers nostalgic valedictory at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, where he is greeted by thunderous applause; implores Americans to protect his achievements by electing Vice Pres Al Gore to succeed him; says one of very best decisions of his entire life was asking Gore to be running mate; scoffs at recent suggestion by Republican nominee Gov George W Bush that nation stumbled into economic prosperity and links Gore to economic good times; catalogues high points of his two terms in office; convention is also addressed by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton; she praises husband, blesses nomination of Vice Pres Al Gore and tries to boost her own bid for US Senate from New York; photo (M) President Clinton savored what he called ''this moment of unprecedented good fortune'' and, in a nostalgic valedictory tonight, implored Americans to protect his achievements by electing Al Gore to succeed him. ''One of the very best decisions of my entire life,'' he said, was ''asking Al Gore to be my partner.'' President Clinton savored what he called ''this moment of unprecedented good fortune'' and, in a nostalgic valedictory tonight, implored Americans to protect his achievements by electing Al Gore to succeed him. ''One of the very best decisions of my entire life,'' he said, was ''asking Al Gore to be my partner.'' While Mr. Clinton made no direct mention of Gov. George W. Bush during his address on the opening night of the 43rd Democratic National Convention, he scoffed at the recent suggestion by the Republican nominee that the nation had stumbled into prosperity. [Transcript, Page A17.] Mr. Clinton made no allusions to the personal scandals he has weathered; at a church last week, the president said his transgressions should not tar Mr. Gore. Instead, Mr. Clinton catalogued the high points of his entire two terms, the longest presidential tenure of a Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt, who died in 1945 after 12 years in office. The president also tried to transfer his popularity among the faithful to Vice President Gore, who has had an arduous time rousing his party. Mr. Clinton, who has said Mr. Gore's election is crucial to protecting his own legacy, offered this testament: ''In the most challenging moments, when we faced the most difficult issues of war and peace, of whether to take on some powerful special interests, he was always there.'' Linking Mr. Gore to the economic good times, Mr. Clinton said of his ambitious plan to cut the deficit in 1993: ''It passed by a single vote in both houses. In a deadlocked Senate, Al Gore cast the deciding vote. Not a single Republican supported it. Their leaders said our plan would increase the deficit, kill jobs and give us a one-way ticket to recession.'' Even as Mr. Clinton was trying to hand off the party to Mr. Gore, the production tonight lacked the end-of-an-era wistfulness of Ronald Reagan's farewell in 1988. That was in part because Mr. Clinton's wife, Hillary, was front and center, speaking in her new role as Senate candidate. Mrs. Clinton not only commended her husband and blessed the nomination of Mr. Gore but sought to bolster her own bid for the Senate from New York. After calling on the public to ''continue America's progress'' by electing Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Mrs. Clinton turned to her own race. And to some delegates, it was a reminder that Mr. Gore faces a daunting challenge in trying to inspire voters as skillfully as Mr. Clinton -- widely regarded as the party's most adroit campaigner since John F. Kennedy, who was nominated at a convention in Los Angeles in 1960. The outpouring for Mr. Clinton underscored a daunting problem for Mr. Gore: the more powerful that Mr. Clinton was in his speech, the less likely that the vice president could pull off a climactic acceptance speech Thursday night. ''There's a certain sadness to this evening,'' said Cheri Hamilton, a delegate from Kentucky who covered herself in Clinton-Gore buttons. ''They have been a good team, Clinton and Gore. Gore will work well with Lieberman. But I'm really going to miss Bill.'' When short excerpts of past convention speeches by Democratic presidents were shown on a screen overhead, there was warm applause for Mr. Kennedy, and polite applause for Jimmy Carter. But the moment Mr. Clinton's face filled the screen, the hall exploded with cheers. It was impossible not to notice that the sound fell slightly but unmistakably when Mr. Clinton's clip was followed by one of Mr. Gore. Another explanation for an apparent lack of excitement about Mr. Gore among some of the 4,339 delegates is that polls show he is trailing Mr. Bush. Tonight, Mr. Clinton faced one of the most precarious political challenges of his career: to offer a stout endorsement of Mr. Gore that will spur Democrats -- and the American public -- to rally around the vice president. But he also had to take care to leave Mr. Gore some room to declare his independence. He devoted far more attention to Mr. Gore than to Mrs. Clinton, whom he praised for her work with children and for being ''a great first lady,'' who will ''always be there for the families of New York and America.'' Asserting that the new ticket would build on his foundation, Mr. Clinton said: ''Al Gore and Joe Lieberman will keep our prosperity going by paying down the debt, investing in education and health care and providing family tax cuts that we can afford. Now that stands in stark contrast to the position of our Republican friends.'' He offered what sounded like a point-by-point rebuttal of Mr. Bush's acceptance speech two weeks ago. And Mr. Clinton's presence tonight could not help but remind viewers of the Clinton administration scandals that the Bush campaign is intent on keeping alive. For some Democrats, the president's departure on Tuesday could not come too soon. Beyond the objective of pumping up Mr. Gore for four nights, the Democrats sought to portray the Republicans as staging a masquerade of moderation at their convention. On this first day, there was not quite the harmony that so marked the Republican convention. Representative Loretta Sanchez of California rebuffed an offer to address the convention, saying she didn't want to appear as if she had been motivated by ''personal gain'' when -- under pressure from the Gore campaign -- she agreed to move a fund-raiser from the Playboy mansion.
 Editorial says Pres Clinton's speech at Democratic National Convention, both a passionate defense of his record and a steadfast argument that Vice Pres Al Gore is ready to take over, represents end of an era; says that, in party terms, Clinton's great accomplishment was to update the liberal policies that let Democrats dominate midcentury politics but that became a straitjacket when Ronald Reagan arrived on scene; says despite fact that Clinton record will forever be blotted because his leadership gifts were offset by a self-destructive streak, Clinton will go into party history as only politician of his decade with personal magnetism to match those of Reagan and Clinton's own boyhood idol, John F Kennedy In an emotional farewell to the party that he reshaped and led for eight turbulent years and to the political arena he will clearly miss, President Clinton last night offered a passionate defense of his record and a steadfast argument that Vice President Al Gore is ready to take over. As students of convention staging will no doubt remember, the president chose an oddly hokey gladiatorial entrance. For fans of presidential oratory, the speech was a reminder of Mr. Clinton's skills as an advocate who can both speak from the heart and argue a case through a series of logical points. The Democrats' enthusiastic reception was testimony to their mixed feelings -- an eagerness to move beyond Mr. Clinton and his outsized personal problems as well as genuine gratitude for his success in modernizing their party. Mr. Clinton's valedictory appearance, on the first day of the convention, was aimed at letting the president make a best-case argument for his stewardship, before the party turns to the hard work of  pushing Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman, across the finish line. Mr. Clinton paid tribute to Mr. Gore's steadiness under pressure and his knowledge of government in arguing that the vice president deserved considerable credit for the successes of the last eight years. He also portrayed Mr. Gore as the most future-oriented politician in the country in regard to science, technology and education issues. In an emotional farewell to the party that he reshaped and led for eight turbulent years and to the political arena he will clearly miss, President Clinton last night offered a passionate defense of his record and a steadfast argument that Vice President Al Gore is ready to take over. As students of convention staging will no doubt remember, the president chose an oddly hokey gladiatorial entrance. For fans of presidential oratory, the speech was a reminder of Mr. Clinton's skills as an advocate who can both speak from the heart and argue a case through a series of logical points. The Democrats' enthusiastic reception was testimony to their mixed feelings -- an eagerness to move beyond Mr. Clinton and his outsized personal problems as well as genuine gratitude for his success in modernizing their party. Mr. Clinton's valedictory appearance, on the first day of the convention, was aimed at letting the president make a best-case argument for his stewardship, before the party turns to the hard work of  pushing Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman, across the finish line. Mr. Clinton paid tribute to Mr. Gore's steadiness under pressure and his knowledge of government in arguing that the vice president deserved considerable credit for the successes of the last eight years. He also portrayed Mr. Gore as the most future-oriented politician in the country in regard to science, technology and education issues. As he did in recent interviews, Mr. Clinton also made it clear that Republican convention oratory about an era of accidental and purposeless prosperity had nettled him mightily. In response to recent  sallies from the G.O.P. nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Clinton pointed out that when the administration enacted its economic strategy of trying to close the budget deficit, even by raising taxes on the richest Americans, the Republican leadership in Congress voted uniformly against it and predicted it would bring about economic ruin. ''Time has not been kind to those predictions,'' he declared. Indeed, as he pointed out, it was Mr. Gore who supplied the tie-breaking vote in the Senate. The president's most explicit effort to sell Mr. Gore as a presidential-scale leader came in a personal testimony to him as ''one strong leader'' who is capable, indeed eager to make ''tough choices.'' He also praised Mr. Lieberman, noting that he had known the Connecticut senator since working for his first state legislative campaign while a law student 30 years ago. And when Mr. Clinton reminded the audience of his own personal journey to the White House from a small-town boyhood, he seemed to be trying to contrast himself with the pampered upbringing of Governor Bush, who is seen by many Americans as a man they can empathize with more than Mr. Gore. In an emotional touch, he spoke of the gray hair and wrinkles that now mark his visage, but have not dimmed ''optimism and hope I brought to the work I love eight years ago.'' One of the strongest flashes of irritation from Mr. Clinton came when he defended his administration's record on military and preparedness issues. At the Philadelphia convention the Republicans charged relentlessly that American defenses had declined in the last eight years, ignoring the fact that military budgets had started to go down under President Bush and have gone back up in the last several years. Mr. Clinton boasted that the United States had expanded human rights in the tradition of former President Jimmy Carter, who was sitting in the audience, and then went on to suggest that the Republicans were inviting trouble from overseas with their accusations. Any foreign country inspired by the Republican Party to think that America is not ready to defend itself, he said, would be gravely mistaken.
 Party leaders had warned Ms. Sanchez that if an official of her high rank presided over a fund-raiser at the Playboy Mansion, the party's efforts to portray itself as the party of ''family values'' rather than the party of sex scandals would be set back immeasurably. She resisted, arguing that the event was already sold out, but eventually gave in when Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, let it be known that they, too, disapproved of the mansion site.
 Now, how can we continue America's progress? By electing Al Gore and Joe Lieberman the next president and vice president of the United States. I've watched him as Bill's trusted partner in the White House. Together, they made the hard decisions to renew our nation's economy and our national spirit; to advance democracy and defend freedom around the world. And I can't wait until we watch Al Gore take the oath of office on Jan. 20, 2001. And standing next to him will be his wonderful wife and my dear friend, who inspires us through her work for the homeless and her advocacy on behalf of mental health. Tipper Gore will make a great first lady. And the country has seen again Al Gore's leadership in his choice of Joe Lieberman. From a stronger economy to more Americans attending college to a cleaner environment, Bill Clinton and Al Gore have put people first. And not only that, they put children first.
 Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Isn't it great to be here in California together? Forty years ago, the great city of Los Angeles launched John Kennedy and the New Frontier. Now, Los Angeles is launching the first president of the new century: Al Gore. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Isn't it great to be here in California together? Forty years ago, the great city of Los Angeles launched John Kennedy and the New Frontier. Now, Los Angeles is launching the first president of the new century: Al Gore. You gave me the chance to turn those ideas and values into action, after I made one of the very best decisions of my entire life: asking Al Gore to be my partner. We sent our plan to Congress. It passed by a single vote in both houses. In a deadlocked Senate, Al Gore cast the tie-breaking vote. Now, not a single Republican supported it. Here's what their leaders said. Their leaders said our plan would increase the deficit, kill jobs, and give us a one-way ticket to a recession. Time has not been kind to their predictions. Now, of course we all know that the biggest choice that the American people have to make this year is in the presidential race. Now, you all know how I feel. But it's not my decision to make. That belongs to the American people. I just want to tell all of you here in this great arena and all the folks watching and listening at home a few things that I know about Al Gore. Whether it was in how we reform welfare, or in protecting the environment, or in closing the digital divide, or bringing jobs to rural and urban America through the empowerment zone program, the greatest champion of ordinary Americans has always been Al Gore. I'll tell you something else about him. More than anybody else I've known in public life, Al Gore understands the future and how sweeping changes and scientific breakthroughs will affect ordinary Americans' lives. And I think we need somebody in the White House at the dawn of the 21st century who really understands the future. Finally, I want to say something more personal. Virtually every week for the last seven and half years, until he became occupied with more important matters, Al Gore and I had lunch. And we talked about the business between us and the business of America. But we'd also often talk about our families, what our kids were doing, how school was going, what was going on in their lives. I know him. He is a profoundly good man. He loves his children more than life. And he has a perfectly wonderful wife who has fought against homelessness and who has done something for me and all Americans in bringing the cause of mental health  into the broad sunlight of our national public life. We owe Tipper Gore our thanks. It should not be a surprise to anyone that Al Gore picked the leader of the new Democrats to be his vice president. Because Joe Lieberman has supported all our efforts to reform welfare, reduce crime, protect the environment, protect civil rights and a woman's right to choose and to keep this economy going. All of them. And he has shown time and time again that he will work with President Gore to keep putting people and progress over partisanship. First, on the economy, Al Gore and Joe Lieberman will keep our prosperity going by paying down the debt, investing in education and health care, moving more people from welfare to work and providing family tax cuts we can afford. Now, that stands in stark contrast to the position of our Republican friends. Here is their position. They say we have a big projected 10-year surplus and they want to spend every dime of it and then some on tax cuts right now. That would leave nothing for education or Medicare, prescription drugs, nothing to extend the life of Medicare and Social Security for the baby-boomers, nothing in case the projected surpluses don't come in. Now, let me say something to you that's even more important than the economy to me. When Al Gore picked Joe Lieberman, the first Jewish American to join a national ticket, to be his partner, and he joined with our presidential nominee who has, along with his great mother and late father, a lifetime commitment to civil rights and equal opportunity for all, even when it was not popular down home in the South -- when they did that, we had a ticket that embodies the Democratic commitment to one America. They believe in civil rights and equal opportunity for everybody. They believe in a woman's right to choose. And this may be the most important of all, they believe the folks that you're buying your soft drinks, soft drinks and popcorn from here at the Staples Center should have the exact same chance that they do to send their kids to college and give them a good life and a good future.
 Four years ago, Jimmy Carter conspicuously avoided the Democratic National Convention in Chicago. His relationship with the incumbent presidential candidate, Bill Clinton, was testy. Put bluntly, the two former Southern governors were both competitive and uneasy with each other. ''I've always had good relations with Vice President Gore,'' said Mr. Carter, picking his words carefully as he spoke over a cellular phone yesterday afternoon from a limousine as he rode to a reception. Four years ago, Jimmy Carter conspicuously avoided the Democratic National Convention in Chicago. His relationship with the incumbent presidential candidate, Bill Clinton, was testy. Put bluntly, the two former Southern governors were both competitive and uneasy with each other. ''I've always had good relations with Vice President Gore,'' said Mr. Carter, picking his words carefully as he spoke over a cellular phone yesterday afternoon from a limousine as he rode to a reception. Mr. Carter was not planning to attend this year's convention. Four years ago he spent convention week on a ranch in Montana. ''At first Al Gore invited me and I told him I'd prefer not to come and make a big speech,'' Mr. Carter said. ''But then the idea came for a video presentation. It's been a very, very pleasant experience.'' But Mr. Carter spoke warmly of Mr. Gore. ''Whenever there was a problem I called Al Gore,'' he said. ''I always called him. I've known him for 25 years. He's been my key friend and trusted ally.'' Mr. Gore's enthusiasm for Mr. Carter is not altogether altruistic. Although George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, is favored at the moment in numerous Southern states, Georgia could be a battleground. And Mr. Carter could be enlisted to campaign in the state for the Gore-Lieberman ticket. Delegates close to Mr. McCall -- which seems to be the majority of them -- say that Mr. Cuomo, who is helping to run Al Gore's presidential campaign in New York, is using the Gore-New York party apparatus to help with his own contacts and political future. Mr. Cuomo responded: ''How could I possibly be using the Gore apparatus if I'm not saying anything about the gubernatorial race -- and he is?'' Mr. Cuomo was referring to Mr. McCall and his energetic, public efforts in Los Angeles to line up support for his own race for governor.  Mr. McCall responded: 'If somebody wants to compete with me, I wish them luck.'' He added that he had briefly said hello to Mr. Cuomo at events here, but no more. ''I don't know what kind of a discussion we would have at this point,'' he said. 'I mean, what would we talk about?''
 Former Sen Bill Bradley, in last symbolic act of his failed presidential campaign, releases his 390 delegates to Vice Pres Al Gore, urging them to set aside hard feelings and support Democratic ticket; says Gore will stand up for things they fought for in campaign; photo (S) In the last symbolic act of his failed presidential campaign, former Senator Bill Bradley released his 390 delegates to Vice President Al Gore today, telling them that ''Al Gore will stand for the things we fought for in our campaign, and he deserves our support.'' In the last symbolic act of his failed presidential campaign, former Senator Bill Bradley released his 390 delegates to Vice President Al Gore today, telling them that ''Al Gore will stand for the things we fought for in our campaign, and he deserves our support.'' Then, recalling an event last month where he formally endorsed Mr. Gore, Mr. Bradley encouraged his supporters to set aside their hard feelings about the bitterly contested primary and work hard for the Democratic ticket. After Mr. Bradley's remarks, William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, praised Mr. Bradley as ''a special person'' who had a ''unique understanding of America.'' ''To honor him is to make sure that the sort of things he talked about get implemented,'' Mr. Daley said. ''For that, we need your strong support for Al Gore and Joe Lieberman.'' Mr. Daley noted that Mr. Bradley often took ''controversial positions'' that ''may have caused him problems in the short term, but in the long term are the right positions.'' Paradoxically, Mr. Gore attacked Mr. Bradley during the primary campaign for taking positions that did not conform to Democratic orthodoxy. Mr. Bradley contends that he pushed Mr. Gore into taking stronger positions on health care, gun control, child poverty and changing the campaign finance system. And many of Mr. Gore's aides acknowledge that Mr. Bradley's challenge made Mr. Gore a better campaigner. Many of the delegates said they would work enthusiastically for Mr. Gore, if only out of fear that voting for Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, or not voting at all, would lead to a Bush victory. ''People don't want Gore to lose,'' said David Loebsack, a professor of political science at Cornell College in Iowa and a Bradley delegate. ''There is a real difference between Gore and the Republican ticket.'' But Cornel West, a Harvard professor who is close to Mr. Bradley, said there was still wariness among some Bradley supporters toward Mr. Gore and his centrist agenda.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has made clear that he supports a defensive system that would be based on land, at sea and possibly in space to cover all 50 states and be extended to protect allies in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. Vice President Al Gore, adopting the Clinton policy, supports a more modest land-based system that could protect against a small number of missiles fired at the United States by mistake or by what the administration previously called rogue states but now calls ''states of concern,'' like, perhaps, North Korea or Iraq. This system should be built, in the Clinton-Gore view, only if it can be shown to enhance national security and if the cost and the technology are feasible. Governor Bush calls this approach timid. Mr. Gore, who as vice president has been instrumental in setting the administration's policy toward Russia, has expressed concern that any missile system would violate the 1972 treaty and undermine relations with Russia. The Democratic platform's insistence that the defense system be compatible with the treaty was seen by some as a guarantee that no such system would ever be constructed. Mr. Bush has said he has no qualms about pulling out of the pact. Mr. Bush clearly understands how President Reagan's dream captured the public imagination. This spring, years after the Reagan plan was abandoned, a New York Times/CBS News poll found that 58 percent of American adults favored building a shield against nuclear attack. As his campaign developed this year, Mr. Bush made a concerted drive to speak out on national security to allay concerns about his lack of experience in foreign policy matters.
 Op-Ed article by Daniel H Pink, Al Gore's speechwriter from 1995 to 1997, says Gore's decision to write his own acceptance speech will give him opportunity to use his own authentic voice and offer specifics for people to evaluate on their terms; says Gore may be much more in sync with voters than is commonly believed; recommends that Gore make speech conversational, not oratory, and laden with policy, and follow it with nationally televised call-in question and answer program The terrifying report hopped from sky box to sky box like the West Nile virus: Al Gore was writing his own acceptance speech. Eek! cried the talking heads and the pundits. The speech will be dull, boring. It will be -- gasp -- specific. The terrifying report hopped from sky box to sky box like the West Nile virus: Al Gore was writing his own acceptance speech. Eek! cried the talking heads and the pundits. The speech will be dull, boring. It will be -- gasp -- specific. But there may be a method to Al Gore's supposed madness -- a recognition that politics and the broader culture are in the midst of a significant transition. By writing his own speech, speaking in his own authentic voice, and offering specifics for people to evaluate on their terms, Mr. Gore may be much more in sync with the voters than his opponent or the press corps dare to be. The punditocracy hailed George W. Bush's acceptance speech, but when The Washington Post convened a panel of swing voters, the reaction was overwhelming: Lovely speech, but where were the specifics? When Newsweek asked voters how important it is that Mr. Gore offer specifics in his convention speech, a stunning 75 percent said ''very important.'' Contrast that with 24 percent who said it was very important for him to talk about his own life experiences and 18 percent who thought it crucial that he discuss his faith. ''My sense is that an Al Gore policy-laden speech might be hard going,'' said Brit Hume of Fox News when he heard that the vice president was hunched over his laptop. But that's probably because he's not one of the 41 million Americans who can't afford health insurance. Daniel H. Pink, Al Gore's speechwriter from 1995 to 1997, is author of the forthcoming ''Free Agent Nation.''
 In Democratic fund-raising parlance, these were ''donor servicing'' or ''donor maintenance'' events. The distinction party leaders draw is that no money actually changed hands at these affairs; the checks have long since been cashed. But the events were intended to ''energize'' donors, encouraging them to make further donations and keep the money flowing. Democratic Party officials have not staged the type of fund-raising gala here that the Republicans did in Philadelphia with a $10 million event headlined by Gov. George W. Bush. In Democratic fund-raising parlance, these were ''donor servicing'' or ''donor maintenance'' events. The distinction party leaders draw is that no money actually changed hands at these affairs; the checks have long since been cashed. But the events were intended to ''energize'' donors, encouraging them to make further donations and keep the money flowing. Democratic Party officials have not staged the type of fund-raising gala here that the Republicans did in Philadelphia with a $10 million event headlined by Gov. George W. Bush. Yet the Democratic Party has been as aggressive as the Republicans in using its convention to court  its biggest donors, trying to put them in the mood to write new checks for the fall campaign. Supporters who contributed at least $100,000 to the Democratic National Committee were issued an 18-page ''Convention 2000 Passport.'' It lists four days and nights of invitation-only meals, receptions and intimate events with party leaders, including the president, Vice President Al Gore and first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton. There is another reason Democratic leaders want to keep the money chase more muted. In its platform, the party advocates a ban on political contributions known as soft money. Mr. Gore has pledged an effort to outlaw soft money as his first legislative priority. Democrats are also worried that the investigation of fund-raising in the 1996 election could hurt Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore initially described the now-infamous luncheon at the Hsi Lai Buddhist Temple in 1996 as a ''community outreach'' session, even though nuns and others at the temple contributed more than $100,000 to the Clinton-Gore campaign. Later, he said the visit was ''finance-related.'' When Mr. Gore was questioned in April by the special counsel investigating campaign finance, he insisted the event was not a fund-raiser.
