 Party in honor of Pauline LaFon Gore, 87-year-old mother of Vice Pres Al Gore, is held in Los Angeles on day her son is nominated for president; photo (M) On the day that her beloved Democrats were to nominate her beloved son for president, Pauline LaFon Gore sat in an elegant ballroom at the Regal Biltmore Hotel and greeted a long line of admirers who had come to pay tribute to the 87-year-old matriarch of the Gore family. She fussed over every guest, whether old friend or stranger, lingering so long in some cases that  Karenna Gore Schiff, her granddaughter, felt obliged to move the crowd along. When Marcia Lieberman paid an unexpected visit, Mrs. Gore rose from her chair and offered a warm hug to the 85-year-old mother of her son's running mate. She made no speech, but blew kisses to her granddaughter after Ms. Schiff toasted her as ''truly an amazing woman'' who had inspired thousands with ''her charm and grace, her grit and determination, and her idealism.'' On the day that her beloved Democrats were to nominate her beloved son for president, Pauline LaFon Gore sat in an elegant ballroom at the Regal Biltmore Hotel and greeted a long line of admirers who had come to pay tribute to the 87-year-old matriarch of the Gore family. She fussed over every guest, whether old friend or stranger, lingering so long in some cases that  Karenna Gore Schiff, her granddaughter, felt obliged to move the crowd along. When Marcia Lieberman paid an unexpected visit, Mrs. Gore rose from her chair and offered a warm hug to the 85-year-old mother of her son's running mate. She made no speech, but blew kisses to her granddaughter after Ms. Schiff toasted her as ''truly an amazing woman'' who had inspired thousands with ''her charm and grace, her grit and determination, and her idealism.'' It is a remarkable moment in the remarkable life of Pauline Gore, who rose from humble beginnings to become one of the first women to graduate from law school at Vanderbilt University, who participated as a full partner in the 32-year Congressional career of her husband, Senator Albert Gore Sr., who endured his painful election defeat in 1970 and the death of their daughter, Nancy, in 1984, and who has been a bulwark in the political life of their son, Vice President Al Gore. It is also a bittersweet moment for Mrs. Gore, who will watch her son's acceptance speech on Thursday night surrounded by family but missing her husband, who died in 1998 after nearly 91 years of life and 61 years of marriage. They met when she served him coffee at the Andrew Jackson Hotel in Nashville, where both were law students. Together they stoked the young Mr. Gore's ambition, nurturing him for public service from his earliest days and providing him a seamless political resume. ''They really were a lovely couple to behold,'' said Bill McSweeney, a longtime family friend who recalls the Gores holding hands while watching ''The Lawrence Welk Show'' on Saturday nights. Since 1993, Mrs. Gore has endured a heart attack, brain surgery to remove a blood clot, and two strokes, one of which impaired her vision. Her husband trained her to walk again after the strokes, and she now strolls around the family farm in Carthage, Tenn., using one of his old wooden canes. The day after her surgery, she asked her nurses to hook up cable television in her hospital room so she could watch C-Span. But there was no sign today that Mrs. Gore, known to all as Miz Pauline, was having a bad day. And her family and friends say she has been completely attuned to her son's campaign in recent weeks and is thrilled to be attending the Democratic National Convention. While Mrs. Gore is no longer strong enough to wage the kind of cross-country campaign she undertook during her son's 1988 race for president, she has not been content to sit idly at the farm. She speaks almost daily to Mr. Gore -- three times on the day of the New Hampshire primary -- and watches the Sunday political talk shows, making mental note of who says anything nasty about her boy. She attends Democratic events around Tennessee, took a prime seat at the unveiling of the Gore-Lieberman ticket in Nashville last week and has made numerous unscheduled visits to the campaign headquarters there. ''She says, 'I just had to come check on you,' '' said Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore's campaign manager. ''She wants to talk to the strategists and the lawyers. She wants to know who everybody is, where they're from. And she reassures us that Al Gore is going to win.'' Many who know Mrs. Gore well say  politics has been her tonic. Mrs. Gore has long been considered the most astute political mind in the family, a pragmatic strategist who continues to embrace the old-fashioned notion that politics can be personal. ''She recognizes in this wonderful, sort of uniquely feminine way how the human interaction in relationships are vital to social change,'' Ms. Schiff said. ''She has been a hostess in many ways throughout my family's political life, but a hostess with real power and insight.'' It was always Mrs. Gore who spent the days before an election with long lists of phone numbers, calling preachers, friends and elected officials to encourage them to get out the vote. Just last Sunday, she went after church to the City Cafe in Carthage and campaigned for Mr. Gore at every table on the way out. Those who know the Gores well say the son drew more of his temperament from her than from the blustery father he followed into the House and the Senate. Both mother and son, they say, are reserved. Above all, Mr. Gore seems to have drawn strength and confidence from her enduring presence. ''She has given him the courage, the intellect, the background and the confidence that comes from a strong family,'' said Peter Knight, a former aide to Mr. Gore. ''He always knew they'd be behind him, and you have to have that confidence when you're running for president of the United States.''
 Of the major network sites, only ABC continued to cling to the convention as its lead item, offering the insight that, yes, now is the time for Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to introduce themselves to the American people. As John Tyson, one of the vice president's college roommates, described it to MSNBC this evening, the final two days of the convention will provide ''a good strong dose of Al Gore.'' Of the major network sites, only ABC continued to cling to the convention as its lead item, offering the insight that, yes, now is the time for Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut to introduce themselves to the American people. As John Tyson, one of the vice president's college roommates, described it to MSNBC this evening, the final two days of the convention will provide ''a good strong dose of Al Gore.'' That was the theme emphasized on every single one of the Web sites and by the cable anchors. Most often, it quickly led to the unanswerable question of whether Mr. Gore would be able to rise to the occasion and make himself appear sufficiently presidential to improve his poll numbers. Bring on the pundits! By evening, some of the sites (Fox and CBS) had finally come around to leading with their own Lieberman pieces. But the general lack of drama in Los Angeles was perhaps best exemplified by CNN's extensive coverage of the arrival of Mr. Gore's jet at Burbank Airport. For what seemed like hours, Air Force Two taxied down the runway and then sat on the tarmac, the camera focused on the dark, gaping doorway, waiting for someone, anyone, to emerge. David Carr, writing on Inside.com, had fun predicting how the major news outlets would cover the Democratic convention, day by day. Today's reports, he predicted, would center on the vice president's efforts to finish writing his acceptance speech. ''Every one of the major papers in America will buy into the transparent canard that Gore -- a man who does push-polling on his choice of neckwear -- is working the speech all by his lonesome, revising draft after draft deep into the night,'' Mr. Carr wrote.
 A GRACIOUS HOST -- On the day that her son would be nominated for president, Pauline LaFon Gore found herself surrounded by family, friends and admirers. PAGE A25
 Karenna Gore Schiff, daughter of Vice Pres Al Gore, seconds her father's nomination to be president, praising him for balancing family and government work (M) Karenna Gore Schiff, the candidate's daughter, tonight filled the role once played by governors, senators, former presidents and former first ladies by seconding her father's nomination to be president, praising him in remarks for balancing family and government work, and helping her with a dinosaur diorama after a long day of Congressional hearings. Karenna Gore Schiff, the candidate's daughter, tonight filled the role once played by governors, senators, former presidents and former first ladies by seconding her father's nomination to be president, praising him in remarks for balancing family and government work, and helping her with a dinosaur diorama after a long day of Congressional hearings. Today, if any purpose remains, it is to humanize and depoliticize. Two weeks ago in Philadelphia, the Texas Republican with the second most at stake in the election, Lt. Gov. Rick Perry, nominated his boss in less than a minute, ''Mr. Chairman and fellow delegates, I am proud to nominate the current governor of the great state of Texas and the next president of the United States -- George W. Bush.'' Tonight's presentations, a nomination by Tommy Lee Jones, Mr. Gore's Harvard roommate, and seconding speeches by Mrs. Schiff and Lois M. DeBerry, a Tennessee legislator, were personal reflections. Joe Andrew, national chairman of the Democratic Party, said they could answer an important question about Mr. Gore: ''What kind of decisions did you make before you were in government?'' Other speakers, he said, dealt with issues and Mr. Gore's record in government. Indeed they have, sometimes with a level of exaggeration that Mr. Gore himself would envy. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, for example, credited Mr. Gore with helping pass the children's health insurance legislation, when, in fact, Mr. Gore followed White House orders in May 1997, and disappeared, after promising Mr. Kennedy he would come to the Senate to break a tie. Tonight's speakers were chosen, Mr. Andrew said, to help America ''know Al Gore more as a person.'' The same assignment will fall Thursday to the candidate's wife, Tipper. Mr. Jones may have a political following, but only in Hollywood, and Mrs. Schiff and Mrs. Gore have none at all. But the Democrats, like the Republicans, are counting on their conventions as television shows, not as tools for party unity. And if there is one thing they fear more than a long speech, it is the disease of dissent. Mr. Bush's campaign officials not only thwarted debate about abortion, but they also deemed it destructive to let delegates debate whether to make Republican National Committee members automatic delegates.
 Vice Pres Al Gore is nominated for president at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles after running mate Sen Joseph Lieberman addresses convention with forceful appeal on his behalf and with muted rebuke of Gov George W Bush; Lieberman tells convention Gore is man of courage and conviction who believes in service to America; says Democrats will expand nation's economic prosperity while Republicans will squander it; draws enthusiastic support from delegates and efforts to reassure African Americans seems to have met with some success; other high points of speech noted; photos (M) Albert Arnold Gore Jr., who steadfastly served as vice president through an often tumultuous eight years, was nominated for president tonight after his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, introduced himself to America with a forceful appeal on behalf of Mr. Gore and a muted rebuke of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Lieberman, whose selection as Mr. Gore's running mate made him the first Jew on a major party ticket, delivered a personal testament to the vice president, saying they were so close that they prayed together. Albert Arnold Gore Jr., who steadfastly served as vice president through an often tumultuous eight years, was nominated for president tonight after his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, introduced himself to America with a forceful appeal on behalf of Mr. Gore and a muted rebuke of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Lieberman, whose selection as Mr. Gore's running mate made him the first Jew on a major party ticket, delivered a personal testament to the vice president, saying they were so close that they prayed together. ''Al Gore is a man of courage and conviction,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''He believes in service to America. He volunteered for Vietnam. Together, we crossed party lines to support the Gulf war. I was there in the room when I heard him forcefully argue that America's principles and interests were at stake in Bosnia and Kosovo. That wasn't easy. He had the guts to do it.'' [Excerpts, Page A26.] In the ceremonial, but joyous, roll-call of states to ratify Mr. Gore's nomination, Florida put him over the top just before midnight E.D.T., surpassing the 2,170 votes needed for the nomination. The Democrats were signaling their intention to make Florida a battleground in November. Shortly before the actual vote, the hall exploded in chants of ''We want Gore!'' when the vice president, unannounced, stepped briskly on stage from a submerged stairway to embrace his eldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, after she seconded his nomination with a personal testament to her father. After waving to the roars of the more than 4,000 delegates, the Vice President strolled off stage with his daughter. The address by Mr. Lieberman, who will formally be nominated on Thursday, was one of the most anticipated, and consequential, moments of the four-night convention. The Gore campaign has counted on the senator to electrify the ticket of a standard bearer who has struggled to galvanize even loyal Democratic voters. Another reason for all the interest in Mr. Lieberman -- who was introduced by his wife, Hadassah, tonight as ''just a regular Joe'' -- is that when he was plucked by Mr. Gore eight days ago he was virtually unknown beyond his home state of Connecticut. Though he has been a senator for 12 years, Mr. Lieberman, who is 58, is not nearly as tested on the national stage as Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, who had served as a Congressman, White House chief of staff and secretary of defense. Mr. Lieberman dutifully took on Mr. Bush and the Republicans, but without the hard edge of Mr. Cheney, who in his own acceptance speech two weeks ago at the Republican convention in Philadelphia bitterly ridiculed Mr. Gore and President Clinton. Beyond telling his story, Mr. Lieberman drew contrasts between his party and the Republicans. And he skipped over the fact that he is viewed as hewing to more moderate positions on a range of issues than Mr. Gore. Mr. Lieberman, who had not been widely viewed by most Democrats as a likely choice for Mr. Gore still seemed a bit fazed by his newfound celebrity and, perhaps, that Mr. Gore dared to pick a Jew. As he put it in his opening line, ''Is America a great country or what?'' Before the program opened, Mr. Gore arrived here triumphantly, stepping off Air Force Two for a rally at the Burbank airport with Mr. Lieberman and their families. Only a day after President Clinton embraced Mr. Gore in Monroe, Mich., as the inheritor of his political legacy, the vice president moved to strike out on his own. ''In every generation, we have to make the hard choices between one direction or another, between going back to the past or forward to the future,'' Mr. Gore declared. ''Let others argue the case for the old guard.  We're the new guard, and we're going to bring positive change to the United States of America.'' Even if manufactured, the suspense today was inside the Staples Center. While Mr. Gore claimed enough delegates to put him over the top five months ago, this remained a night of triumph -- and, at long last, emergence -- for him. He represented Tennessee in the House for nine years and the Senate for eight years, but has been best known for his eight years of service to President Clinton. Despite Mr. Gore's often grueling primary race against Bill Bradley and his high-profile assignments from Mr. Clinton, like running a program to streamline the federal government, the vice president remains a bit of a mystery to the electorate. It has become almost a cliche for people to describe Mr. Gore as remote and hard to warm to. But Ms. Schiff, one of Mr. Gore's closest political advisers, sought to alter that perception by describing a sweet and conscientious Al Gore that the public does not know. ''When my dad was a Congressman, he listed our number in the phone book in Carthage so the people he worked for could always reach him,'' Ms. Schiff said, seconding Mr. Gore's nomination. ''During my summers on the farm, I would answer the phone, and it would often be a constituent who needed help getting his veterans' benefits, or finding the right health care. I was taught to run -- not walk -- to get my dad so that people wouldn't be kept waiting for a moment.'' Mr. Gore's name was put in nomination by Tommy Lee Jones, the actor who was one of his roommates at Harvard. Mr. Jones also tried to warm up Mr. Gore's image by attesting to the Gores' relationship, ''To this day,'' he said, ''when they come to our house, they sit in each other's laps. They hold hands. They even smooch occasionally -- like the kids they have always been.'' Robert Rubin, a treasury secretary under Mr. Clinton, saluted Mr. Gore for his help in ensuring a vibrant economy. ''I worked with Al Gore for six and a half years,'' he said. ''And he was a powerful and effective force in all of the major economic policy decisions that contributed so critically to this record. I was there.'' In the short term, at least, Mr. Lieberman brought the Democrats a wave of favorable publicity in the days leading to the convention. By turning to Mr. Lieberman, the first Democratic senator to aggressively repudiate President Clinton for his affair with a White House intern, Mr. Gore underscored his determination to shed the shadow of Mr. Clinton. Vice President Al Gore will deliver his acceptance speech to the Democratic National Convention about 10 tonight. It will be carried live on ABC, CBS, CNN, C-Span, Fox News Channel, MSNBC, NBC, NY1 and PBS.
 Zach Exley, the network's collaborator on a parody George W. Bush Web site that drew complaints from the Bush campaign, said he had never met any of the three in person.
 Deepak Chopra letter disputes James Atlas's August 7 Op-Ed article on Vice Pres Al Gore's reading habits James Atlas, in his Aug. 7 Op-Ed article about Al Gore's reading habits, says one of Mr. Gore's ''new favorites is 'The Marriage of Sense and Soul,' by Ken Wilber, a disciple of Deepak Chopra.'' James Atlas, in his Aug. 7 Op-Ed article about Al Gore's reading habits, says one of Mr. Gore's ''new favorites is 'The Marriage of Sense and Soul,' by Ken Wilber, a disciple of Deepak Chopra.''
 News analysis: Sen Joseph I Lieberman, hastily retooled to exigencies of a national campaign, takes stage at Democratic convention and follows what are apparently current rules of vice-presidential candidacy--praise your master and mute your own views; speech bypasses mention of any issue that might highlight Lieberman and Gore's differences as Democrats strive for ideological identity (M) No advocacy of school vouchers or the partial privatization of Social Security, no criticism of affirmative action. No ragged policy edges that might keep the party's core voters from supporting Al Gore. Nothing that might highlight the candidates' differences rather than their agreements. No advocacy of school vouchers or the partial privatization of Social Security, no criticism of affirmative action. No ragged policy edges that might keep the party's core voters from supporting Al Gore. Nothing that might highlight the candidates' differences rather than their agreements. ''I've known Al Gore for 15 years,'' Senator Lieberman assured the delegates to the Democratic National convention here. ''I know his record and his heart. I know him as a public servant and I know what it is like to sit with him around the dining room table. We have discussed -- sometimes even debated -- policy issues.  And we have shared private moments of prayer.'' But any new proposals will have to come from Mr. Gore himself on Thursday night. For his part, Mr. Lieberman delved even less into the nitty-gritty than did Dick Cheney, his Republican opponent, at the Republican convention. Bill Clinton was a master at reconciling differences among Democrats of varying stripes. But as William J. Daley, the chairman of the Gore campaign, noted the other day, wearing his best Buster Keaton deadpan, ''Clinton is not on the ticket this year.'' And Mr. Gore has trouble enough with the party's base -- blacks and labor and others who have stood behind it for decades --  without getting into more because of Mr. Lieberman's views. Mr. Gore has a bit of a reputation for flip-flopping and corner-cutting on issues like abortion and trade.  Former Senator Bill Bradley, Mr. Gore's primary opponent, accused him in January of ''using words in a very tricky manner,'' and Gov. George W. Bush, his opponent in the general election, mocked him for having voted one way on guns in the 1980's and another in the 1990's, adding: ''When it's convenient politically, he changes his tune.'' Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman began attacking that problem when they visited the vice president's hometown, Carthage, Tenn., almost a week ago. ''Believe me,'' Mr. Lieberman said, ''when President Gore decides, Vice President Lieberman will support him wholeheartedly.'' This year, ideological identity is the real goal for the Democratic ticket, much as the party may have flaunted its ideological diversity in its ''Liberals' Corner'' on Tuesday night. Vice President Al Gore not only selected someone from roughly the same segment of the party --  both have been stalwarts of the centrist Democratic Leadership Conference -- but he and his aides also sought to make sure that Mr. Lieberman fell into line on all the major issues. That took some doing, because on some questions, his position was a bit to the right of Mr. Gore's. Not that Mr. Lieberman is a right-winger, or anything resembling one. He may have had doubts about affirmative action, for example, but he will be the first person ever on a national ticket who went to Mississippi to show racial solidarity in the dark days of 1963. And tonight, in a bid to reassure blacks and other liberals, he had this to say: ''It's not just the size of our national feast that is important, no, but the number of people we can fit around the table. There must be room for everybody.'' Those words were directly from an Al Gore speech. But consider the matter of vouchers issued to parents by the federal government, to be used to pay their children's tuition. In his time as Connecticut's junior senator, Mr. Lieberman sponsored legislation establishing experimental programs for vouchers. He voted for such programs on at least four occasions. But vouchers are anathema to the American Federation of Teachers and the 2.5 million-member National Education Association, a pair of powerhouses that are expected to pour money and energy into the Gore campaign this fall. What to do? After he was chosen by Mr. Gore, according to a report in The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Lieberman called Sandra Feldman, the leader of the teachers' federation, and promised that a Gore-Lieberman administration would be resolutely anti-voucher. Statements like that helped to win Mr. Lieberman a reputation as one of the least partisan, most civil and most thoughtful members of Congress. But not among African-Americans, one of the groups Mr. Gore must count upon. Similarly he has backed away from the idea of allocating some percentage of Social Security funds for investment by individuals, a proposal at the heart of the Bush campaign. In an interview in 1998 with the Copley News Service, Mr. Lieberman said, ''I think in the end that individual control of part of the retirement-Social Security funds has to happen.'' Mr. Gore stoutly opposes that. But almost immediately after he was chosen by Mr. Gore, the senator released an unpublished op-ed article entitled, ''My Private Journey Away from Privatization,'' cleared first by the Gore campaign. In it, he said that the promises and the numbers supporting the proposal ''don't add up.''
 Dear friends, 10 days ago, with courage and with friendship, Al Gore asked me to be his running mate. And I don't have to tell you that this has been a most extraordinary week for my family and me. . . . We see the environment through a different set of eyes. For more than 20 years Al Gore has been a leader in protecting our environment. We know that health care is one of the most important problems facing America's family today. We believe that medical decisions should be made by doctors, not bureaucrats. We believe that senior citizens should not be stopped from filling a prescription in this great country of ours because they can't afford to pay for it. And I tell you tonight that Al Gore and I are the only candidates in this race who will extend access to health care coverage to every single child in America. Yes we will. And let me say one other thing about the difference between our parties in this election. This party will reform our campaign finance laws, because it's only Al Gore and not George Bush who will send the McCain-Feingold bill to Congress and sign it when it's passed. Now let me just speak to those of you at home who have not made up your mind yet about how you're going to vote in this election. And I hope you'll think of it this way: if you want to build on our prosperity, if you want progress not partisanship in Washington, if you want to reform the system and not retreat from the problems, then I respectfully say to you, your choice is clear. Al Gore and I are the guys who are ready to do the job. . . . Al Gore is also a man of courage and conviction. He believes in service to America. He volunteered for Vietnam. America, you know better than that. Our fighting men and women are the best-trained, best-equipped, most powerful fighting force in the history of the world, and they will stay that way when Al Gore and I are elected. You can count on it. And Al Gore is also a man of vision and a man of values. For his entire career, Al Gore's values have guided the way he meets the challenges that lie ahead. That's why I hope you will conclude, you at home, as I have, that for his honesty, for his strength, for his integrity and for his character, Al Gore must become the next president of the United States.
 Poll of CIO Magazine executives show 28 percent favor Vice Pres Al Gore and his running mate, Joseph Lieberman, while 46 percent prefer Gov George W Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney (S) The statistical validity of the findings is clearly open to question, but there appears to be sobering news for Al Gore in CIO Magazine's latest quarterly poll of information technology executives. Among the executives who attended a conference the magazine sponsored in February, 24 percent favored Mr. Gore and just 16 percent endorsed George W. Bush. Among those attending a conference in San Diego this week, though, the Gore/Lieberman ticket was favored by 28 percent, while 46 percent preferred Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney. The statistical validity of the findings is clearly open to question, but there appears to be sobering news for Al Gore in CIO Magazine's latest quarterly poll of information technology executives. Among the executives who attended a conference the magazine sponsored in February, 24 percent favored Mr. Gore and just 16 percent endorsed George W. Bush. Among those attending a conference in San Diego this week, though, the Gore/Lieberman ticket was favored by 28 percent, while 46 percent preferred Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney.
 That was just one of a string of borscht belt lines that Senator Lieberman has delivered in recent days. At a meeting of 200 Hispanic Democrats today, he said he was thrilled when Vice President Al Gore made that special phone call last week. But  he added, ''I'll be honest with you: I'd be excited if just about anybody else called.'' At another point today, Mr. Lieberman welcomed Al and Tipper Gore  to the convention, meeting them at Burbank Airport with a twist on Ronald Reagan's old standby line. ''I've been waiting for a week to say this,'' Mr. Lieberman began, ''and I can't control myself anymore. In this election, will you help me win one for the Tipper?''
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore must deliver acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles that clearly defines his vision for country and that overcomes widespread perception that Gov George W Bush is more likeable (M) Al Gore has two big problems  Bill Clinton and Al Gore. Al Gore has two big problems  Bill Clinton and Al Gore. ''People still don't feel they really know Al Gore, and that's hurting him,'' said a Democratic delegate, her face a study in disappointment. ''They think they know Clinton but Gore comes off as inauthentic. Only he can change that.'' Moreover, most voters appear to agree with Mr. Gore on most of the big issues in this year's election, largely supporting his approach on such matters as health care, Social Security, taxes and the way to handle the federal budget surplus. Polls have shown that a majority of voters also believe Mr. Gore is better prepared to be president than George W. Bush in terms of his intellectual capacity, command of the issues and experience. And yet the vice president has trailed Mr. Bush in poll after poll, sometimes by wide margins. And the lack of enthusiasm for Mr. Gore from groups that traditionally are among the Democrats' strongest supporters, notably blacks and labor unions, is both palpable and potentially devastating. Bill Clinton is a problem because the Gore folks both need him and wish he would go away. The vice president would like to bask in the sunshine of Mr. Clinton's accomplishments, even as he worries about getting lost in the president's shadow. He also worries about the dangers of Clinton fatigue. But the bigger, tougher problem is Al Gore himself. Interviews this week with staunch Democrats who are fervent in their desire to see him become president have shown a deep concern that Mr. Gore's strengths when it comes to issues and experience may be trumped by the widespread perception that Mr. Bush is more likable. The feeling generally was that Mr. Gore's public persona and communications skills had not markedly improved over the course of the campaign. There was a hunger among most of the people I talked with for the vice president to become less guarded and more spontaneous in his public appearances. Robert Kayyem, a Los Angeles venture capitalist, was one of about 1,400 people who attended a Clinton fund-raiser over the weekend. When Mr. Clinton spoke, he said, ''the other 1,399 people disappeared and it was as if the president had put his hands on my shoulders and was talking directly to me. Too often, Gore is just giving you boilerplate. He needs to speak with a certain genuineness of tone, which has been lacking. And I think he has to take some risks with his viewpoints and opinions.'' Loren Rothschild, the owner of an investment fund and a supporter of Mr. Gore, agreed that the vice president's personality was problematic. But he remained optimistic. ''Not everyone can be Bill Clinton or Franklin Roosevelt or John Kennedy,'' he said. ''But it seems to me the Democrats have the issues -- on choice, on gun control, on the economy. And I think when people look at those issues they'll vote for the Democrats.'' Tonight's the night for Mr. Gore. With much of the nation watching -- both critically and expectantly -- he will give his acceptance speech. It may not be fair to compare him to Mr. Clinton, who was blessed with extraordinary political skills, or to suggest that it is not enough for Mr. Gore to be better prepared and better qualified than Mr. Bush. It was a Democrat, after all, John Kennedy, who liked to point out that life is not fair. Leadership is as important as competence in a president. The American people must be convinced that Al Gore is capable of defining a vision for the country and then rallying the forces necessary to realize that vision. And after Bill Clinton, they especially need a president they know is being straight with them. Al Gore should let it rip tonight. The real Al Gore. Because if a phony shows up at that podium, this election is over.
 Film director Spike Jonze is completing campaign video profiling Vice Pres Al Gore; photo; Los Angeles civic and financial leader Eli Broad has accused entertainment mogul David Geffen of backing out of financial commitments to Democratic National Convention; third night of Democratic convention will focus on Al Gore's military service; Repr Loretta Sanchez's fund-raiser for Hispanic lawmakers is success, despite not being held at Playboy Mansion (Los Angeles Diary) (M) Spike Jonze, the 29-year-old director of ''Being John Malkovich'' and one of the coolest filmmakers in Hollywood, picked up the phone several weeks ago and got what he called one of the biggest surprises of his life. The Gore campaign asked him to fly to Nashville and hang out with Vice President Al Gore and his family,  and then make a movie about the Gores for the campaign. Mr. Gore, whose supporters include such directors as Steven Spielberg, Sydney Pollack and Rob Reiner, could have probably called on any filmmaker in Hollywood. But one of Mr. Gore's favorite films in recent years is ''Being John Malkovich,'' which was praised by critics as one of the most original and offbeat movies in years. Spike Jonze, the 29-year-old director of ''Being John Malkovich'' and one of the coolest filmmakers in Hollywood, picked up the phone several weeks ago and got what he called one of the biggest surprises of his life. The Gore campaign asked him to fly to Nashville and hang out with Vice President Al Gore and his family,  and then make a movie about the Gores for the campaign. Mr. Gore, whose supporters include such directors as Steven Spielberg, Sydney Pollack and Rob Reiner, could have probably called on any filmmaker in Hollywood. But one of Mr. Gore's favorite films in recent years is ''Being John Malkovich,'' which was praised by critics as one of the most original and offbeat movies in years. The film has jagged MTV-style editing. It is an affectionate portrait of a relaxed and laughing Mr. Gore at his family's farm, at the dinner table with his wife and daughters, deciding what film to watch on video, swimming in heavy surf at the beach and riding on a military helicopter. In the film, Mr. Gore joked on Air Force Two about his reputation as an uptight politician, pointing to his  wife, Tipper, who is barefoot. ''She insists on going barefoot -- it completely messes up my image,'' he said. Tipper Gore cheerfully replied: ''That's my job.'' Mr. Gore even kidded about his role as vice president. ''The guy standing motionless on stage behind the president -- what the hell makes him think he can be president?'' Mr. Gore joked at one point. Vietnam. Thirty years ago the Democratic Party tried to forget the war that began in the administration of John F. Kennedy and reached its peak in the Lyndon B. Johnson years. But the convention here is raising the Vietnam issue -- specifically who served there, and who didn't -- in an effort to contrast Vice President Gore, who served near Saigon, with his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. On Wednesday, two Democratic senators and combat veterans wounded in Vietnam, Senator Max Cleland of Georgia and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, were given prominent speaking roles. Tonight, several Vietnam veterans will introduce Mr. Gore, who served in the military for two years and in Vietnam as an Army reporter. By contrast, Mr. Bush served in the Air National Guard and was not called to Vietnam. Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, used deferments to avoid being drafted. And Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democratic vice presidential candidate, also used deferments first as a student and later as a parent. Mr. Lieberman has said that he has ''felt some remorse'' about not serving. Even without the Playboy mansion, Representative Loretta Sanchez's fund-raising bash for Hispanic lawmakers was hopping on Tuesday night. Ms. Sanchez, a California Democrat, had been pressured by party leaders to drop the Playboy Mansion as the spot for her blast, even though Mr. Gore himself has accepted money from Hugh Hefner, the founder of Playboy. The Democratic National Committee feared the Playboy party would be a public relations debacle and run counter to the Democrats' attempts to portray themselves as the party of family values. In the end, the party seemed most of all a huge public relations coup for Ms. Sanchez, who held forth in a plunging black gown and upswept hair as a hundred reporters and television crews recorded her every word at B. B. King's Blues Club at Universal Studio's City Walk, the new site of the party. ''Al Gore has accepted money from Playboy,'' Ms. Sanchez said pointedly. ''And he would have to give you his reasons as to what he's done with that money and where it goes and why he takes it.''
 William Safire Op-Ed column recognizing leadership qualities of Vice Pres Al Gore, notably understanding of foreign affairs, which he says has been glossed over at Democratic National Convention In his you-never-had-it-so-good stemwinder the other night, Bill Clinton twice deftly stepped on applause lines for Joe Lieberman. Concentered all in self, the reluctantly departing president failed to impart a single behind-the-scenes anecdote to dramatize the leadership qualities of his loyal sidekick, Al Gore. Thus it falls to a scandalmonger who has relentlessly castigated the vice president for his fund-raising excesses to provide a behind-the-scenes glimpse of Al and Tipper Gore under pressure. In his you-never-had-it-so-good stemwinder the other night, Bill Clinton twice deftly stepped on applause lines for Joe Lieberman. Concentered all in self, the reluctantly departing president failed to impart a single behind-the-scenes anecdote to dramatize the leadership qualities of his loyal sidekick, Al Gore. Thus it falls to a scandalmonger who has relentlessly castigated the vice president for his fund-raising excesses to provide a behind-the-scenes glimpse of Al and Tipper Gore under pressure. I slipped up toward the front cabin, eager to witness Gore make this command decision. Through a slit in the curtain, I could see and hear arguments presented: Oil-rich Kazakhstan, which could be wooed further away from Russia, might be put off by American queasiness about landing. Diplomats fretted. The gutsy pilot thought he could make it on another try. Gore glanced toward Tipper. Arms folded, she almost imperceptibly shook her head. I thought: Sensible woman. That struck me as leadership in action. Gore's creative audible-calling demonstrated a wise willingness in a tight spot to listen to the cautious counsel of his wife.
 Is laying off thousands of employees so that they can subsidize the obscene salaries of America's chief executives the sort of ''compassionate conservatism'' that the Bush-Cheney ticket has in mind for this country?
 Television coverage of the somewhat disorganized and late-running Democratic National Convention seems to be playing to advantage of Vice Pres Al Gore, if not necessarily to Democratic Party at large; photo (M) At first glance, things might seem not to have gone particularly well for the organizers of Al Gore's Democratic convention these past few days. At first glance, things might seem not to have gone particularly well for the organizers of Al Gore's Democratic convention these past few days. There were a few grumblings -- outside the Gore campaign -- among senior Democrats tonight about the evident absence of discipline. But in part because of planning -- and in part, one top Democratic official acknowledged tonight, because of sheer luck -- the management of the spectacle and the media in the Democratic convention seems to be playing, if in slightly messy ways, to the advantage of Mr. Gore, if not necessarily to the Democratic Party at large. Yes, the keynote speaker did not take the stage until nearly 11 p.m.,  Eastern time, on Tuesday. But for days, aides to Mr. Gore have said that the last thing they wanted voters to pay attention to that night was what was taking place on the stage here. The voters' attention was supposed to have been focused on Mr. Gore meeting President Clinton in Michigan -- and Mr. Clinton leaving the stage. If that drew little attention from the general public, Mr. Gore's centrist Democratic aides said, all the better. ''It's check the box day,'' one of Mr. Gore's aides said. But even as Mr. Clinton's aides were described as frantic over the clock as they waited for Mr. Clinton to go on to the podium, Mr. Gore's aides were sanguine, confident that viewers would hang in for Mr. Clinton's last pitch. And the fact is that while inefficiency might have served the Democrats well these first two nights -- or at least not hurt the party -- things began to change this evening with the first part of what Mr. Gore's aides view as the only truly meaningful nights of this week. The first was tonight, when Mr. Gore was nominated by his daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, and introduced by a biographical film, directed by Spike Jonze, all designed to splash some color to Mr. Gore's gray outlines. Mr. Lieberman made it on stage tonight right in the middle of prime time, walking out at 10:07 p.m., and Mr. Gore's unannounced appearance after his daughter nominated him took place at 11 p.m. sharp. The second night that matters is Thursday, when Mr. Gore delivers his acceptance speech. One of Mr. Gore's aides said flatly tonight that that would happen by 10:15 sharp. (A few minutes later, this adviser amended his advisory: ''Or maybe a few minutes after that.'' In some measure, the lax organization serves neither Mr. Gore nor his party. One of Mr. Gore's senior aides tonight said that Mr. Clinton would draw an audience no matter how late he spoke, within reason. Another Democrat outside the campaign described it as a ''critical mistake,'' adding, ''It is unconscionable that one of the greatest political speeches you and I have ever heard went on until 11:40.'' The situation was no different on Tuesday, when the proceedings loped on till midnight. The only event that Mr. Gore's aides really cared about was the speech by Caroline Kennedy,  an event so unusual that they assumed that viewers would tune in or, if not, it would receive abundant coverage on the late news. Mr. Gore's advisers -- some of whom admitted they hadn't even bothered watching the convention -- said they were less than distressed that speakers like Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Jesse L. Jackson and Bill Bradley might not have escaped the notice of most American viewers. NBC News did not even broadcast that night, a decision that Mr. Gore's advisers did not quarrel with. The prime time network television audience for the convention, though strong on Monday night, when President Clinton spoke, had died down considerably by Tuesday, according to Nielsen Media Research.
 Mr. Cheney's contract with Halliburton gave him the right to retire after he reached age 62, but the board chose to waive that provision for Mr. Cheney, 59, the former secretary of defense. Had the board not done so, he would have forfeited options to buy 400,000 shares as well as 140,000 shares of restricted stock. Mr. Morris said the company calculated the value of the shares based on the assumption that they were all sold at a price of $42.25, the closing value on July 25, the day after Mr. Cheney was chosen as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate.
 Since the celebration of the 10th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall last year, when Mr. Kohl took center-stage along with with George Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the former chancellor has suffered an astonishing fall from grace. Precipitated by a party financing scandal, his eclipse seems to have left the Christian Democrats rudderless.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman continues his efforts to win full support of Democratic Party's liberal wing with visits to gay and lesbian, Hispanic and Asian Pacific Islander caucuses; at same time, Rev Jesse Jackson meets with New York delegation to praise inclusiveness of Vice Pres Al Gore's selection of Jewish running mate Joseph Lieberman (M) And at nearly the same time, Mr. Jackson told New York delegates that Vice President Al Gore's selection of Mr. Lieberman as his running mate was a bold expression of affirmative action. Mr. Gore, he said, ''broke the quota of zero to make sure an American Jew would be on the ticket.'' Mr. Jackson appeared as delegates here were buzzing about an editorial in The Amsterdam News, the major black newspaper in New York City, suggesting that Mr. Gore had selected Mr. Lieberman as a way of currying favor from Jewish contributors. ''I must say,'' he told the Asian Pacific Islanders caucus of the Democratic National Committee, ''that when I look out on this room I see the faces of my grandparents and my parents, and I see the story of America. What a remarkable turn of events to find Al Gore to have had the courage to break the barrier he did by picking me. But if Mr. Lieberman was anxious to solidify his relationships with these groups, they, too, seemed ready to embrace the Gore-Lieberman ticket. He received enthusiastic receptions from all three caucuses. Members of the Asian group stood and chanted ''We want Joe.'' During his meeting with the gay and lesbian caucus, a man yelled ''We love you, Joe.'' The Hispanic caucus cheered him wildly and some members held up signs that read, "Viva Gore-Lieberman.'' In recent days, Mr. Lieberman has pledged not to engage in harsh, partisan attacks against the Republican Party, and today he largely abided by that promise. He barely mentioned the Republican nominees, George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. ''Some of my best friends are Republicans,'' he quipped at one point. In an interview on Tuesday, Mr. Lieberman said that part of his job as a running mate included reintroducing Mr. Gore to the electorate. Today, he worked hard at fulfilling that role. He described their 12-year friendship, and recalled how they have often talked, argued and prayed together. ''I love this man,'' he told the Hispanic caucus. ''I believe in Al Gore,'' he told the Asian caucus. Again and again, he described his selection as a window into Mr. Gore's values and character. ''Al Gore said more about himself, his trust in the American people, than he did about me.''
 David A Bositis Op-Ed article says Sen Joseph Lieberman, of all candidates mentioned as Vice Pres Al Gore's vice presidential running mate, is one least likely to appeal to African-Americans and that it is hard to image that his selection will galvanize blacks to vote; notes Lieberman is not supporter of affirmative action, and carries with him implicit repudiation of Bill Clinton--first President to fully embrace black America; drawing (M) At the Democratic convention this week, good manners reign supreme. Despite many doubts, most African-American delegates are supporting Al Gore's choice for a running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman. Even Maxine Waters, the outspoken congresswoman from California, has announced that after talking to Mr. Lieberman about his views on affirmative action, she is now on board. But outward party unity doesn't mean that internal fissures have disappeared. Indeed, the selection of Mr. Lieberman points to some real differences between Mr. Gore and black Democrats. And these differences are important to his chances in November. At the Democratic convention this week, good manners reign supreme. Despite many doubts, most African-American delegates are supporting Al Gore's choice for a running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman. Even Maxine Waters, the outspoken congresswoman from California, has announced that after talking to Mr. Lieberman about his views on affirmative action, she is now on board. But outward party unity doesn't mean that internal fissures have disappeared. Indeed, the selection of Mr. Lieberman points to some real differences between Mr. Gore and black Democrats. And these differences are important to his chances in November. These states have significant numbers of black voters, who are reliably Democratic, that is, if they go to the polls. To win this election, Mr. Gore will have to ensure that black turnout is high. The problem? It's hard to imagine that his selection of Mr. Lieberman will galvanize them to vote. As a pollster and researcher who has long followed African-American politics, I know that of all the people mentioned as Mr. Gore's possible running mate, Mr. Lieberman was the one least likely to appeal to African-Americans. Mr. Lieberman's speech calling Mr. Clinton's actions immoral in the Monica Lewinsky scandal was widely praised. Indeed, after Mr. Lieberman was selected, this factor was cited favorably, and seen as helping Al Gore distance himself from the president. In the last eight years, African-Americans have gotten used to being taken seriously. They want that influence to continue, and are waiting for Mr. Gore to send a signal that it will. Unfortunately, his selection of Mr. Lieberman sends a different signal. Mr. Gore now finds himself in a position of having to assure black voters that they will have a real voice in his administration, that their concerns will be addressed. The pollsters can talk all they want about reaching out to swing voters. But Al Gore knows he cannot win without his party's most loyal voters.
 Oil would certainly become a presidential campaign issue if the price remained high, especially because of the connections to the oil industry of the Republican ticket of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney.
 Excerpts from Karenna Gore Schiff's remarks about her father, Vice Pres Al Gore, at Democratic National Convention (S) KARENNA GORE SCHIFF  Remarks last night about her father, Vice President Al Gore, at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles: KARENNA GORE SCHIFF  Remarks last night about her father, Vice President Al Gore, at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles:
 Joyce Purnick Metro Matters column discusses editorial written in Amsterdam News, oldest black weekly in New York City, by editor emeritus Wilbert A Tatum that stated that Al Gore selected Sen Joseph Lieberman as his running mate to attract Jewish money; contends that rehashing of old prejudices by editorial should not be ignored (M) But it does matter that the oldest black weekly in New York told its dwindling readership that Vice President Al Gore picked a Jewish running mate for the money. For the Jewish money. So states the editorial in the Aug. 10-16 issue of The Amsterdam News, written by Wilbert A. Tatum, publisher emeritus: ''Gore and his minions did it for the money.'' But it does matter that the oldest black weekly in New York told its dwindling readership that Vice President Al Gore picked a Jewish running mate for the money. For the Jewish money. So states the editorial in the Aug. 10-16 issue of The Amsterdam News, written by Wilbert A. Tatum, publisher emeritus: ''Gore and his minions did it for the money.'' There's more. ''The reasoning in the Gore camp went out all over the world to Jews of means: You've got to show me the money. When you do, one of yours will be given the second spot on the ticket. The word went out all over the world to Jews in every pocket of civilization and near-civilization, that the major protector of Jews in this world, the American government, is now available. But in order to get it, you've got to buy it.'' Perhaps Mr. Tatum was looking for attention. In a way, that would be better than if he really believes what he wrote. There are many many things wrong with Mr. Gore's fund-raising techniques, but the Tatum theory would be laughable if it wasn't so hurtful. His newspaper has little influence left. The latest official audit shows that the circulation of The Amsterdam News is down to 19,568 from 25,962 just two years ago. It was 58,907 in 1977. Mr. Gore obviously calculated that anti-Semitism was not a major political factor, or at least would be balanced in the election by what he saw as Mr. Lieberman's strengths. We won't know until November, since people lie in polls about race and religion, but clearly there are still problems. ''Gore, in a bold affirmative action, broke the quota of zero to make sure an American Jew would be on the ticket,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''That's what affirmative action is. It breaks the barriers of exclusion.''
 Sen John S McCain is diagnosed with two new sites of malignant melanoma, deadliest and most aggressive form of skin cancer; McCain cancels several campaign stops on behalf of Gov George W Bush in order to undergo further testing; photo (M) Mr. McCain, 63, who had been expected to campaign this fall for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in his presidential bid and for Republican Congressional candidates, will go ahead with a scheduled campaign appearance for Senator Mike DeWine in Ohio on Sunday. But Mr. McCain has canceled other campaign stops, including a few for House members in New Jersey, Ohio and Washington State. The skin growths were first detected during a routine examination on Aug. 2, his office said. He underwent biopsies at the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., the next day. That night he joined Governor Bush on stage after Mr. Bush accepted the Republican presidential nomination, and the next day, Aug. 4, Mr. McCain was told that the two spots were malignant. When Mr. McCain abruptly disappeared from the convention after his speech on Aug. 1, there were questions about his commitment to Mr. Bush, his one-time Republican primary rival. But Mr. McCain returned to the convention on Aug. 3, and then joined Mr. Bush on the campaign trail last Thursday, at which point he already knew he had been diagnosed with cancer. Last Saturday, Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, spent the night at Mr. McCain's Arizona ranch. ''We just came back from a visit to John and Cindy's home and our fondest thoughts are with him and his family,'' Mr. Bush said today in a statement. ''John is a good man and a fighter. He is in our prayers as he battles this illness.'' Vice President Al Gore also said he was praying for Mr. McCain's recovery. ''One thing about him is he is so courageous,'' Mr. Gore said.
 Ticket Is Set as Lieberman Sets the Stage for Gore  The Democratic National Convention nominated Al Gore for president, and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, introduced himself to the American voter on prime-time television with a forceful appeal on behalf of his old friend and a muted attack on the Republican nominee, George W. Bush. Mr. Gore tinkered with his speech, which he and his aides describe as a political self-portrait: heavy on personal biography, policy detail and a vision for the future, composed in his own hand and syntax. Editorials: What Joe Lieberman can do; a metropolis of poor children; Eleanor Randolph on Al Gore's speech preparations.  Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.
 The Nader advertisement takes Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore to task on the need for campaign finance reform, and for the exclusion of Mr. Nader from the presidential debates.
 Editorial says speech by Democratic vice presidential candidate Sen Joe Lieberman at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles was blend of personal reminiscences and condemnation of Republican policies and was forceful effort that cleared way for Vice Pres Gore's all-important address; says while he can help to establish aura of confidence around ticket, it is up to Gore to make impression on public and to walk out of shadow of Pres Clinton and waves of nostalgia that have washed over convention for days (M) It was a long time in coming, but last night Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut finally moved to center stage at the Democratic convention. Mr. Gore's arrival in Los Angeles and Mr. Lieberman's emotional speech accepting the vice-presidential nomination sought to move the party beyond its tributes to the Clinton era and to present a new ticket with its own agenda and less baggage. Mr. Lieberman's speech was a blend of personal reminiscence and condemnation of Republican policies on schools and health care. It was a forceful effort, clearing the way for Mr. Gore's all-important address tonight. The selection of Senator Lieberman has worked well for Mr. Gore, giving Mr. Gore credibility as a risk-taker and tightening the polls. Since it also  stirred a few concerns in parts of the Democratic base, Mr. Lieberman reached out to those groups in his speech. Addressing blacks and liberals worried about his record on affirmative action, he spoke of his family escaping tyranny in Europe and his lifelong fight against discrimination. ''That's why I continue to say, when it comes to affirmative action, mend it, don't end it,'' he declared. It was a long time in coming, but last night Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut finally moved to center stage at the Democratic convention. Mr. Gore's arrival in Los Angeles and Mr. Lieberman's emotional speech accepting the vice-presidential nomination sought to move the party beyond its tributes to the Clinton era and to present a new ticket with its own agenda and less baggage. Mr. Lieberman's speech was a blend of personal reminiscence and condemnation of Republican policies on schools and health care. It was a forceful effort, clearing the way for Mr. Gore's all-important address tonight. The selection of Senator Lieberman has worked well for Mr. Gore, giving Mr. Gore credibility as a risk-taker and tightening the polls. Since it also  stirred a few concerns in parts of the Democratic base, Mr. Lieberman reached out to those groups in his speech. Addressing blacks and liberals worried about his record on affirmative action, he spoke of his family escaping tyranny in Europe and his lifelong fight against discrimination. ''That's why I continue to say, when it comes to affirmative action, mend it, don't end it,'' he declared. Other traditional Democrats say they are worried about Mr. Lieberman's centrist philosophy challenging liberal orthodoxy on school vouchers and privatization of Social Security. In response, Mr. Lieberman offered a robust attack on Gov. George W. Bush's approach to government and spoke of the ''real differences'' with the G.O.P. nominees, whom he spoke of as ''decent and likable men.'' He also signaled the possibility of some tough oratory to come. In Philadelphia Mr. Bush had declared ''Don't mess with Texas,'' but Mr. Lieberman drew cheers last night when he declared that for all the Republican promises, Texas lagged seriously in health care and cleaning up the environment. Scoffing again at claims by the Bush campaign that he is actually closer to the Republicans, he declared, ''I'm glad the G.O.P. has changed their rhetoric, but I wish they would also change their policies.'' For all the warmth of their response, the delegates in the Staples arena know that a vice-presidential choice rarely makes a decisive difference. But a vice-presidential candidate can help establish an aura of confidence around a ticket. Mr. Gore's supporters can hope that the selection of Mr. Lieberman attests to the ability of their nominee to think originally, shatter the old barriers of prejudice and feel comfortable with challenging ideas. Mr. Lieberman spoke fervently of his long admiration for and friendship with Mr. Gore, as well as the ''private moments of prayer'' he had shared with him. But if Mr. Gore is to make an impression on the public this week and walk out of the shadow of Mr. Clinton and the waves of nostalgia that have washed over the convention since last weekend, that work still belongs mainly to one person. His turn will come tonight.
 As Al Gore tinkers with final version of his convention address, his speech has come together in what he and his aides describe as a political self-portrait: heavy on personal biography, policy detail and a vision for the future; photo (M) As Al Gore tinkers with the final version of his address to the nation, his speech has come together in what he and his aides describe as a political self-portrait: heavy on personal biography, policy detail and a vision for the future, all composed in his own hand and in his precise syntax. As Al Gore tinkers with the final version of his address to the nation, his speech has come together in what he and his aides describe as a political self-portrait: heavy on personal biography, policy detail and a vision for the future, all composed in his own hand and in his precise syntax. His aides emphasized that more than anything, Mr. Gore hoped to seize the moment and present himself as the leader of his party. This has been the plan all along, now that President Clinton has left the convention and the two staged a symbolic ''passing the torch'' ceremony in Michigan on Tuesday. ''This is his main chance to be the main guy,'' Carter Eskew, Mr. Gore's top media adviser, said. ''That's something he's been looking forward to for a long time.'' Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said, ''The scepter is in his hand.'' Mr. Gore suggested that he wanted to present a unifying vision of himself, connecting his policies with his life experiences. ''I hope that those who watch and listen will feel afterward that they have a clearer idea of exactly what I'm proposing to do,'' Mr. Gore told reporters. ''They'll also know how the ideas and proposals I'm making are rooted in the experiences that I've had. I'll give a few specific examples. I'll tell them why I feel as strongly as I do about the choices we have to make.'' Clearly buoyant, Mr. Gore held two rallies here today before watching his oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, 27, place his name in nomination at the convention. As he had in the last few days on the campaign trail, Mr. Gore, while he talked with reporters on his plane and at the rallies today, discussed his speech, saying it would be heavy on policy details. Aides said this was a deliberate counterpoint to criticism that Mr. Gore comes across as too cautious and calculating. ''In every generation we have to make the hard choices between one direction or another, between going back to the past or forward to the future,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Let others argue the case for the old guard. We're the new guard, and we're going to bring positive change to the United States of America.'' Mr. Eskew said that the speech describes differences with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival, but that it remains ''respectful.'' Mr. Gore said he began working on the speech two months ago, rewriting it with advice from Mr. Eskew and Bob Shrum, his top message and media advisers, and Eli Attie, his speechwriter. Mr. Gore has been tapping the speech out on a laptop computer and the aides have been exchanging copies of it by computer disk. President Clinton, by contrast, prefers to write longhand. Mr. Gore ''goes through a process where he gets a draft and looks at it and signs off on certain sections and zeroes in on things he wants to refine and tweak,'' Mr. Eskew said. Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, and their wives, Tipper and Hadassah, drove in a motorcade from the Burbank airport to the Warner Brothers studios, where they were greeted by convention delegations from Tennessee and Connecticut -- the ''home folks,'' as Mr. Gore called them. Noting that the television series, ''The West Wing,'' was produced on the lot, Mr. Lieberman said of Mr. Bush: ''The closest George Bush will get to the West Wing is a remote control!''
 Man in the News profile of Vice Pres Al Gore, nominated as presidential standard bearer by delegates at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; was born Albert Arnold Gore Jr in Washington, DC, on March 31, 1948; long career in politics discussed; photos (L) After Al Gore ran for president in 1988 and lost, just as he turned 40, he organized a series of dinners at which he went around the room asking each person to tell him where he had gone wrong. What hadn't he known? What hadn't he done? After Al Gore ran for president in 1988 and lost, just as he turned 40, he organized a series of dinners at which he went around the room asking each person to tell him where he had gone wrong. What hadn't he known? What hadn't he done? Mr. Gore responded, as he has at every critical moment of his life, by going back to school. He put together a graduate seminar for one, complete with a syllabus and a heavy-duty reading list, and applied himself to the serious study of tax policy and business history. He brought in a mathematician to explain chaos theory. And he hired a speech consultant and a dance coach -- ''a ballet type,'' he told one friend -- to help him move more fluidly. Politicians often learn from and are even transformed by a good drubbing at the polls, but few have pursued their lessons as aggressively as Mr. Gore. No one can say that the man who will accept the Democratic Party's nomination for the presidency tonight has not diligently  readied himself. Yet all this extensive preparation has not always shown in the Gore campaign, which until recently has seemed surprisingly unfocused, at least in part because Mr. Gore has been training to govern from a young age but has always shown mixed feelings about politics. Reinvention isn't all bad. In 1981, when Mr. Gore became concerned about where the cold war was headed, he turned himself into a bona fide arms-control expert in a single year by plunging into the arcana of a subject he had previously known next to nothing about. In the 1990's, he was out front in learning about issues no one else was paying much mind, like information technology and global warming. Yet this quality has been nothing but trouble in the current campaign. Much of the coverage has dwelled on Mr. Gore's small but symbolic personal alterations, like his new Palm Pilot and his switch from dark suits to earth tones. The changes themselves are insignificant, but resonate because they remind many people of his shifts on issues like gun control and abortion. It is the same story with Mr. Gore's work ethic -- something Americans profess to love. He was so determined to shoehorn extra work into his day as a senator that during weekends of back-to-back town hall meetings he would get himself booked in two places at the same time -- a trick that was possible, barely, because there are two time zones in Tennessee. Mr. Gore is someone who makes all his hard work look like . . . hard work. Lacking the smooth moves of either his boss, Bill Clinton, or his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, Mr. Gore is a plodder, who hopes to be a tortoise to Mr. Bush's hare. But there is more going on than raw effort. Mr. Gore's intellect and the willingness to use it are probably his most important assets. His Harvard mentor, the presidential scholar Richard Neustadt, has said that compared with American presidents in the last century, probably only Theodore Roosevelt had a keener mind. Mr. Gore's friends often see him as a visionary. His oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, said, ''He likes to ask, 'What's the assumption here? What if we subvert it?' and one of the things he could maybe do well if he wins the job is make new connections, like between the economy and the environment, and ask, 'What if we were the leading exporter of ways to clean up the environment?' '' Those are not the kind of connections that crowds thrill to, though. All Mr. Gore's intelligence and dexterity with facts do not necessarily help him sway the public with feeling -- something he knows all too well. One senior member of the Clinton administration says that the interesting thing about watching Mr. Gore in a meeting is the way he reasons deductively, rather than inductively, relying less than most other politicians on anecdotes and more on all that is known about a given topic. Again, this is both a strength and a failing. While he is able to analyze options dispassionately, he does not seem to understand fully how important human stories are in communicating about policy with the public. Mr. Gore is genuinely in love with the world of ideas, loves nothing more than a good back and forth about the multiverse, and apparently sees how fractal geometry might improve our lives. He seems to have quite a rich emotional life -- is clearly still over the moon for Tipper Gore, his wife of 30 years, and enviably close to their four children. By all accounts, he is someone who actually listens to his friends when they have had a bad day or a family problem. He is also big on small gestures, like having a neatly pressed, beautifully boxed $5 bill delivered to a consultant, Robert Shrum, in his London hotel room last year after losing a bet about whether another top aide, Carter Eskew, was planning to propose to his girlfriend. (Mr. Gore bet against true love and lost.) At 52, Albert Arnold Gore is without question a complicated man. He is a native of Washington, born there on March 31, 1948. And through his father, he met the men who ran the world. Senator Albert Gore was an up-from-nothing child of the Depression whose stands for civil rights and against the war in Vietnam were out of sync with his Tennessee constituents and lost him his seat in 1970. Yet young Al Gore had something of a double life even in the capital, where he attended elite St. Alban's prep school, but dressed in a cousin's hand-me-downs. He shared a bedroom with his sister, Nancy, who was 10 years older, in a four-room hotel suite because it was owned by a relative who gave his family a break on the rent. Some of his most deeply felt positions -- in support of both free trade and the labor unions, for example -- create political contradictions. And sometimes, he seems to be fighting himself as much as he is Mr. Bush. One knock against Mr. Gore is that he has not shown himself to be sufficiently human. But it may be that he has shown himself to be all too human, someone who does sweat the small stuff and is cursed with a level of self-awareness that does not appear to trouble Mr. Bush. Fireworks were planned, but they started badly. Mr. Gore had already turned to leave when they suddenly erupted into a splendid celestial spectacle. He wandered out onto the lawn, alone, for a better look. A decade ago, after his 6-year-old son ran into the street and was hit by a car right in front of him, Mr. Gore did what one friend called ''psychotherapy by correspondence course'' -- trying to puzzle through his life by reading and listening to personal development tapes. In it, the author describes how he developed anxiety attacks after his cruelly demanding father made him cut their lawn with a hand razor. It is impossible to read it without thinking of the summer that Mr. Gore's father put him through an equally pointless character-building exercise, making him clear 20 hilly acres with a hand ax. The job would have taken just a few hours with a bulldozer, as Mr. Gore's high school girlfriend in Tennessee, Donna Armistead, remembers it. ''One day I stopped by and he had got in a nest of hornets. The poor guy was eaten up, but it didn't matter,'' she said bitterly. ''His dad said it had to be done.'' Even now, amid the craziness of the campaign, Mr. Gore is a highly interior person, who can withdraw deep inside himself quite suddenly. He loved the dark, out-there movie ''Being John Malkovich.'' (Mr. Bush says the last movie he enjoyed in a theater was ''Forrest Gump.'') One relative describes Mr. Gore as ''very edgy'' in a business that does not award a lot of points for edge. Asked if Mr. Gore had seemed happy as a student at Harvard, where he was, after all, facing service in Vietnam, his mentor, Mr. Neustadt, said: ''I'd have called him an intellectually interested kid, a questioning, pondering kid. In social situations, he was pleasant and capable of enjoyment, but happy? There were always a lot of issues Al was concerned about morally. I wouldn't have called him happy.'' Yet he does not seem to suffer from a lack of confidence; this is a man who applied only to Harvard because it never occurred to him that he would not get in. When he became a reporter, he seems to have assumed he would follow in the footsteps of David Halberstam, a friend of his sister's, who had won a Pulitzer Prize. Mr. Gore ran for Congress at 28 and began mounting his first presidential campaign only 10 years later. Had he been elected, he would have been the youngest American president in history. Mr. Gore said in a recent interview about that time in his life: ''The statements made by Mayor Koch took me by surprise. I had no advance notice, was not happy about it and didn't handle it very well.'' Yet Mr. Gore himself had snidely knocked Mr. Jackson, saying the country was electing a president, not a preacher. Mr. Gore was soon overwhelmed with guilt, horrified in particular by the racial implications of the Koch-Jackson fight, something he should have known about before seeking an alliance with Mr. Koch. In the campaign's final days, Mr. Gore was asking Mr. Jackson's forgiveness almost every night. Mr. Gore had been a virtual grown-up since he was a child, expected to perform in the company of important adults. He had seen the nation's leaders up close, and had not been daunted. Not quite two years after he was elected to the Senate, the talk show host John McLaughlin said this in an interview: ''You've got the magical name -- Al Gore. Your father was in Congress for 32 years. You've got character, you've got no clay feet, no skeletons showing. You're intelligent. You're well-informed. You've got a Vietnam War record. You've been an investigative reporter, and you've got religious coloration, too. (Mr. Gore's answer, for the record: ''I don't know.'') Bill Clinton's impeachment and Mr. Gore's own role in the fund-raising scandals of recent years took care of that perception, of course. Mr. Gore was criticized for the fund-raising phone calls he made from the White House and his attendance at a fund-raiser at a Buddhist temple in Los Angeles in 1996. Mr. Gore's mother, Pauline LaFon Gore, who like her husband grew up poor and put herself through law school, has often been considered the political brains in the family. And on this occasion, she was adamant. ''She said he had bad moral character,'' Dr. Fleming said. ''She said, 'Bill Clinton is not a nice person. You shouldn't associate too closely with him.' '' Yet Mr. Gore went on the ticket with Mr. Clinton, he says, because he thought he could help: ''I thought I could make a difference, and maybe the difference.'' But the phrase also reflects an important truth about Mr. Gore. He was made responsible for his parents' hopes from an early age, and was raised not to let his family down. He often talks about his work and his life in a way that suggests he defines himself as someone people are depending on. ''He's trying to be a good night watchman,'' a relative of Mr. Gore's said. ''That's the kind of president he would be.'' Yet because of his ambivalence about politics, in some past races he has seemed focused only in the final stages of the campaign, on deadline, like the former news reporter he is. There is typically a last-minute flurry of ''new Al Gore'' stories, detailing his metamorphosis from lackluster to ''newly energized'' campaigner. And aides certainly hope they see that beginning now, as he bonds with his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. On Long Island the other day, Mr. Gore gave his own theory about the stories that begin, ''In yet another attempt to reinvent himself today. . . .'' He said reporters sensed that he was discarding the vice presidential voice of nearly eight years, and heard his newly presidential voice ''as trying to be something they don't think I am.''
 Eleanor Randolph's Editorial Notebook column on ways in which Vice Pres Al Gore can look and sound Presidential during acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles (M) Now comes the moment when Vice President Al Gore gives his big speech, and most knowledgeable Democrats have the good sense to be scared to death. Mr. Gore's best attributes do not shine past the teleprompter, and over the years, the microphone has not been his friend. Normally, advice on how to make a smashing acceptance speech does not come cheap. Who knows what it cost to wipe that smirk off Gov. George W. Bush's face in time for his big moment in Philadelphia? But we found a number of expert speechwriters, image makers and commentators willing and even eager to provide Mr. Gore with a few suggestions gratis. Perhaps they are like surgeons happy to be called in on a difficult case. It's also possible that the Republicans want to see Mr. Gore fail and the Democrats want to be able to say ''I told you so'' if he does. At any rate, here is a sampler of their advice: Now comes the moment when Vice President Al Gore gives his big speech, and most knowledgeable Democrats have the good sense to be scared to death. Mr. Gore's best attributes do not shine past the teleprompter, and over the years, the microphone has not been his friend. Normally, advice on how to make a smashing acceptance speech does not come cheap. Who knows what it cost to wipe that smirk off Gov. George W. Bush's face in time for his big moment in Philadelphia? But we found a number of expert speechwriters, image makers and commentators willing and even eager to provide Mr. Gore with a few suggestions gratis. Perhaps they are like surgeons happy to be called in on a difficult case. It's also possible that the Republicans want to see Mr. Gore fail and the Democrats want to be able to say ''I told you so'' if he does. At any rate, here is a sampler of their advice: Stuart Spencer, who was President Ronald Reagan's campaign strategist, believes Mr. Gore's team ''ought to calm him down a little.'' He explains: ''The first thing is not to run out to the podium like a kid at a high school basketball game. Don't high-five everybody. I laugh every time I see it. He skips, hops and jumps through the crowd. It's outrageously unpresidential.'' There are widely varying views on the notorious stiffness problem. Our Times colleague William Safire, who once wrote speeches for the notably unlimber Richard Nixon, suggests Mr. Gore could surprise people with a lighter touch. He recalled that the vice president demonstrated at this year's Gridiron dinner in Washington that he does a good job with self-deprecating humor. And finally Bill Maher, the host of ''Politically Incorrect,'' made this last-minute plea: ''Al Gore should examine the backgrounds of the delegates at the Democratic convention, and after realizing that they all have at least fourth-grade educations, not talk to them as if they don't.''
 Cindy Williams Op-Ed article on increasing pay gap between military personnel and civilian counterparts says Republican contention that Clinton administration has eroded America's defenses is misplaced noting when Pres Clinton took office pay gap was already 11.5 percent, all accumulated in Bush and Reagan presidencies (M) Democrats are saying this week in Los Angeles that the military is strong and fit, while campaigning Republicans contend that the Clinton administration has run America's defenses down. It's a complex issue, but in at least one aspect -- military pay -- Republican scorn is misplaced. The G.O.P. platform says Americans in uniform face a 13 percent ''pay gap'' relative to their civilian counterparts. But when President Clinton took office, the gap was already 11.5 percent, all accumulated in the Reagan and Bush presidencies. Democrats are saying this week in Los Angeles that the military is strong and fit, while campaigning Republicans contend that the Clinton administration has run America's defenses down. It's a complex issue, but in at least one aspect -- military pay -- Republican scorn is misplaced. The G.O.P. platform says Americans in uniform face a 13 percent ''pay gap'' relative to their civilian counterparts. But when President Clinton took office, the gap was already 11.5 percent, all accumulated in the Reagan and Bush presidencies. The emergence of the so-called pay gap did not signal that Mr. Reagan and President George Bush did not respect or appreciate the military; nor does its small growth under Mr. Clinton mean that he has run the military down.
 As he made clear during his unsuccessful primary run against Al Gore, Mr. Bradley does not think his own party has done enough on this score. But it has at least done and promised more than the Republican opposition. Both sides have pledged to devote substantial resources to early childhood education, an important issue to Mr. Gore and almost a signature issue for George W. Bush. The Democrats have also offered proposals like expanding the earned-income tax credit and raising the minimum wage that would quickly put real dollars in the pockets of the poor.
