 As a result, viewers will not just get a refresher course on the accomplishments of the Clinton-Gore administration; the opening day is being devoted to discussions of the economy and the needs of working families. But they will also hear enough talk of weighty policy matters to fill a social studies textbook. Health care is to be a constant thread, introduced in several panel discussions and reinforced in addresses by the major speakers. The other big issues include education, retirement security and fighting crime. Even the sleek computers, made by Apple and supplied to each delegation on the floor, are intended subtly to reinforce the idea of the Democrats as the party of the future, and Vice President Al Gore as the candidate of innovation. (Computers were scarce on the floor of the First Union Center in Philadelphia.) The Democrats promise a convention less overtly rehearsed than that of their rivals. The party is not well known for sticking to the script anyway, as was demonstrated over the weekend by the tussle over the plans by Representative Loretta Sanchez of California to stage a benefit at the Playboy Mansion, and Representative Jesse Jackson Jr.'s tepid expression of support for Mr. Gore. The attempt at message discipline may not reach the levels of those at the Republican convention, where copies of media talking points nine pages long were placed each day on the seat of every delegate. In Los Angeles, the emphasis will be on a reiteration of Mr. Gore's positions on issues that have tested well. Across the board, for instance, candidates, officials and Gore surrogates will talk about the vice president's advocacy of adding a prescription drug plan to Medicare. The Democrats may find obstacles to delivering their message on television from a surprising source -- their own speakers. Addresses on the initial nights by President Clinton, Hillary Rodham Clinton and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut could be major media events unto themselves, and thus could be the kinds of distractions for Mr. Gore that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas largely did not have to deal with in Philadelphia.
 Gov George W Bush defends generous $20 million retirement package Republican vice presidential running mate Dick Cheney received from former employer Halliburton Co as standard practice for company executive; senior Democrats deride Bush for backing settlement when Republican-led Congress resisted increasing minimum wage (S) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas this weekend defended the generous retirement package that his running mate, Dick Cheney, received from his former employer as a standard practice for a company executive. But senior Democrats today derided Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, for standing behind the settlement when the Republican-led Congress has resisted increasing the minimum wage. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas this weekend defended the generous retirement package that his running mate, Dick Cheney, received from his former employer as a standard practice for a company executive. But senior Democrats today derided Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, for standing behind the settlement when the Republican-led Congress has resisted increasing the minimum wage. After accepting Mr. Bush's offer to join him as the vice-presidential candidate, Mr. Cheney resigned as chairman and chief executive of the Halliburton Company, a Dallas-based energy services company. Halliburton awarded him a financial settlement worth an estimated $20 million after five years of service during which he received about $12.5 million in pay and stock options currently worth $39 million. In an interview with The Los Angeles Times that was published today, Mr. Bush said he was aware that Mr. Cheney would receive a retirement package, as any successful chief executive would. Mr. Bush said: ''I think what you ought to do is ask, 'Does the board of directors know what they are doing? Are they expert? And let the experts make the decision as to what's fair.' '' Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Vice President Al Gore, said the size of the retirement package and Mr. Bush's approval reflects the close relationship between the Republican Party and big business that working families might find troublesome.
 Letter from Bard College president Leon Botstein says that if Vice Pres Al Gore gained a love of inquiry and thought as college student and has kept it alive, that in itself is a virtue and points to a proper and dynamic relatiohship between intellect and power (Aug 7 James Atlas Op-Ed) Mr. Atlas confuses the life of the mind with academic fashion. If Al Gore gained a love of inquiry and thought as a college student and has kept that alive, that in itself is a virtue and points to a proper and dynamic relationship between intellect and power. Mr. Atlas confuses the life of the mind with academic fashion. If Al Gore gained a love of inquiry and thought as a college student and has kept that alive, that in itself is a virtue and points to a proper and dynamic relationship between intellect and power. If Mr. Gore is an intellectual, he follows in the footsteps of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, two of our founding fathers who embraced close reading and systematic thought as lifelong enterprises. They drew on books and ideas that they encountered when they were young men of college age. And perhaps they were worried, as Mr. Atlas suspects Mr. Gore is, that modern civilization might indeed overemphasize the material at the expense of the spiritual.
 Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the vice-presidential candidate, made the same rounds of Sunday talk programs that his Republican counterpart, Dick Cheney, made two weeks ago. This time, it seemed like a battle of the research departments, as each program tried to dig up examples of how Mr. Lieberman had differed on issues with Vice President Al Gore. School vouchers. Privatizing Social Security. Bashing Hollywood. ''You've got a great research team,'' Senator Lieberman said to Tim Russert of NBC at one point.
 While Mr. Clinton popped up in Los Angeles on Friday for fund-raisers and appearances that drowned out the attention -- and complicated fund-raising -- for Al Gore, Mr. Reagan did not arrive in New Orleans until the Sunday before the convention 12 years ago. Even as they acknowledged that Mr. Clinton is dominating the ramp up to the convention, many delegates sounded wistful about his leaving the White House. Some said they did not view Mr. Gore as alluring a leader. ''We all know that if there were not term limits, Bill Clinton would be running for president again,'' said Martha Aasen, a delegate from Westport, Conn. ''Gore doesn't turn me on. He's different. He's sincere. He knows the issues, but he's different.'' She was glad, she said, that Mr. Gore was not speaking until three days after Mr. Clinton, so there will not be back-to-back comparisons. The difference, of course, between the Clinton and Reagan models is that while Vice President George Bush tried to distance himself from Mr. Reagan on the Iran-contra case, he did not have to worry about being connected to anything approaching the embarrassment of Mr. Clinton's personal scandals. So Mr. Gore is faced with the far more confounding task of trying to take credit for the booming economy encouraged by the current administration but not wanting to be linked to the baggage. ''Most people would see the transfer in 1988 as being successful; it was gracefully done,'' Mr. Andrew said. ''But there was a very different goal. They wanted George Bush to be Ronald Reagan.'' Asked then if the Democratic Party did not want Al Gore to be Bill Clinton, he demurred, saying, ''We want Al Gore to simply be Al Gore.'' It is especially striking that Mr. Clinton has been ridiculed for pulling attention from Mr. Gore given that he has been much more aggressive in helping his vice president than was Mr. Reagan. In fact, Mr. Reagan's endorsement of Mr. Bush was so feeble -- almost like an afterthought -- that he had to clarify his comments the next day. Robert M. Teeter, who was a top strategist for Mr. Bush, said Mr. Clinton's transgressions are a horrible burden for the vice president. ''We had the challenge of Bush having to establish himself in his own right,'' he said. ''In Gore's case, it's a very difficult strategy because the economy's in pretty good shape but people want a change. There's real tension.'' David Leland, the chairman of the Ohio Democratic Party, said he understands the political need for Mr. Clinton to depart on Tuesday to leave the stage for Mr. Gore. That doesn't mean he is happy about it.
 THE Republicans on MSNBC's ''Equal Time'' were having a hard time painting the smiling, smooth-faced guy in glasses and a brown suit -- the one trying in vain to offer an opinion -- as in league with Al Gore's ''slaughterhouse killers.'' THE Republicans on MSNBC's ''Equal Time'' were having a hard time painting the smiling, smooth-faced guy in glasses and a brown suit -- the one trying in vain to offer an opinion -- as in league with Al Gore's ''slaughterhouse killers.'' Mr. Nicholson: ''Is Joe Lieberman going to work in the slaughterhouse?'' -- as Mr. Gore's wild-talking campaign manager, Donna Brazile, recently called their headquarters. Mr. Andrew: ''It's called the kitchen'' -- the Gore campaign's name for its ''war room.'' When George W. Bush was asked, not long ago, to respond to a charge Mr. Andrew had made, his response was, ''Who is Joe Andrew?'' One of those six-degrees-of-separation diagrams that showed all Hollywood linked to  Winona Ryder might work for Joe Andrew in Washington. Mr. Gore's new running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, had Mr. Andrew in class at Yale and recommended him for his current job. William M. Daley of Chicago, who is running Mr. Gore's campaign, once worked with him on a legal case. He got to know Jesse Jackson through Black Expo, a cultural festival in Indianapolis. He has worked for Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana. And that is how he met a bunch of people with ties to Mr.  Gore -- including Carter Eskew, Mr. Gore's top consultant. Ron Klain, Mr. Gore's former chief of staff, is a fellow Hoosier Mr. Andrew knows from Indianapolis -- a networking hot spot, it would seem. And Mr. Klain also had a hand in bringing him into Goreworld.
 Izzy Paskowitz put his arm around Mr. McAuliffe and asked if he and his seven brothers could come hear Vice President Al Gore give his speech on Thursday night at the Staples Center. After all, ''We're the surfing Jews for Lieberman,'' he said with a broad smile. Yesterday morning, in an interview on CNN, the House minority whip, Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, questioned whether it was prudent for the president to schedule such an event before Mr. Gore is to take the stage.
 Diverging Views  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman sought to play down his differences with Vice President Al Gore on some of the leading issues of the campaign. But in the process he revealed a new and potentially contentious one, saying that a proposal to raise the retirement age for Social Security and Medicare, a move his party denounces, should be ''kept on the table'' for further discussion. PAGE A16
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore and actor/director Rob Reiner visit Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital in Cleveland, where they discuss serious topic of children without health insurance; engage in humorous repartee--welcome surprise to many Gore aides and friends, frustrated by his inability to project lightness of being that seems to come easily for adversary, Gov George W Bush; photo (M) It was the Al and Rob show, an unlikely new comedy duo now making occasional appearances on the campaign trail to the White House. Starring Vice President Al Gore, a politician with a famously wooden public demeanor, and Rob Reiner, the actor and director known for sly satire, the team came to the Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital here to talk about the serious subject of children without medical insurance. But as the two stood side by side in the hospital atrium, swapping turns with the microphone in a discussion with doctors and parents, the topic was at times overtaken by two other objectives of the Gore campaign: making Mr. Gore more likable, and finding ways to attack George W. Bush without turning voters off. It was the Al and Rob show, an unlikely new comedy duo now making occasional appearances on the campaign trail to the White House. Starring Vice President Al Gore, a politician with a famously wooden public demeanor, and Rob Reiner, the actor and director known for sly satire, the team came to the Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital here to talk about the serious subject of children without medical insurance. But as the two stood side by side in the hospital atrium, swapping turns with the microphone in a discussion with doctors and parents, the topic was at times overtaken by two other objectives of the Gore campaign: making Mr. Gore more likable, and finding ways to attack George W. Bush without turning voters off. Mr. Reiner took on both challenges today, introducing Mr. Gore as ''a good man,'' and then, almost beseechingly, assuring the audience that Mr. Gore does indeed possess a sense of humor. ''He's a fun man,'' he said. ''We have laughs together.'' Then, as Mr. Gore plowed into a long description of how some states have thrown up bureaucratic barriers to enrolling children in government-financed health care, Mr. Reiner cut in with deadpan timing.  ''Would one of those states be Texas?'' he asked, all mock innocence. Embracing the straight man role, Mr. Gore replied, ''If it is, can I still not say?'' For Mr. Gore's aides, the repartee was a welcome surprise, a moment to get in a subtle jab at Mr. Bush while showing their candidate as a man who, if not exactly George Burns, is at least capable of adding a human touch to policy jargon. In recent months Mr. Gore's friends have repeatedly expressed frustration at his inability to project a certain lightness of being that seems to come so easily for Mr. Bush. During a private lunch, Mr. Gore and Mr. Reiner watched film of Mr. Gore shot by Spike Jonze, the director of the movie ''Being John Malkovich.'' The film, paid for by the Democratic National Committee, is said to show a more appealing side to Mr. Gore, and Mr. Reiner, the director of ''The American President,'' gave it a gushing review. The public, he said, needs to see this kind of film, perhaps even this week at the Democratic convention. As part of the campaign's quest to soften his image, Mr. Gore has toned down his criticism of Mr. Bush. ''I pledged not to make any negative personal attacks, and I won't,'' Mr. Gore said in a local television interview today. The same cannot be said of Mr. Gore's press aides and surrogates such as Mr. Reiner, who did not disappoint. He sailed into passionate attacks on Mr. Bush that were oddly reminiscent of the diatribes he once delivered against Richard M. Nixon when he played Archie Bunker's liberal son-in-law in the 1970's sitcom ''All in the Family.'' He was even more exercised when  Mr. Gore's aides had him meet with reporters. Waving his arms, talking a mile a minute, Mr. Reiner called Mr. Bush ''a hypocrite of staggering proportions.'' He chided Mr. Bush for having ''the audacity'' to call himself a champion of children when it is Mr. Gore who has proposed spending $42 billion to provide health care to another one million uninsured children. By contrast, he and Gore advisers said, Mr. Bush has resisted efforts to expand government health care programs to hundreds of thousands of poor children in Texas. At one moment, though, Mr. Reiner's impassioned advocacy seemed to get the better of him. Mr. Reiner asserted that Mr. Gore was one of the three most qualified men to run for president ''in our lifetimes.'' The others, he said, were Lyndon B. Johnson and Mr. Nixon, presidents perhaps best known for leading the nation through the traumas of Vietnam and Watergate. ''Al Gore, of those three, is the most qualified,'' he said. When reporters burst into laughter at the unlikely comparison of Mr. Gore to Mr. Nixon, Mr. Reiner tried hard to backpedal. ''Don't just print the Nixon part,'' he begged, far, far too late.
 In the last decade, Mr. Hefner, the founder and editor in chief of Playboy Enterprises, and Ms. Hefner, the company's chief executive, have given about $95,000 to Democratic candidates and committees, with a large portion of their donations going to female candidates and to liberals -- and at least $8,000 going to the Clinton and Gore campaigns. In the last decade, Mr. Hefner, the founder and editor in chief of Playboy Enterprises, and Ms. Hefner, the company's chief executive, have given about $95,000 to Democratic candidates and committees, with a large portion of their donations going to female candidates and to liberals -- and at least $8,000 going to the Clinton and Gore campaigns. Mr. Hefner has a more mainstream approach to giving, primarily making large contributions to eading Democratic committees -- $20,000 in 1998 and $5,000 in 1996 to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, $5,000 this year and $5,000 in 1998 to the Democratic National Committee and $5,000 to Leadership 98, Vice President Al Gore's leadership PAC, along with $1,000 to Gore 2000 in 1999. Except for Ms. Sanchez, who has received three four-figure donations from Mr. Hefner, he has not given directly to candidates other than Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton. Mr. Hefner has, however, allowed the Playboy Mansion to be used for political fund-raisers.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Democratic candidate for vice president, minimizes his differences with Vice Pres Al Gore on some of leading issues of campaign, but reveals new and potentially contentious one by stating that proposals to raise retirement age for Social Security should be kept on table for further discussion; acknowledges that he holds different positions from Gore on array of issues, but scoffs at notions that his views are closer to Republicans' than Gore's; praises Gore for selecting running mate who differs with him on important subjects; photo (M) As Democrats prepared to kick off their national convention here on Monday, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the party's candidate for vice president, sought today to minimize his differences with Vice President Al Gore on some of the leading issues of the campaign. But in the process he revealed a new and potentially contentious one, saying proposals to raise the retirement age for Social Security and Medicare should be ''kept on the table'' for further discussion. Speaking on five news shows, Mr. Lieberman acknowledged that he had held different positions from Mr. Gore on an array of issues, from affirmative action to school vouchers to tort law changes. But he scoffed at assertions that his views were closer to the Republicans' than to Mr. Gore's, and he praised the vice president for having had the confidence to select a running mate who differed with him on important subjects. As Democrats prepared to kick off their national convention here on Monday, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the party's candidate for vice president, sought today to minimize his differences with Vice President Al Gore on some of the leading issues of the campaign. But in the process he revealed a new and potentially contentious one, saying proposals to raise the retirement age for Social Security and Medicare should be ''kept on the table'' for further discussion. Speaking on five news shows, Mr. Lieberman acknowledged that he had held different positions from Mr. Gore on an array of issues, from affirmative action to school vouchers to tort law changes. But he scoffed at assertions that his views were closer to the Republicans' than to Mr. Gore's, and he praised the vice president for having had the confidence to select a running mate who differed with him on important subjects. ''It is again a mark of Al Gore's strength of leadership that he didn't look for somebody who had 100 percent agreement with him,'' Mr. Lieberman said on NBC's ''Meet the Press.'' ''We've argued, we've debated, and I think that's what progress comes from, particularly the willingness to look at new ideas.'' Still, in explaining how he has come to agree with Mr. Gore on a core issue of the campaign -- whether to allow taxpayers to invest some of their Social Security payroll taxes in the markets -- Mr. Lieberman exposed another rift in their views. While Mr. Gore has insisted that he would not consider raising the retirement age for Social Security or Medicare, Mr. Lieberman said today that any debate on keeping the system solvent should include that idea. Today's interviews capped a remarkable week for Mr. Lieberman, whose selection by Mr. Gore six days ago infused many Democrats with a new sense of optimism about the race. But the ability of television interviewers to throw Mr. Lieberman onto the defensive today, over his differences with Mr. Gore and his past criticisms of President Clinton, suggests a line of attack that the Republicans are likely to pursue relentlessly in the coming days. Mr. Gore has denounced the idea of raising the retirement age for Social Security, and the party's platform is unequivocal on the issue. Moreover, the Gore campaign has hammered the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, for even considering the notion. But today, Mr. Gore's aides sought to play down the differences, saying that Mr. Lieberman supported Mr. Gore's broad plan to keep Social Security solvent through 2055 by using general tax revenues instead of raising the retirement age, cutting benefits or increasing taxes. The current retirement is scheduled to rise to 67 over the next several decades. ''I think Mr. Lieberman was suggesting that at some future point, perhaps after 2055, that it might need to be considered,'' said Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. ''But not now.'' Mr. Gore campaigned today in Ohio and Missouri, moving west for a Wednesday arrival in Los Angeles and a Thursday evening coronation as the party's standard-bearer. The Democrats are looking to their convention to cast Mr. Gore in a more appealing light, hoping to close what has been a double-digit lead for Mr. Bush in many polls. The four-day extravaganza has been choreographed to help Mr. Gore step out of President Clinton's shadow, but the president and his wife, Hillary, have been in town for two days, raising money, visiting supporters, soaking up attention -- and causing grumbling in the Gore camp. (Mr. Gore did little to build a sense of separation from the president today when he told The Associated Press that he would continue to seek Mr. Clinton's counsel after he leaves the White House.) Asked on Fox News whether he was worried that Mr. Clinton, who is scheduled to address the convention in prime time on Monday, might dominate the convention spotlight this week, William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, said no. ''I think it's totally appropriate for him to be here to thank the Democrats, because the Democratic Party stood with him during good times and difficult times over the last eight years,'' Mr. Daley said. ''But after tomorrow night's speech -- which is an important speech for the president, for the campaign and for Democrats -- this is Al Gore's convention.'' President Clinton and Mrs. Clinton appeared tonight at a reception organized by four Jewish groups on a set at Sony Studios in Culver City. Mr. and Mrs. Clinton spoke warmly of Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman, but the President also used the opportunity to recount a so-far-unsuccessful effort at Camp David to forge a peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians. And in the midst of his sober recounting of the Camp David talks, Mr. Clinton offered a defense on a subject that Mr. Gore had been ridiculed for: his suggestion that he deserved credit for inventing the Internet. ''And by the way, Mr. Gore did sponsor the legislation'' that led to creating the Internet, Mr. Clinton said. ''Part of my job, since I'm not running is to correct the record here.'' The Democrats are counting on the convention to show that they are every bit as unified as the Republicans. But some liberals have begun warning that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman's centrist positions on important issues may have dampened enthusiasm for the ticket among vital parts of the party's base like union members and black voters. In his television appearances today, Mr. Lieberman tried to put to rest concerns that he differed significantly from Mr. Gore on major issues. He said that although he has voted for a pilot program for school vouchers, he would also increase federal spending on public schools. And he said that while he has raised concerns about affirmative action, he did not support efforts to ban it. He said Mr. Gore had encouraged him to argue his views vigorously -- in private. But in public, Mr. Lieberman said, a Gore administration would be firmly united. ''When he makes a decision, I know what the administration policy will be, his,'' the senator said on Fox. Mr. Lieberman, the first Democrat to chastise President Clinton from the Senate floor about his affair with a White House intern, praised Mr. Clinton today for seeking repentance last week. But when asked whether he would place Mr. Clinton among the great presidents, as Mr. Gore has, Mr. Lieberman demurred.
 Seemingly overnight, California has become for Democrats what the South once was in national elections -- their indispensable electoral building block. So it is fitting for them to celebrate in Los Angeles what they hope will prove a seamless transition from the Age of Clinton to the Age of Gore. Seemingly overnight, California has become for Democrats what the South once was in national elections -- their indispensable electoral building block. So it is fitting for them to celebrate in Los Angeles what they hope will prove a seamless transition from the Age of Clinton to the Age of Gore. But a word of caution is in order for California Democrats as they uncork the Champagne bottles this week. Independents, not Democrats, are the only growing category of registered voters. Recent polls suggest the race could be closer in California than previously thought, and Vice President Al Gore's choice of Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate could dampen the enthusiasm of the party's Hollywood backers. Democrats would also be foolish to take the votes of Hispanics, those Americans most likely to still live in a traditional family, for granted. This is particularly true if Gov. George W. Bush succeeds in his effort to broaden his party's voting base. In his book ''Cadillac Desert,'' Marc Reisner called California a ''beautiful fraud,'' referring to how much of the desert state was transformed into a verdant mirage. It may yet prove that to political analysts too eager to read permanence into the current political snapshot. Things change, especially in Reagan Country.
 Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, while seeking to minimize his differences with Vice President Al Gore on some of the leading issues of the campaign, revealed a potentially contentious disagreement in their views about raising the retirement age for Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Lieberman said any debate on keeping the system solvent should consider raising the retirement age. Bush Defends Cheney's Deal  Gov. George W. Bush defended the generous retirement deal that Dick Cheney received from his former employer. But Democrats questioned the message it sent to working people, especially since Republicans have resisted increasing the minimum wage.
 And the more that the major party candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, fight for the political center, the more appeal Mr. Buchanan has to hard-right conservatives left behind.
 The President-elect said that when he meets later this month with President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, he would also begin a dialogue about the formation of a North American common market. Referring to the successes of the European Union, Mr. Fox said that a common market would promote economic cooperation rather than competition. The President-elect said that when he meets later this month with President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, he would also begin a dialogue about the formation of a North American common market. Referring to the successes of the European Union, Mr. Fox said that a common market would promote economic cooperation rather than competition. Relaxed and talkative, speaking in English, the President-elect met with American reporters at his mother's sprawling colonial hacienda to discuss his ideas for addressing some of the most contentious grievances in Mexico's relationship with the United States, including immigration, the fight against drug trafficking and corruption. At many points throughout the 90-minute meeting, he spoke with a candor rare among Mexican politicians about his country's failings and its continuing need for foreign assistance, and he encouraged American officials to do the same when he meets Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore on Aug. 24, and Governor Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, the following day in Texas. Although he said that most of his meetings in Washington -- and in Dallas with Mr. Bush -- would be informal, he said he would strongly propose an end to the American drug-certification program. Under the program, the United States Congress annually certifies that Mexico and other individual Latin American countries where there is a substantial drug trade meet a set of standards for combating the illegal traffic. Those countries that do not meet the standards face an array of possible sanctions. He said he had met previously with Mr. Bush, when Mr. Fox was governor of Guanajuato, and said he would meet Mr. Gore for the first time in Washington.
 The Democratic delegates arriving here to nominate Vice President Al Gore for president think of themselves as moderates, but their views on issues from affirmative action to an activist federal government are more liberal than those of the public or even Democratic voters generally, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. On one issue, the death penalty, a random sample of 1,042 of the 4,339 delegates was decisively more liberal than Mr. Gore, though 56 percent said they were moderates. Asked to choose between the death penalty and life in prison without parole, 20 percent of the delegates preferred executions, compared with 46 percent of Democrats generally and 51 percent of the public. Mr. Gore is one of those supporters. The Democratic delegates arriving here to nominate Vice President Al Gore for president think of themselves as moderates, but their views on issues from affirmative action to an activist federal government are more liberal than those of the public or even Democratic voters generally, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. On one issue, the death penalty, a random sample of 1,042 of the 4,339 delegates was decisively more liberal than Mr. Gore, though 56 percent said they were moderates. Asked to choose between the death penalty and life in prison without parole, 20 percent of the delegates preferred executions, compared with 46 percent of Democrats generally and 51 percent of the public. Mr. Gore is one of those supporters. Most of the interviews of the delegates were conducted in July, before the selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as Mr. Gore's running mate and Dick Cheney as the vice-presidential choice by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee for president. One distinct difference between the Democratic and Republican delegates was their confidence about the election. Only 51 percent of the Democrats said Mr. Gore was the favorite in their state, and just 27 percent called him a big favorite. Among Republicans, 68 percent said Governor Bush was a favorite in their state and 44 percent said he had a big edge. Stephen W. Long, a lawyer from Crestwood, Ky., had called his state a tossup as well. He said: ''Lieberman being a moderate helps him here in Kentucky. I don't think the Jewish factor will be a problem at all here. His stances on taxes and education exemplify what Gore has been standing for and also strengthen Gore's personality as a straight shooter.''
 Democratic National Convention will adopt platform that like Republican counterpart makes broad effort to reach voters in middle but sharply diverges on most issues, providing clear indications on how Gore and Bush administrations will differ; plaftorms are alike, despite clear disagreements, in that they closely reflect styles, broad visions and campaign agendas of both candidates; compared (M) But in the details, the platforms sharply diverge on most issues, providing clear indications of how Gore and Bush administrations would differ. But in the details, the platforms sharply diverge on most issues, providing clear indications of how Gore and Bush administrations would differ. For all those clear disagreements, the platforms are alike in that they closely reflect the styles, broad visions and campaign agendas of the two candidates. Writing a platform usually tests a candidate's ability to manage the factions in his party, and both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore successfully enforced a high degree of unity on their platform committees. For Mr. Gore, the result has been a Democratic platform that wraps him more tightly than ever in Mr. Clinton's legacy. Far from stamping a distinctive Gore imprint on the Democratic Party, the document warmly embraces the centrist policies of the Clinton administration and lavishly credits them for the prosperity of the last seven years. ''In 1992, Bill Clinton and Al Gore were elected to turn the American economy around,'' the platform declares in its opening lines. ''Today, the success of these new ideas is clear.'' Mr. Clinton first imposed those positions on the party in 1992 over the objections of liberals, and Mr. Gore's aides fought back efforts -- albeit weak ones -- by progressives again this year to pull the 2000 platform leftward on health care, defense spending and trade. Much like Mr. Clinton in 1992, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has tried to use the 2000 platform to capture a broader swath of moderate swing voters. While the Republican platform remains fundamentally conservative -- strongly opposing abortion, gay rights and gun control while calling for tax cuts, smaller government and more military spending -- some of the hard-edged proposals from 1996 are gone. The platform no longer would deny citizenship to the American-born children of illegal immigrants, abolish the federal department of education and end federal financing for the arts. For Mr. Gore, the major fight was on trade. Over the objections of labor unions, the platform endorses the policy of ''fast track,'' which would allow presidents to negotiate certain treaties without Congressional approval. But at the behest of unions, the platform also calls for negotiating labor and environmental standards into all trade accords. For Mr. Bush, adopting softer positions on issues like education and immigration meant accepting language flatly opposing abortion, even though he would personally allow it in cases of rape or incest or when a woman's life is in danger. In tone, both platforms also reflect the stump styles of the two candidates. The Republican platform is heavily salted with the kind of optimistic, inclusive-sounding phrases that flavor Mr. Bush's speeches. The Democratic document mirrors Mr. Gore's knife-edged efforts to cast Mr. Bush as a risk to the nation's peace and prosperity. Thus, the platform asserts, the Republicans ''eschew fiscal discipline and offer up nothing less than fiscal disaster.'' Mr. Bush's Social Security plan would ''take the 'security' out of Social Security.'' And the Republican proposal for a space-based missile defense system ''would plunge us into a new arms race.''
 Jennifer Bird letter suggests that instead of Vice Pres Al Gore speaking more 'plainly' to get his ideas across, we should rise to intellectual challenge (Aug 7 James Atlas Op-Ed) But then Mr. Atlas suggests that Al Gore should speak ''plainly'' to get his ideas across. That reminds me of a third-grade teacher telling the class brain to speak less intelligently so that the other children will understand. Rather than speak more plainly, maybe Mr. Gore could raise the bar for all of us.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column on Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; likens it to a minefield from which Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph Lieberman will be lucky to escape with any momentum at all; urges Pres Clinton to help party and country by adopting lower profile (M) With friends like Bill and Hillary hijacking the spotlight (and trailing the noxious memories of Monica behind them), and with anarchists and other protesters threatening to turn parts of the city upside down, Al Gore and Joe Lieberman will be lucky to escape L.A. with any momentum at all. With friends like Bill and Hillary hijacking the spotlight (and trailing the noxious memories of Monica behind them), and with anarchists and other protesters threatening to turn parts of the city upside down, Al Gore and Joe Lieberman will be lucky to escape L.A. with any momentum at all. For a while last week, Mr. Gore looked like a genuine leader. The bold choice of Joe Lieberman as his running mate was deftly handled and widely hailed. But then the Clintons took over. On Thursday we were treated to the spectacle of the president appearing before thousands of evangelical ministers in a Chicago suburb, where he very publicly revisited -- in the name of contrition -- the incredible stain he put on the nation's highest office. Mr. Gore had other problems, one of them being the fallout from the plan by Representative Loretta Sanchez, a California Democrat, to hold a fund-raiser at Hugh Hefner's Playboy Mansion. Ms. Sanchez was one of the few people in the entire country who failed to recognize that anything even remotely connected with playboys and naked ladies is a no-no for the duration of this campaign. Under tremendous pressure, she finally backed off. None of this does Al Gore need. What he needs is a dignified convention, where he and Senator Lieberman can attempt to make the case that their leadership and their policies -- not Bill Clinton's and not the Republicans' -- are the best course for the U.S. to follow. Gore-Lieberman is not a charismatic ticket. They either win on substance or not at all. But it's awfully hard to get your message heard amid the din of Clinton narcissism, dumb distractions and demonstrations in the street. This is the week for Al Gore to make his case, to argue convincingly that government is not the enemy of the people, and not a servant of the rich, but rather, as Abraham Lincoln said, a collective effort ''to do for a community of people whatever they need to have done, but cannot do at all in their separate and individual capacities.'' Nearly one in five American children are poor, and many working families, despite the extraordinary economy, are having trouble paying bills and putting food on the table. What do Gore and Lieberman have to say about trying to bring them into the mainstream? What do they have to say about the nation's school system, and health care, and global warming, and gun control and abortion and the Supreme Court?
 Just this morning, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman was asked by Tim Russert on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' what would happen if the Gore-Lieberman ticket won the presidency. The inauguration date is Jan. 20, 2001, a Saturday. As an Orthodox Jew, Mr. Lieberman strictly observes the Sabbath, from sundown on Fridays to sundown on Saturdays, which ostensibly prohibits working, riding in vehicles and other activities. Just this morning, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman was asked by Tim Russert on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' what would happen if the Gore-Lieberman ticket won the presidency. The inauguration date is Jan. 20, 2001, a Saturday. As an Orthodox Jew, Mr. Lieberman strictly observes the Sabbath, from sundown on Fridays to sundown on Saturdays, which ostensibly prohibits working, riding in vehicles and other activities. Privately, several prominent Democrats in the entertainment industry have said that contributors like Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen, two of the owners of the film company DreamWorks, have been called by Vice President Al Gore, who is sensitive to Hollywood's uneasiness with Mr. Lieberman, and asked their opinion of his running mate and that they not publicly criticize the choice. Mr. Gore got what he wanted. Criticisms have been muted. The moguls got what they wanted. A call from the presidential candidate asking for a favor. It was not until the very end of the party -- held under the lemon and grapefruit trees on the estate of Ken Roberts, a radio and real estate magnate -- that anyone even got around to mentioning the name of the Democratic presidential nominee. And that had to come from the president himself. ''He understands the future,'' Mr. Clinton said of Vice President Al Gore. ''He was talking about global warming when we ran in '92, and people were still making fun of him.'' ''I'm going to relax a little bit,'' said Mr. Teitelbaum, whose wife, Suri Kasirer, a Democrat, is a Gore fund-raiser and a delegate from New York. Ms. Kasirer was staying at the Century Plaza, Mr. Teitelbaum said, while he was staying at the Peninsula.
 James Wood letter says Gov George W Bush is certainly following James Atlas's suggestion that 'power should keep its distance from intellect' in presidential campaign (Aug 7 Op-Ed) Discussing Vice President Al Gore's bookishness, James Atlas (''Erudite and Groovy,'' Op-Ed, Aug. 7) suggests that, in the presidential campaign, ''power should keep its distance from intellect.'' Discussing Vice President Al Gore's bookishness, James Atlas (''Erudite and Groovy,'' Op-Ed, Aug. 7) suggests that, in the presidential campaign, ''power should keep its distance from intellect.'' But George W. Bush is already handsomely following this counsel, and it is hardly clear that American politics needs more of the same. Are we really suffering from a surfeit of bookishness?
 Op-Ed article by Andrew Kohut, director of Pew Research Center for People and the Press, says Vice Prs Al Gore needs to clearly counter the notion that Gov George W Bush and his party are more compassionate and inclusive than Republicans past, and sway surprisingly large number of voters who do not think that who is elected president matters; says Gore has to drill home his differences with Bush on major issues; photos (M) Judging by polls and media reaction, Al Gore engaged the public's interest before the Democratic Convention with his choice of Joseph Lieberman at least as well as George Bush did before the Republican event by choosing Dick Cheney. But Mr. Gore has to take a very different tack this week in Los Angeles than the Republicans did in Philadelphia. If the objective of the G.O.P. was to soften differences between the parties, Mr. Gore's goal has to be to make the distinctions abundantly clear. Judging by polls and media reaction, Al Gore engaged the public's interest before the Democratic Convention with his choice of Joseph Lieberman at least as well as George Bush did before the Republican event by choosing Dick Cheney. But Mr. Gore has to take a very different tack this week in Los Angeles than the Republicans did in Philadelphia. If the objective of the G.O.P. was to soften differences between the parties, Mr. Gore's goal has to be to make the distinctions abundantly clear. Governor Bush made a strong personal showing in Philadelphia -- one that Vice President Gore will struggle to match. It's unlikely that Mr. Gore will overtake his opponent on voter perceptions of charm, leadership ability or even the much hoped-for but never observed stature gap. And since his early stumbles, Mr. Bush has not looked like a candidate who will fall on his face at a critical juncture. Mr. Gore must gently but clearly counter the notion that Mr. Bush and his party are more compassionate and inclusive than Republicans past. And he has to make voters feel there is something at stake in the election. A surprisingly large number don't think who's elected president matters. For many Americans, the first year of the campaign served to blur, rather than accentuate, issue differences. A Pew Research Center survey in June found a bare 51 percent majority of voters thinking Bush and Gore took different positions. The number saying their stands were similar had actually increased from 24 percent to 33 percent since last summer. This is bad news for Al Gore, because when specific issue questions are raised, he and his party score significantly higher than Mr. Bush and the G.O.P. The public has expressed more confidence in the Democrats than Republicans on health care, entitlements, education, the environment and gun control. And most candidate image polls until recently also found Mr. Gore holding the edge on these issues, except for gun control. But so far this issue advantage has not sunk in. Just before the G.O.P. convention, 53 percent of respondents told Newsweek pollsters Mr. Bush shared their views on top issues, while 43 percent said that about Mr. Gore. After the convention, a follow-up Newsweek poll found Mr. Bush had made progress on some specific issues, like education, as well. If Mr. Gore wants to move ahead, he has to drill home his differences with Mr. Bush on Social Security reform, health maintenance organizations, the environment, gun control and education. But there could be pitfalls. He can't let himself be seen as trying to scare the public about risks of privatizing Social Security or introducing school vouchers or tax cuts, but rather as pointing out how the trade-offs come home to average voters. And he must avoid seeming mean-spirited. (The Republicans did a brilliant job of finding the right tone with the general message ''It's not that President Clinton is a bad man -- he robbed you of an opportunity.'') Mr. Lieberman, who has often worked across party lines, may be little help to Mr. Gore in starkly defining the Democratic position. But Mr. Gore also can't seem to be moving too far to the left, and in that regard the choice of the centrist Mr. Lieberman may be helpful.
 On the contrition business, I'd like to tell Bush and Cheney where to get off with all their barbs about ''restoring honor and dignity'' and other code words condemning my private life. But that line of attack from me would play into their hands. Looking into my own soul, I confess I'm torn. The good part of me wants Al Gore to win because it would validate my eight years and show the American people saying, ''We want to give Bill Clinton a third term.'' On the other hand, the bad boy in me wants him to lose, to show the Democrats how much they needed me personally to drag them in and keep them in. So I'll stand up there for my Third Acceptance and wow 'em by taking full credit for everything good that's happened in eight great years. Let Al play Mr. Nice Guy if he likes; I'll be that old lovable rogue who can make a centrist waffle look like red meat. I'll make the Democrats miss my charm. I'll scare the viewers with the prospect of Bush, backward economics and back-alley abortions, and I'll stupefy my enemies with great globs of gratitude.
