 Prof Sean Wilentz Op-Ed article says Al Gore is avoiding issue of Pres Clinton's impeachment but he should artfully and tactfully exploit it, taking a lesson from Republicans, who have mastered art of veiled criticism; says separating himself from Clinton is only half the equation for Gore, who must gently remind voters about fierceness and arrogance with which both independent counsel Kenneth Starr and House Republicans pursued the president (M) Al Gore may have given the speech of his life accepting his party's nomination last week. But he avoided mentioning the elephant in the room: the impeachment of President Bill Clinton. Mr. Gore seems to be running away from this fact as fast as he can. He must think that it's nothing but a loser for him. But this is an issue he should exploit, albeit artfully and with tact. Al Gore may have given the speech of his life accepting his party's nomination last week. But he avoided mentioning the elephant in the room: the impeachment of President Bill Clinton. Mr. Gore seems to be running away from this fact as fast as he can. He must think that it's nothing but a loser for him. But this is an issue he should exploit, albeit artfully and with tact. For a lesson in such implied criticism, Mr. Gore should study the Republicans. They have mastered the art of talking about impeachment -- without talking about impeachment. At their convention in Philadelphia, the Republicans never once mentioned the word. But it was there in code. ''After all of the shouting and all of the scandal,'' Gov. George W. Bush said in his acceptance speech, ''we can begin again.'' Mr. Bush and the other Republicans repeatedly reminded viewers of President Clinton's behavior, without once mentioning the other half of the equation -- the House impeachment gang of Henry Hyde, Bob Barr, Asa Hutchinson and others. These congressmen attended their party's convention, but television viewers never saw so much as their shadows. And Mr. Bush, knowing that the harshness of the impeachment drive had turned off a vast majority of Americans, wanted it known that he and Dick Cheney, his running mate, have had nothing to do with the partisanship in Washington. Mr. Gore now needs to use the issue of impeachment to his advantage. Selecting Joseph Lieberman as his running mate helps distance him from Mr. Clinton, since the senator strongly criticized the president at the height of the Monica Lewinsky scandal. And Mr. Gore, in his acceptance speech, further implied that he would never sully the Oval Office. ''I will work for you every day,'' he said, ''and I will never let you down.'' But separating himself from Mr. Clinton is only half the equation. Mr. Gore (or his surrogates) must gently remind voters about the fierceness and the arrogance with which both Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, and the House Republicans pursued the president. Such a reminder, made implicitly rather than openly, would in no way violate Mr. Gore's pledge to run a positive campaign. After all, if Mr. Bush can tar Mr. Gore with President Clinton's private sins and his efforts to conceal them, then Mr. Gore can fairly remind voters about the public sins of the House Republicans.
 Editorial says presidential camndidates have embarked on unhelpful debate about Gov George W Bush's assertion that US military forces have been 'hollowed out' during Clinton administration; says United States has by far world's most powerful military, and real question for Americans to consider is whether US armed forces are adapting quickly enough to fight kinds of battles they are likely to face in years ahead (M) The presidential campaign has embarked on an unhelpful debate between the candidates about Gov. George W. Bush's assertion that American military forces have been ''hollowed out'' during the Clinton administration. That is not true, and it deflects the conversation from a host of important defense issues that the candidates should be addressing. The United States has by far the world's most powerful military forces and invests more money in maintaining them and their weapons than the next 10 largest countries combined spend on their militaries. The question for Americans to consider is whether the armed forces are adapting quickly enough to fight the kinds of battles they are likely to face in the years ahead. The presidential campaign has embarked on an unhelpful debate between the candidates about Gov. George W. Bush's assertion that American military forces have been ''hollowed out'' during the Clinton administration. That is not true, and it deflects the conversation from a host of important defense issues that the candidates should be addressing. The United States has by far the world's most powerful military forces and invests more money in maintaining them and their weapons than the next 10 largest countries combined spend on their militaries. The question for Americans to consider is whether the armed forces are adapting quickly enough to fight the kinds of battles they are likely to face in the years ahead. Mr. Bush has offered a few thoughtful and provocative ideas on defense but now needs to move beyond generalities. Mr. Gore, long a student of military issues, has seemed content to let the Clinton administration's record and policies speak for him. Both candidates have chosen running mates who are interested and knowledgeable about military issues. The two tickets should now move on to an expansive defense debate.
 William Safire Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore came across as earnest and knowledgeable in his nomination acceptance speech but there was plenty of room for editorial improvement; notes powerful ending of Abraham Lincoln's first Inaugural Address, which was collaboration between Lincoln and William Seward (M) In his acceptance speech, Al Gore came across as earnest and knowledgeable. He did not descend into discomfiting sentiment, as he did twice before, and he overcame his habit of speaking in slow condescension. His was a meat-and-potatoes populist speech. Gore's ''I will not let you down'' separated him from the president who did. Similar criticism of the poll-driven Clinton could be inferred from ''Sometimes you have to be willing to spend your popularity in order to pick the hard right over the easy wrong.'' Moreover, Gore's device of audience involvement worked well. He dramatized welfare reform, subsidized drugs for seniors, federal subsidy for local schools and ire at H.M.O.'s by focusing on individual faces, adding impact to the television coverage. In his acceptance speech, Al Gore came across as earnest and knowledgeable. He did not descend into discomfiting sentiment, as he did twice before, and he overcame his habit of speaking in slow condescension. His was a meat-and-potatoes populist speech. Gore's ''I will not let you down'' separated him from the president who did. Similar criticism of the poll-driven Clinton could be inferred from ''Sometimes you have to be willing to spend your popularity in order to pick the hard right over the easy wrong.'' Moreover, Gore's device of audience involvement worked well. He dramatized welfare reform, subsidized drugs for seniors, federal subsidy for local schools and ire at H.M.O.'s by focusing on individual faces, adding impact to the television coverage. Asserting his own-manmanship, Gore wrote the speech himself. But to break from banality, that speech needed a rewrite. Fancy oratory is not eloquence, but original expression makes an address memorable and a decent respect for rhetoric is needed to do justice to history. Consider his feeble attempt to build upon John Kennedy's thematic signature, which 40 years before had transfixed the audience in that venue. ''From this city that marked both the end of America's journey westward and the beginning of the New Frontier,'' said Gore, ''let us set out on a new journey to the best America. A new journey on which we advance not by the turning of wheels, but by the turning of our minds . . .'' Turning from what toward what?  Tentatively trying out the New Journey as his slogan, Gore stumbled at the first step. Gore's fake apology -- ''sometimes people say I'm too serious, that I talk too much substance and policy'' --  reminded me of Nixon's ''some of my advisers have suggested I take the easy way.'' (As a White House speechwriter, I often advised ''take the easy way!'' so I could submit a draft in which Nixon could say he rejected that counsel.) When Gore tried to make a phrase, he demonstrated his need for editorial improvement. ''In this City of Angels,'' he offered in a lame peroration, ''we can summon the better angels of our nature.'' That was merely a play on words, and a few remembered that in 1988, Vice President George Bush said that prosperity's purpose was to allow us ''to pursue our better angels.'' To be your own man does not require that you be your own sole  writer. Creative revision by another pair of eyes helps a speech rise to a great occasion. Gore should remember Lincoln's collaborative peroration as he dreams of his own Inaugural Address.
 Top Southern Democrats Offer Gore Little Support  Several prominent Democratic politicians in the South have been keeping their distance from Vice President Al Gore as they begin their own general election campaigns. Their decisions seem to illustrate the South's general indifference to Mr. Gore's appeal, and demonstrate how hard he will have to work to capture even a few states in the region. Mr. Gore renewed his attacks on drug companies and health maintenance organizations and vowed to bring broader and fairer health coverage to all Americans. Campaigning in Illinois and Iowa, Mr. Gore also said he would push for a patients' bill of rights to protect HMO consumers and for adding a prescription drug benefit under the Medicare program. A senior adviser to Mr. Gore accused Gov. George W. Bush of trying to dodge, or at least minimize the impact of, presidential debates, while one of Mr. Bush's top aides said the governor was willing to debate but was still considering more than 40 invitations from an array of potential sponsors.
 Several prominent Democratic politicians in South have distanced themselves from Vice Pres Al Gore as they begin general election campaigns, underscoring South's general indifference to Gore's appeal and how hard he will have to work to capture even few states in region; State Atty Gen Mike Easley, Democratic candidate s for governor in North Carolina, and Zell Miller, candidate for US Senate from Georgia, avoided appearing with Gore and skipped Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles; Gov Jim Hodges of South Carolina left convention conspicuously before acceptance speeches by Gore and Lieberman, citing fund-raising commitments; polls taken before convention show Gore behind in every Southern state except native Tennessee; reveal that Gore has been hurt by Pres Clinton's personal scandals; his positions on major issues are seen as less congenial in South than those of Bush's; photos (M) As if Vice President Al Gore did not have enough trouble in his native region, several prominent Southern politicians of his own party have been keeping their distance from him as they begin their own general election campaigns. The Democratic candidates for governor in North Carolina and senator in Georgia have avoided appearing with Mr. Gore and skipped last week's Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. The governor of South Carolina left the convention early and has dismissed Mr. Gore's chances in his state. As if Vice President Al Gore did not have enough trouble in his native region, several prominent Southern politicians of his own party have been keeping their distance from him as they begin their own general election campaigns. The Democratic candidates for governor in North Carolina and senator in Georgia have avoided appearing with Mr. Gore and skipped last week's Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. The governor of South Carolina left the convention early and has dismissed Mr. Gore's chances in his state. Each has his own explanation, and no one will confess to a deliberate snub of the national ticket. But taken as a whole, their decisions seem to illustrate the South's general indifference to Mr. Gore's appeal and demonstrate how hard he will have to work to capture even a few states in the region. When Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, held a rally in downtown Atlanta on Aug. 10, there was no sign of Georgia's newest statewide Democratic candidate, Senator Zell Miller, the state's former governor. The Democratic candidate for governor of North Carolina, State Attorney General Mike Easley, chose not to appear with Mr. Gore during a June visit to meet with flood victims, although the two men met privately. Mr. Easley has made it clear in various interviews that campaigning with Mr. Gore is not a priority for him. Mr. Easley made a speakerphone call to the North Carolina delegation at last week's Democratic convention but was criticized by some delegates for not appearing in person and for distancing himself from the ticket. Jim Hodges, the Democratic governor of South Carolina, left the convention rather conspicuously on Tuesday, before the acceptance speeches of Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman. Mr. Hodges, who has had a rocky political relationship with Mr. Gore, was quoted in The State, the Columbia newspaper, as saying Gov. George W. Bush has a ''99 percent'' chance of winning South Carolina, adding that he was not planning to work hard for the ticket. Mr. Hodges is not up for re-election this year, but is commanding a major campaign for a November referendum to create a lottery in the state that would provide more money for education. According to a series of recent polls taken before the convention, Mr. Gore was behind in every Southern state except his native Tennessee. Mr. Gore may be doing better after his convention appearance, but the earlier polls showed that he had been hurt by President Clinton's personal scandals, and his own positions on issues like gun control and the environment are seen as less congenial in the South than those of Mr. Bush. ''It always happens, and you can bet it's going to happen in this year's races -- the Republicans are going to try to tie the state Democrats to the unpopular head of the national party,'' said Bill Moore, a professor of political science at the College of Charleston. ''From their point of view, it's just pragmatic politics to appear as independent from Gore as they can be.'' Mr. Hodges backed off his earlier assessment that Mr. Gore had no chance in South Carolina, saying Mr. Gore's selection of Mr. Lieberman and his positions on education and Medicare might help him if he chose to campaign in the state. But many Southern Democrats are grumbling more openly that the Gore campaign has spent little time and money in the South, essentially freeing up candidates to go off on their own. Richard A. Harpootlian, the chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party, said the Bush campaign was still reaping the benefits of having spent at least $4 million in the state during the hotly contested Republican primary in February, while the Democrats have spent about $5,000. ''I want them to commit the resources, commit the effort,'' he said of the Gore campaign. ''If they do that, I think they can win the state.'' But in the absence of a strong national presence, Mr. Easley said, he has to run his own race, because ''there's not any room on the ticket for a weak campaign, top or bottom.'' Campaign officials said he was too busy campaigning to go to Los Angeles. The Gore campaign insists it can be competitive in the South -- particularly in Tennessee, Florida and Georgia, and possibly North Carolina and Arkansas -- and plans to devote resources to the region, although Douglas Hattaway, a campaign spokesman, said he did not know precisely where Mr. Gore would appear. ''Al Gore is a Southern New Democrat who has long favored a strong defense, welfare reform, fiscal responsibility, and values like that,'' Mr. Hattaway said. ''Those are the kind of issues that are important to Southern voters and New Democrats.'' But Rick Dent, a spokesman for Senator Miller, said it might be the Southern Democrats who wound up helping Mr. Gore, a reversal of the conventional coattails theory. Mr. Miller, as a new senator, has been too busy learning the job and gearing up for his campaign to appear with the national ticket, Mr. Dent said. ''But he is a strong vote-getter,'' Mr. Dent said, ''and it may just be that some of his supporters will decide to vote for Mr. Gore.''
 Political Notebook vignettes of behind-the-scenes happenings during stopover in Moline, Ill, by Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph Lieberman (M) In the Gore camp, there has been much talk about the need to gain separation from President Clinton, to set Al Gore apart as his own man with his own style, message and persona. On Saturday, in a most surprising way, Mr. Gore took a step toward doing just that. He did it by becoming more like Mr. Clinton, and he did it, best of all, in a place called Clinton, a small Iowa town set back from the banks of the Mississippi River. There, on the lawn of the county courthouse, Mr. Gore put in a performance more reminiscent of Mr. Clinton's two presidential campaigns than of Mr. Gore circa 2000. In the Gore camp, there has been much talk about the need to gain separation from President Clinton, to set Al Gore apart as his own man with his own style, message and persona. On Saturday, in a most surprising way, Mr. Gore took a step toward doing just that. He did it by becoming more like Mr. Clinton, and he did it, best of all, in a place called Clinton, a small Iowa town set back from the banks of the Mississippi River. There, on the lawn of the county courthouse, Mr. Gore put in a performance more reminiscent of Mr. Clinton's two presidential campaigns than of Mr. Gore circa 2000. He arrived hours late, filled his speech with twangy Southernisms, spoke with a populist passion that had the crowd roaring, danced with his wife and then stayed late into the cool summer night to shake every hand he could reach. Normally not known to linger at the rope line, Mr. Gore plunged again and again toward knots of onlookers, posing for group photographs, kissing babies, tweaking a little boy's nose, signing autographs, slapping high fives -- reveling in the crowd in much the same way Mr. Clinton is famous for doing. ''Are you with me?'' Mr. Gore shouted from the stage. ''Yeah!'' the crowd yelled back. In a campaign sometimes notable for staging events with the pizazz of a tax seminar, Mr. Gore's appearance in Clinton was one of his most energetic and effective in more than a year of campaigning. ''My goodness gracious,'' said Mary Ruth Michelson, 70, who waited four hours for a glimpse of Mr. Gore but never expected anything quite so lively. ''What on earth has gotten into him?'' At the end of his speech, Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, danced under a spray of confetti, and they looked so loose and natural that one grizzled union organizer in the audience wondered whether the notoriously wooden Mr. Gore had undergone a body transplant. By contrast, Iowa's governor, Tom Vilsack, looked stiff and uncomfortable -- think of the old Mr. Gore -- trying to boogie up on a stage in front of several thousand people. Then again Mr. Gore had a slight advantage. Before his arrival in Clinton aboard the riverboat Mark Twain, Mr. Gore had been dancing with gusto during a birthday celebration for his wife on the top deck. In another echo of Mr. Clinton, who was known to cultivate relationships with journalists during his presidential campaigns, the Gores invited reporters to join the festivities in a rare extended off-the-record session. In purely political terms, it may not have been the ideal time to take a day off from the campaign trail. Just as Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, were trying to build momentum from the Democratic National Convention, just as they were trying to give their political partnership a memorable national identity, and right as the campaign held the attention of a large traveling press corps, Mr. Lieberman and his family all but disappeared to observe the Sabbath. On the same day, Mr. Gore was winding his way down the Mississippi, delivering forceful, populist stump speeches to thousands of people in small towns and cities where Mr. Lieberman is largely an unknown. Mr. Gore regularly paused to praise Mr. Lieberman, but he never felt the need to explain the reason for Mr. Lieberman's absence, a reflection of his stated desire to incorporate Mr. Lieberman's Orthodox practices into the rhythm of campaigning with as little fanfare as possible. Campaign aides reasoned that regardless of the cost of Mr. Lieberman's being off the national stage one day every week, many voters would admire a display of commitment to religion above political ambition. And there was another benefit: On Friday, Mr. Lieberman's voice was raw and hoarse. This morning, when he rejoined Mr. Gore in Moline, his voice was back to normal. For those charged with shaping Mr. Gore's image, his four-day trip down the Mississippi has been a feast of useful symbolism. What better way to convey a politician of mainstream, heartland values than to put him aboard the Mark Twain decorated with red, white and blue bunting? But even on this tightly scripted journey, events have sometimes intervened in ways that turned the symbolism upside down. Take Saturday morning in Dubuque, Iowa, where Mr. Gore gave a speech on a low bluff overlooking the Mississippi. At stage right, organizers had erected a huge sign that read, ''Gore Iowa 2000.'' Unfortunately, minutes before Mr. Gore was to take the stage, the ''Iowa 2000'' part of the sign collapsed to the ground with a thud.
 Bob Shrum, senior adviser to Vice Pres Al Gore accuses Gov George W Bush of trying to dodge, or at least minimize,impact of presidential debates; Bush top aide Karen P Hughes says Bush is ready and willing to debate, but is still mulling over details; photos (M) A senior adviser to Vice President Al Gore accused Gov. George W. Bush today of trying to dodge -- or at least minimize the impact of -- presidential debates, while one of Mr. Bush's top aides said the governor was ready and willing but still mulling over the details. ''I think George Bush wants to engineer these debates so the fewest number of people see them,'' said Bob Shrum, the Gore adviser, on the ABC News program ''This Week.'' A senior adviser to Vice President Al Gore accused Gov. George W. Bush today of trying to dodge -- or at least minimize the impact of -- presidential debates, while one of Mr. Bush's top aides said the governor was ready and willing but still mulling over the details. ''I think George Bush wants to engineer these debates so the fewest number of people see them,'' said Bob Shrum, the Gore adviser, on the ABC News program ''This Week.'' Mr. Shrum was referring to the fact that while Mr. Bush had pledged to participate in three debates, he had not agreed specifically to the three proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, which has sponsored all the presidential debates since 1988. Karen P. Hughes, director of communications for the Bush campaign, said on the same program that the governor was simply giving himself time to consider more than 40 debate invitations from an array of potential sponsors. ''Governor Bush is committed to debating,'' Ms. Hughes said. The certain high point of this phase will be the televised face-to-face encounters between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. And the weeks leading to those events are already giving rise to aggressive public posturing, febrile  private negotiations and all-out efforts by each campaign to make sure its candidate ultimately enters the arena with just the right buildup. The Gore campaign has been portraying Mr. Bush as a neophyte frightened of any format that requires him to give lengthy answers and stray beyond sound bites. Mr. Gore's advisers repeatedly note that Mr. Gore has, either formally or informally, agreed to dozens of debates, even though such a number is almost logistically unimaginable. The Bush campaign moved to blunt that line of attack late last week by announcing that Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, would agree to a combined five debates, a ''modern-day record,'' as Ms. Hughes put it. Ms. Hughes and other officials with the Bush campaign have also been talking loudly about what a fierce debater Mr. Gore is, a clear attempt to lower the expectations for Mr. Bush to the point where he is guaranteed to exceed them. And campaign officials have been busily analyzing and deconstructing videotapes and transcripts of Mr. Gore's debates back to 1988, when he ran for the Democratic presidential nomination, a senior adviser to Mr. Bush said. With the help of the Republican National Committee, the adviser said, the Bush campaign has assembled a thick book of research into Mr. Gore's debate performances and has even diagrammed Mr. Gore's typical debate response: an expression of empathy for the issue at hand, followed by an explanation of the remedy he is offering, followed by a pointed attack on his opponent's record or proposal. And the Bush campaign months ago recruited Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire, to prepare for and play the part of Mr. Gore in debate rehearsals. Mr. Gregg did the same for Jack Kemp, the Republican vice-presidential nominee in 1996, before his debate with Mr. Gore that year. The debates have begun to loom larger with the emergence of signs that the race between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore is tightening. A USA Today-CNN-Gallup poll released today showed Mr. Gore moving from a 16-point disadvantage against Mr. Bush before the Democratic National Convention to a 1-point advantage after the convention. That poll, which had a sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points, reflected interviews on Friday and Saturday with 697 likely voters. It put Mr. Gore, who had the support of 47 percent of respondents, and Mr. Bush, with 46 percent, in a four-way contest with Ralph Nader, with 3 percent, and Patrick J. Buchanan, with 2 percent. Mr. Bush's advisers said today that they had always expected that Mr. Gore would get an enormous bounce immediately after his convention and that the race would be close to even around now. They said that the more meaningful polls would come in several weeks, around Labor Day. The competing pitches and warring put-downs as aides to Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush stormed the television airwaves this morning provided a tidy preview of the campaign to come. On the topic of fiscal responsibility, Mr. Gore's advisers moved to defend the amount of spending the vice president had outlined in his convention speech, while Mr. Bush's advisers defended the size of the Texas governor's proposed tax cut of $1.3 trillion over 10 years. Karl Rove, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign, said on the NBC program ''Meet the Press'' that Mr. Bush, who has yet to offer a detailed plan for overhauling Medicare or creating a new prescription drug benefit for the elderly, would be tackling those issues shortly. Mr. Rove said the campaign's budget projections for the next decade showed that Mr. Bush still had ''$900 billion for additional spending and for deficit reduction'' after his tax cut. ''More than enough,'' he said, for a program to expand prescription drug coverage. William M. Daley, the chairman of the Gore campaign, who also appeared on ''Meet the Press,'' told Mr. Rove: ''I would just say that Newt Gingrich and the Republican leadership in the House and Senate over the last eight years haven't been exactly willing to work with President Clinton or Vice President Gore, and that's one of the reasons why we've had a stalemate on important issues.'' On ''This Week,'' Mr. Shrum, the Gore aide, said the Bush campaign was not eager for debates because Mr. Bush did not want to have a substantive discussion of issues.
 Bob Herbert column lauds Vice Pres Al Gore's promise to reach out to working families who have been excluded from nation's economic prosperity; scores Republicans who have denounced this effort as divisive attempt at class warfare; says Republicans in Congress have stood in way of modest minimum wage hike desperately needed by America's low-wage workers, even as Gov George W Bush gift wraps most of nation's projected surplus as tax breaks for the wealthiest among us (M) The Valleses are among the millions of working families Vice President Al Gore is trying to connect with as he travels the country promising to fight for ''those who need a champion, those who need to be lifted up so they are never left behind.'' The Republicans have denounced this effort to reach out to working families -- to build, as Mr. Gore says, a ''better, fairer, more prosperous America'' -- as divisive. It's dangerous, we're told. Un-American. Mr. Gore is ''a candidate who wants to wage class warfare to get ahead,'' said George W. Bush. With Mr. Bush already gift-wrapping most of the nation's projected surplus, which he intends to hand over to the very wealthiest among us, it's fair to ask who's waging war on whom. The Republicans in Congress have stood in the way of this most modest of pay hikes for the nation's low-wage workers. Mr. Gore favors the increase and says he'll fight for it. If that's class warfare, we need more of it. Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, is getting a retirement package worth an estimated $20 million from the Halliburton Company, an energy services outfit that has a big financial stake in the policies of the federal government. No problem, said Mr. Bush.
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph I Lieberman make campaign stop in Moline, Ill, where Gore renews attacks on drug companies and health maintenance organizations and vows to bring broader and fairer health coverage to all Americans; vows to push for patients' bill of rights to protect HMO consumers and for adding prescription drug benefit under Medicare program; photo (M) Comparing his increasingly populist pitch to that of Harry S. Truman, but leaving the ''give-'em-hell'' to his running mate, Vice President Al Gore renewed his attacks on drug companies and health maintenance organizations today and vowed to bring broader and fairer health coverage to all Americans. At the first of four appearances today in Illinois and Iowa, all of them in communities along the Mississippi River, Mr. Gore said he would push for a patients' bill of rights to protect H.M.O. consumers and for adding a prescription drug benefit under the Medicare program. Comparing his increasingly populist pitch to that of Harry S. Truman, but leaving the ''give-'em-hell'' to his running mate, Vice President Al Gore renewed his attacks on drug companies and health maintenance organizations today and vowed to bring broader and fairer health coverage to all Americans. At the first of four appearances today in Illinois and Iowa, all of them in communities along the Mississippi River, Mr. Gore said he would push for a patients' bill of rights to protect H.M.O. consumers and for adding a prescription drug benefit under the Medicare program. ''If you entrust me with the presidency, we will flat make it happen,'' Mr. Gore promised a crowd of about 3,000 in downtown Moline. Both Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, used their speeches here to draw on the Trumanesque imagery that has enthralled Democrats for more than half a century. But Mr. Gore left it to Mr. Lieberman to assail the health care record of Mr. Gore's Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. While Mr. Gore made only passing references to the Republicans, Mr. Lieberman cited statistics that 1.4 million children in Texas did not have health insurance, that Texas led the nation in the percentage of residents who were uninsured and that it ranked next to last in health care coverage for women. Mr. Lieberman said Mr. Bush often responded to criticism of his state by saying, ''Don't mess with Texas.'' But, he asserted, ''when it comes to health care, it's a mess in Texas.'' Aides to Mr. Bush accused the Gore campaign today of distorting the governor's health care record, pointing out that a bill he signed in 1999 was expected to add 423,000 children to the health insurance rolls by 2001. (Mr. Bush, however, had earlier fought for a less-inclusive plan.) ''The further Al Gore floats down the Mississippi, the more he drifts away from the facts on Governor Bush's record on health care in Texas,'' said Dan Bartlett, a Bush spokesman. After a two-day riverboat tour down the Mississippi, Mr. Gore left the slow-moving ship and traveled by bus today so he could make all four cities on his schedule. Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, were rejoined by Mr. Lieberman and his wife, Hadassah, who had left the tour in Wisconsin on Friday to observe the Jewish Sabbath. The candidates clearly have been buoyed by polls showing they received a significant boost from the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, and they have been received enthusiastically by sizable crowds. ''I'm no expert as to what to make of it,'' Mr. Gore told reporters, ''but it feels good.'' As in his speech at the convention on Thursday night, Mr. Gore accepted credit today for the economic health of the Clinton years but said there was more work to be done. He noted, for instance, that 15 percent of Americans still lacked health insurance. Mr. Gore said he would move incrementally toward a system of universal health care, starting with guaranteed coverage for every child by 2004. And he said the country owes its older citizens a prescription drug benefit, a proposal estimated to cost $253 billion over 10 years. ''When people have bills for pills that are more than their Social Security check,'' Mr. Gore said, ''it is wrong for our country to put seniors, the generation that won World War II, in a situation where they have to choose between food and medicine when the drug companies have the biggest profits of any industry in America.'' The drug companies, Mr. Gore said, do not support such plans because they fear that drug prices will come down. ''Well, they need to come down,'' he said. ''They need more competition.'' He added: ''I'll be like Harry Truman. I'll tell them the truth and they'll just think it's hell.'' Mr. Gore then switched targets from the drug companies to H.M.O.'s that he accuses of making financial decisions that usurp medical recommendations. ''Some bean counter behind a computer terminal who doesn't have a license to practice medicine and surely does not have a right to play god overrules the doctor because the H.M.O. or the insurance company doesn't want to shell out the money, even though you've been paying the monthly premium,'' Mr. Gore said. ''What is that all about?'' Mr. Gore's proposal for a patients' bill of rights, campaign aides say, would assure access to specialists, would guarantee emergency room care regardless of when and where the need arises and would provide either a right to sue or an alternative appeals process if insurers deny coverage. The Gore campaign criticizes Mr. Bush's proposed bill of rights because it would cover only those Americans in federally governed health care plans, a restriction that Gore aides say would exclude 135 million people with private insurance.
 As Brutus, Mr. Sheridan has the tense, macho mien of a Tom Landry-like football coach, someone who relishes the burden of setting a martyr's example for underlings. He seems to relish being put upon, even at home. (Portia, his wife, is played by Colette Kilroy as embittered by her husband's preoccupied frame of mind, and she uses the wounding of her thigh as a shrewish manipulation of his attention.) But Mr. Sheridan is a stiff performer, passing from reaction to reaction with a visible yank. His funeral speech feels practiced -- think Al Gore -- inadvertently masking the complications in Brutus's heart, making Antony's countervailing oration a finger snap.
 Dr Christine K Cassel letter comments on disagreements between Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph I Lieberman over raising eligibility age for Social Security or Medicare The disagreement between Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman over raising the eligibility age for Social Security or Medicare (news article, Aug. 14) can be solved with a logical compromise: Lower Medicare's eligibility age to 55 while raising the age of Social Security eligibility. This would improve the health of older Americans while keeping more experienced employees in the labor market. The disagreement between Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman over raising the eligibility age for Social Security or Medicare (news article, Aug. 14) can be solved with a logical compromise: Lower Medicare's eligibility age to 55 while raising the age of Social Security eligibility. This would improve the health of older Americans while keeping more experienced employees in the labor market.
 A lifelong, politically active Democrat, she returned home Friday from the party's convention in Los Angeles. She is an eager supporter of Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Gore, she says, will continue the economic expansion that is helping make cars safer. ''It's a luxury to make policy that provides for safety,'' she said. ''If you have a sound economy, corporations are going to be more willing and more able to embrace techniques to make cars safer.''
 Jay Raghavan letter disputes August 15 letter about Gov George W Bush's leadership qualities I disagree with an Aug. 15 letter about Gov. George W. Bush, which argues that ''a leader who recognizes his own limitations is always preferable to one who believes himself to hold all the answers.'' The presidency requires a leader with a good grasp of issues. To delegate responsibilities to aides may be the proper way of doing business, and it is how many successful enterprises operate. But to hand over all the cards to trusted aides does not speak well of a leader. I disagree with an Aug. 15 letter about Gov. George W. Bush, which argues that ''a leader who recognizes his own limitations is always preferable to one who believes himself to hold all the answers.'' The presidency requires a leader with a good grasp of issues. To delegate responsibilities to aides may be the proper way of doing business, and it is how many successful enterprises operate. But to hand over all the cards to trusted aides does not speak well of a leader. A true leader should articulate substance and offer specific ideas. This is where Mr. Bush may be found wanting, which could become evident during debates.
 Re ''Lieberman Sets Stage for Gore as Democrats Seal the Ticket''  (front page, Aug. 17), about Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's speech at the Democratic National Convention: Re ''Lieberman Sets Stage for Gore as Democrats Seal the Ticket''  (front page, Aug. 17), about Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's speech at the Democratic National Convention:
 That evening, Mr. McCain returned to the convention and wore a bandage over part of his left temple when he appeared on stage with Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee.
 Earlier, as he emerged from dinner, the president revealed his birthday wish: that both his wife and Vice President Al Gore win their electoral bids.
