 If concrete bunkers lurk in the background, however, they do not unduly darken Jersey and Guernsey. After our walk on the beach at St. Ouen, we spent the rest of our few days on Jersey among greenery, flowers and tranquil ocean scenery, including a languid beach walk near Orgeuil Castle in Gorey. Like most visitors, we headed to the island's best-known attraction, Gerald Durrell's Jersey Zoo, whose parklike setting is home to about 100 species of rare and endangered animals -- among them the Madagascar aye-aye, the Andean bear and the Sumatran orangutan. Durrell, who died in 1995, began the zoo as a breeding center, and it now functions also as an international training school. But despite its serious purpose, the place has a delightful holiday air. For fancier cooking, try the charming Village Bistro in Gorey. A typical set lunch at $21 might include, among several choices, smoked salmon salad with herb creme fraiche; escalope of pork with woodland mushroom risotto; roasted hazelnut and cocoa pavlova with apricot compote and vanilla ice cream. Reservations essential: (44-1534) 853-429. Open for dinner Tuesday through Sunday and lunch Wednesday through Sunday.
 ''This is right out of the Newt Gingrich, George W. Bush Republican playbook,'' Mrs. Clinton said.
 For the third time, Attorney General Janet Reno brushed off the advice of senior advisers and declined to intensify an investigation into Vice President Al Gore's fundraising activities in 1996. For the third time, Attorney General Janet Reno brushed off the advice of senior advisers and declined to intensify an investigation into Vice President Al Gore's fundraising activities in 1996. She said she would not appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Gore's sworn statements that neither his appearance at a Buddhist temple in California in 1986 nor his attendance at several White House coffee sessions were fundraisers. Law-enforcement officials said Ms. Reno's decision meant that Mr. Gore would finally be free and clear of any criminal liability as he goes into the final months of the presidential campaign.
 I D Abella letter says Paul Krugman's Aug 23 article makes good case that tax cuts proposed by Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore depend on rosy predictions; says solution might be to provide yearly tax dividend or rebate after fiscal year results are in Paul Krugman (column, Aug. 23) makes a good case against the tax cuts of both George W. Bush and Al Gore as depending on rosy predictions. A solution might be to provide a yearly tax dividend or rebate after the fiscal year results are in. This way, only if a year-end ''profit''  exists would a rebate be declared, targeted or otherwise. Tax rates would remain the same. Paul Krugman (column, Aug. 23) makes a good case against the tax cuts of both George W. Bush and Al Gore as depending on rosy predictions. A solution might be to provide a yearly tax dividend or rebate after the fiscal year results are in. This way, only if a year-end ''profit''  exists would a rebate be declared, targeted or otherwise. Tax rates would remain the same.
 He is garrulous, back-slapping, mildly naughty, more resilient physically than he ought to be, adept at publicly disguising whatever might be his temper or disappointment. These days he has a half-dozen projects percolating. He's designing announcements for a new Merce Cunningham performance. He just signed off on prints for Al Gore's campaign, to raise money for the Democratic Party, and for Hillary Clinton: elephants seen from the rear, a broom, a donkey. ''No point being subtle,'' he says.
 Deidre Holmes DuBois letter says Al Gore is for tax credits for working families (Aug 22 article), but offers no tax cuts for her and her husband, a working family with no children '' 'Working Families' Becomes a Theme Meant to Attract Female Voters'' (news article, Aug. 22) doesn't point out the inherent problem with the phrase ''working families.'' In fact, you list some of Al Gore's policies like tax credits for day care and after-school programs as ''aimed specifically at working families.'' '' 'Working Families' Becomes a Theme Meant to Attract Female Voters'' (news article, Aug. 22) doesn't point out the inherent problem with the phrase ''working families.'' In fact, you list some of Al Gore's policies like tax credits for day care and after-school programs as ''aimed specifically at working families.''
 As a Senator, Lieberman Is Proudly Pro-Business  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman has closely aligned himself with three industries -- insurance, high technology and health care -- that are the main sources of his campaign contributions. His pro-business record contrasts sharply with the larger message that Vice President Al Gore has been sending recently. Gov. George W. Bush has embraced his state's growing Mexican-American population. Yet Hispanics in Texas remain more likely to be poor, unemployed and without health insurance, problems that predate Mr. Bush but that his critics say he has done too little to address.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush are more evenly matched for coming presidential debate than people think, and Bush could even come out ahead; photo (M) GIVEN that both sides are bracing for a down-to-the-wire presidential race, the nationally televised debates between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore could be especially crucial. For millions of Americans, it may be the first -- and only -- time they eyeball the two rivals for longer than a few-second snippet on the news or in a commercial. But to listen to many strategists and pundits, Democrats and Republicans alike, Mr. Bush might as well put away his briefing books and sit out the debates. The common wisdom is that Mr. Gore -- the oratorical slayer of Ross Perot, Jack Kemp and Bill Bradley -- is such a vaunted debater and Mr. Bush is such a novice, sometimes even a stumblebum, that it would be like watching a karaoke competition between Barbra Streisand and a barroom crooner. Bush officials angled for advantage last week in negotiating the debate roster, a move Gore aides said was intended to find a format with smaller audiences and moderators hospitable to the governor. GIVEN that both sides are bracing for a down-to-the-wire presidential race, the nationally televised debates between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore could be especially crucial. For millions of Americans, it may be the first -- and only -- time they eyeball the two rivals for longer than a few-second snippet on the news or in a commercial. But to listen to many strategists and pundits, Democrats and Republicans alike, Mr. Bush might as well put away his briefing books and sit out the debates. The common wisdom is that Mr. Gore -- the oratorical slayer of Ross Perot, Jack Kemp and Bill Bradley -- is such a vaunted debater and Mr. Bush is such a novice, sometimes even a stumblebum, that it would be like watching a karaoke competition between Barbra Streisand and a barroom crooner. Bush officials angled for advantage last week in negotiating the debate roster, a move Gore aides said was intended to find a format with smaller audiences and moderators hospitable to the governor. The truth is that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are more evenly matched than people think. Mr. Bush could even come out ahead. Mr. Gore has had years of debate training and is known for absorbing every fact and angle -- and using them to pound like a jackhammer at his opponent. Mr. Bush, by contrast, had taken part in just two debates before the primaries, against his rivals for governor of Texas in 1994 and 1998. Still, Mr. Bush improved significantly during the primaries. And if he can harness his easygoing charm, he might come off as less intense and more appealing than Mr. Gore. After all, Ronald Reagan vanquished President Jimmy Carter in 1980, not because he had a better command of issues -- he did not -- but because he could better connect with the audience when he admonished Mr. Carter, ''There you go again!'' ''If Bush can do to Gore what Reagan did to Carter -- make him look pedantic, like a wonk who is out of touch -- he may very well prevail,'' said Alan Schroeder, a political scientist and the author of ''Presidential Debates: Forty Years of High-Risk TV'' (Columbia University Press, 2000). ''If the debate turns a little more on content, then obviously Gore is in an advantage here.'' Debates are all about expectations, which are decidedly rock bottom for Mr. Bush, and his aides are doing their best to keep them that way. ''I've watched the tapes,'' said Mr. Bush's communications director, Karen P. Hughes, ''and Vice President Gore has a carefully schooled and trained technique.'' Even as other campaign officials were attacking Mr. Bush last week as too timid to  debate, William M. Daley, the chairman of the Gore campaign, tried to raise expectations for his opponent. ''If you see the tape of the Richards-Bush debate,'' he said, ''he did just fine.'' IF fine is coming through without being bloodied, Mr. Bush did survive an hourlong tussle in 1994 with Gov. Ann Richards, who was one of the Democrats' biggest stars. She was funny and sarcastic; he was not, but was unruffled and stuck to his message. Mr. Gore, by most experts' reckoning, is an adroit debater. Yet some of his successes had a lot to do with weak opponents. In the primaries, for example, Mr. Bradley was lackluster and afraid to counterattack aggressively. And in what was perhaps Mr. Gore's best-known debate, on the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993, Mr. Perot was not as well prepared -- and let himself become rattled. Before those matchups, when Mr. Gore went up against Vice President Dan Quayle, who was much maligned for his oratorical skills (or lack thereof), Mr. Gore was not particularly impressive. In fact, many analysts said Mr. Quayle did as well as or better than his opponent. Several times Mr. Quayle tried to goad Mr. Gore into defending President Clinton, saying, ''Bill Clinton has trouble telling the truth.'' Some Democrats skewered Mr. Gore after the debate for not sufficiently defending the president. ''I think Bush has the advantage, oddly enough, entirely because of the expectations game,'' said Senator Mitch McConnell, a Kentucky Republican. Still, the Bush camp seems apprehensive. The campaign proposed five debates this year, two between the vice presidential nominees. But unlike the Gore campaign, the Bush organization has not agreed to the proposal offered by the Commission on Presidential Debates, a bipartisan group that has sponsored debates since the 1988 campaign. The commission has proposed three presidential debates in October. Bush officials said they want to consider all the possible formats; Gore aides say their rival is afraid to meet them head on. There is a history in the Bush family of reluctance to debate: former President George Bush took part in debates in 1988 and 1992, but only after protracted negotiations with the debate commission. In a town meeting-style debate with Mr. Clinton in 1992, Mr. Bush seemed so bored that the camera caught him glancing at his watch. Usually, however, debates simply reinforce existing allegiances toward a candidate. That could be different this year, though, because since there is no incumbent running, the debates will give many Americans their first and possibly only opportunity to scrutinize Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore side by side.
 Pleas offered by Susan Hawk, Rudy Boesch, Kelly Wigglesworth and Richard Hatch to stay on the island in the Survivor television show are compared with speeches made by Vice Pres Al Gore. Gov George W Bush, John McCain and Ralph Nader; photo (M) But the crucial moment came when the last two, Kelly and Richard, had to present their cases to a jury of their ex-peers. One hopes that the presidential candidates, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, were watching and taking notes. Kelly learned that to win an election, dazzling social skills -- or quiet fortitude and an iron will -- are not enough. The winner needs a speech that inspires and empowers the undecided. George W. Bush, the Republican candidate, defined himself as an outsider: Al Gore, concerned that the national election was starting to resemble a high school one, asked constituents to vote not for the more popular guy, but for the one who works the hardest and even makes unpopular decisions. John McCain, an early favorite, endorsed Mr. Bush, honoring a campaign promise. In a letter to his supporters in May, he wrote:
 And in the current presidential campaign, George W. Bush and Al Gore have encouraged churches to take advantage of a provision in the 1996 act that allows faith-based groups to contract with the government to provide social services.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on George W Bush's thoughts about the bounce in polls Al Gore received after planting a big kiss on his wife, Tipper, during Democratic Party's national convention (M) ''One phony kiss and I'm down five points,'' he mutters to himself. ''In four seconds, Al Gore kisses his gender gap goodbye? We're neck and neck because I wouldn't neck? ''Gore is so cocky because his bounce is bigger than mine. Republicans are wondering if I have the fire to win or if I just want to get back into the White House to play horseshoes and have Sunday hamburger lunches. They told me to stop saying that I won't mind if I don't win. Karl said it used to make me sound like I wasn't overly ambitious, which was a good thing; now it makes me sound like I'm not overly ambitious, which is a bad thing. Go figure. ''Know what you're going through, son,'' Poppy says. ''Bush men have a hard time putting on the lovey-dovey. Went through the same deal in '88. Michael and Kitty Dukakis spent the whole Democratic convention hugging. Come on, that stuff about them dancing with no music in the holding room, looking like they were madly in love? Didn't seem real.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, bouyed by success of his prescription-drug proposal, plans to dedicate week to cross-country discussion of heath care issues and comparison of his proposals with those of Gov George W Bush; Republicans are running $7 million worth of television commercials criticizing his plan (M) Riding a wave of success on his prescription-drug plan, Vice President Al Gore plans to dedicate all of next week to a cross-country discussion of health care issues and a comparison of his proposals with those of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Gore's advisers, who outlined the strategy in a conference call this morning, said that prescription drugs had emerged as the ''top issue,'' and that Mr. Gore had surged in the polls in part because he had dedicated so much time to the issue. The Republicans are clearly nervous about the inroads Mr. Gore has made with discussion of his plan and are running $7 million worth of television commercials criticizing the plan. Riding a wave of success on his prescription-drug plan, Vice President Al Gore plans to dedicate all of next week to a cross-country discussion of health care issues and a comparison of his proposals with those of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Gore's advisers, who outlined the strategy in a conference call this morning, said that prescription drugs had emerged as the ''top issue,'' and that Mr. Gore had surged in the polls in part because he had dedicated so much time to the issue. The Republicans are clearly nervous about the inroads Mr. Gore has made with discussion of his plan and are running $7 million worth of television commercials criticizing the plan. Under the Gore plan, people 65 and older with low incomes -- falling below 135 percent of the official poverty line -- would get free prescription-drug coverage. Mr. Bush's plan also covers the elderly poor. Beyond that, Mr. Gore offers a broader package of prescription drug coverage through Medicare to all elderly patients, while Mr. Bush does not. Under the Gore plan, they could pay premiums of between $25 and $44 per month for coverage of prescription drugs. The plan would cover half of all drug costs up to $5,000 and 100 percent of costs beyond $5,000. The patients would also have the option of buying coverage for catastrophic illnesses. Mr. Gore sets aside $253 billion over 10 years to cover prescription drugs. Mr. Bush has not specified what he would set aside. Mr. Gore begins the week in Tallahassee, Fla., with a round-table discussion of his prescription-drug plan. On Tuesday in Albuquerque, N.M., he is to talk about children's health care. His topic will be Medicare on Wednesday in Eugene and Portland in Oregon, and on Thursday he plans a rally in Seattle on the patients' bill of rights. This morning's conference call was joined by Dr. David Kessler, the former food and drug commissioner and now dean of the Yale School of Medicine. Dr. Kessler, speaking from Woodbridge, Conn., said Mr. Gore ''has real commitment and real expertise'' on health care issues.
 The bridegroom's mother, Constance Horner, is a guest scholar at the Brookings Institution in Washington. She was a deputy secretary of health and human services and later the director of the Office of Personnel Management in the Bush administration. His father is a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute in Washington; he was a deputy assistant secretary of state from 1981 to 1985 and the associate director of the United States Information Agency from 1985 to 1991.
 ''This is right out of the Newt Gingrich, George W. Bush Republican playbook,'' Mrs. Clinton said. On Thursday, Mr. Lazio, who has been a congressman from Suffolk County for eights years, said his proposal would include a menu of tax cuts long advocated by Congressional Republicans, among them the elimination of the inheritance tax and the marriage penalty. Mr. Lazio's speech came in a week that George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, was forced to defend his $1.3 trillion federal tax cut proposal. Mr. Lazio said his plan would result in $776 billion in tax cuts over 10 years. It was meant to distance himself from the Bush plan, while still advocating more reductions than Mrs. Clinton did. But Clinton campaign aides said that because of an error in calculations, Mr. Lazio's plan would actually produce $1.24 trillion in cuts, rather than the $776 billion he cited.
 Editorial assess bounce in polls Vice Pres Al Gore has received after selecting Sen Joseph Lieberman as his running mate (M) The 2000 presidential campaign has produced an unusually intense post-convention period. The tradition that the nominees spend a few sleepy weeks resting before Labor Day seems a thing of the distant past, thanks to an unusual volatility in the polls and increasingly heated exchanges between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Even Mr. Gore has got to be a little surprised at the way he has been lifted in voter surveys since the Democrats adjourned their convention. After a smooth run-up to the Republican convention, Mr. Bush has been looking defensive and has even been publicly self-critical about his problems in making the case for his huge tax cuts. The candidates are mischievously making feints into each other's friendly territory -- Mr. Gore in Florida and Mr. Bush in several states carried by the Democrats in recent elections. All told, the voters have reason to believe both men's predictions that this will wind up as a tough, tight race. The candidates' fortunes and the lead in the polls are likely to change several times before the election. But the most striking feature of the past 10 days has been the ''bounce'' experienced by Mr. Gore after his selection of Senator Joseph Lieberman as a running mate and after a spirited convention in Los Angeles. Many polls show him slightly ahead of Mr. Bush for the first time. Some independent voters have swung to his side, and Mr. Gore increased his support among Democrats to levels that are traditional, suggesting that the party faithful may have come home. He has also strengthened his ratings as a convincing leader, whereas before voters rated Mr. Bush more highly on leadership. The 2000 presidential campaign has produced an unusually intense post-convention period. The tradition that the nominees spend a few sleepy weeks resting before Labor Day seems a thing of the distant past, thanks to an unusual volatility in the polls and increasingly heated exchanges between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Even Mr. Gore has got to be a little surprised at the way he has been lifted in voter surveys since the Democrats adjourned their convention. After a smooth run-up to the Republican convention, Mr. Bush has been looking defensive and has even been publicly self-critical about his problems in making the case for his huge tax cuts. The candidates are mischievously making feints into each other's friendly territory -- Mr. Gore in Florida and Mr. Bush in several states carried by the Democrats in recent elections. All told, the voters have reason to believe both men's predictions that this will wind up as a tough, tight race. The candidates' fortunes and the lead in the polls are likely to change several times before the election. But the most striking feature of the past 10 days has been the ''bounce'' experienced by Mr. Gore after his selection of Senator Joseph Lieberman as a running mate and after a spirited convention in Los Angeles. Many polls show him slightly ahead of Mr. Bush for the first time. Some independent voters have swung to his side, and Mr. Gore increased his support among Democrats to levels that are traditional, suggesting that the party faithful may have come home. He has also strengthened his ratings as a convincing leader, whereas before voters rated Mr. Bush more highly on leadership. Mr. Gore has also had some success in switching the campaign focus to budget issues and away from the personality terrain that favors Mr. Bush.  The vice president has done an effective job in attacking the Bush tax cut as a giveaway to the wealthy. Last week, Mr. Bush trotted out some low- to middle-income taxpayers whose federal tax bills would be cut by as much as three-quarters. But these individual cases do not erase Mr. Gore's basic point that the overall distribution of the Bush plan is toward the most wealthy taxpayers. Mr. Bush's case was not helped by his difficulty in getting his numbers straight. The vice president's stands on health, schools and the environment are also more favored by voters. But the Texas governor may still do damage with his charge that under the Democrats, the military has deteriorated -- an echo of the chimerical ''missile gap'' raised by John F. Kennedy in 1960. He also sought to show a statesmanlike side by meeting on Friday with Vicente Fox Quesada, the president-elect of Mexico, and calling for improved ties with Latin America. Mr. Gore had a good response on the military issue, however, noting that military spending had begun declining when Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate, was defense secretary. Wearing his veteran's cap, Mr. Gore noted that he (by implication, unlike Mr. Bush) had volunteered for Vietnam, and he condemned the governor's talk of American weakness as sending a dangerous signal to the world. The Gore campaign's challenge remains to escape the shadow of President Clinton and the scandals of the last several years. Knowing this, Mr. Bush's strategists are sorting out their options as to how to attack on the character issue. On Mr. Bush's order, the Republicans withdrew a television ad tying Mr. Gore directly to Mr. Clinton's problem with telling the truth. They apparently feared the ad might create a backlash. But Mr. Bush will continue to argue that most Americans want to restore ''honor and dignity'' to the White House by a total change of administration. Bush aides also indicate that the governor plans to attack Mr. Gore over the 1996 Democratic fund-raising scandals. That issue came into the news last week when Attorney General Janet Reno decided not to seek appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Gore's denials that he had been aware of fund-raising irregularities in that campaign. Ms. Reno's repeated refusal to bring in an independent prosecutor on the fund-raising issue has amounted to a disgraceful dereliction of duty. But as this page said two months ago, installing a special prosecutor at the height of the campaign would disrupt the electoral process. Since Mr. Gore has released all his deposition statements on this matter, voters can decide how to judge him, and Mr. Bush is fully entitled to raise this issue throughout the fall.
 THE family values platform has been the stomping ground of Republicans for so long that there has been little room for the Democrats. But last week, riding a wave of strong polls following his family-friendly speech at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, Vice President Al Gore reiterated his intention to make families, particularly ''working families,'' the focus of his campaign. Mr. Gore projected himself as a devoted husband and father who understands that all families want the same opportunities for their children. THE family values platform has been the stomping ground of Republicans for so long that there has been little room for the Democrats. But last week, riding a wave of strong polls following his family-friendly speech at the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, Vice President Al Gore reiterated his intention to make families, particularly ''working families,'' the focus of his campaign. Mr. Gore projected himself as a devoted husband and father who understands that all families want the same opportunities for their children. Mr. Gore chose his oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, to nominate him for president at the convention. He sent a message: his role as a father is one of the most important criteria that qualify him for president. Although Ms. Schiff has been an adviser to her father, she became a more visible member of his campaign only after she married and became a mother. In his convention speech Mr. Gore invoked family no fewer than 50 times. On the other hand, Mr. Bush, the Republican candidate, used it only six times. When Mr. Gore announced his candidacy in June 1999, he used family 25 times. Delivering the commencement speech at Harvard University in 1994, he said: ''I believe in finding fulfillment in family, for the family is the true center of a meaningful life. Cynics may say: All families are confining and ultimately dysfunctional; the very idea of family is outdated and unworkable. But the cynics are wrong. It is in our families that we learn to love.'' But with the single lifestyle becoming increasingly popular, particularly among women, Mr. Gore's family focus may alienate those who are trying to take pride in what has been seen as a less than ideal choice in a society that values marriage and childbearing highly. MR. GORE'S national spokesman, Doug Hattaway, said many of the issues Mr. Gore addresses, like prescription benefits, appeal to all people, including those ''who are not yet parents.'' Implicit is perhaps the assumption that the childless and single will one day become parents, that they are responsive to a message that focuses on families.
 A handful Democratic governors from the South skipped the party convention this year, fearful that any association with the scandals of the past eight years might harm them in their conservative districts. The Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, is courting independent voters and disaffected Democrats by running against the ''Clinton-Gore Administration.'' A handful Democratic governors from the South skipped the party convention this year, fearful that any association with the scandals of the past eight years might harm them in their conservative districts. The Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, is courting independent voters and disaffected Democrats by running against the ''Clinton-Gore Administration.'' Even Vice President Gore has kept his distance from the commander in chief, to establish his own identity and avoid being tarred with the president's personal problems. When the presidential campaign heats up, Mr. Clinton will also be a factor. Republicans insist they will campaign hard in New Jersey this fall. But when Mr. Bush does appear in the state, you can bet he'll utter far more code words about ''restoring the honor and dignity to the Presidency,'' than direct criticisms of Mr. Clinton himself. It is unclear whether the President will be asked to campaign for Mr. Gore in the state, but Mr. Clinton showed on Wednesday that he wasn't willing to concede the code language to the Republicans. The president thanked Ms. Bass Levin for her unwavering support and seemed to equate loyalty to Bill Clinton with allegiance to the nation itself.
 Gov George W Bush, who won over some Hispanic voters from Democrats in Texas gubernatorial race, is now courting Hispanics nationwide; critics charge Bush, despite his more moderate rhetoric, has done too little to ease plight of poor Hispanics; Bush's efforts, while in sharp contrast with those of national Republicans, follow path taken by other Texas governors; photo (M)/ The scene from the 1998 race for governor hardly suggested a typical Republican tableau: There in Segundo Barrio, one of the oldest and poorest neighborhoods in this isolated border city, Gov. George W. Bush had come to eat Mexican sweetbread and campaign in Spanish accented with a Texas twang. Mr. Bush was venturing into one of the last Democratic strongholds in Texas, an overwhelmingly Hispanic city that no Republican candidate for governor had ever won. But when Mr. Bush was re-elected by a landslide, he also by one estimate won nearly half the Hispanic vote statewide. He even won El Paso. It seemed like political magic; he had found votes in places Republicans usually dared not tread. The scene from the 1998 race for governor hardly suggested a typical Republican tableau: There in Segundo Barrio, one of the oldest and poorest neighborhoods in this isolated border city, Gov. George W. Bush had come to eat Mexican sweetbread and campaign in Spanish accented with a Texas twang. Mr. Bush was venturing into one of the last Democratic strongholds in Texas, an overwhelmingly Hispanic city that no Republican candidate for governor had ever won. But when Mr. Bush was re-elected by a landslide, he also by one estimate won nearly half the Hispanic vote statewide. He even won El Paso. It seemed like political magic; he had found votes in places Republicans usually dared not tread. As he campaigns for president as ''a different kind of Republican,'' Mr. Bush is now sprinkling his Spanish from Iowa to California, courting Hispanic voters nationwide much as he did in Texas. In speeches, he often mentions the 1998 race as evidence of his commitment to inclusiveness and proof that his policies offer benefits that are colorblind. In Texas, Mr. Bush's record shows that he has embraced his state's growing Mexican-American population, pointedly rejecting the hostility shown by some members of his party on issues like immigration and bilingual education. Yet Hispanics in Texas remain more likely to be poor, unemployed and without health insurance -- ingrained problems that predate Mr. Bush but problems that his critics say he has done too little to address. [In a foreign policy address on Friday Mr. Bush focused on Latin America and his desire to strengthen economic and political ties with the region. ''Should I become president,'' he said, ''I will look south not as an afterthought but as a fundamental commitment of my presidency.''] ''George W. Bush's rhetoric is more moderate,'' said Dolores Briones, the El Paso County judge, a Democrat and the county's highest elected local official, ''but the reality for our families has not changed.'' Even today, there is debate in Texas about how well Mr. Bush did with Hispanics in 1998. He won 69 percent of the overall vote, and he has claimed winning 49 percent of the Hispanic vote, based on an initial exit poll. But that figure is remarkably high for a Republican, and later exit polls and academic studies suggest his actual total was as low as 33 percent, still high for a Republican but not as impressive. ''They use the 50 percent, and that's just false,'' said Dr. Rodolfo de la Garza, head of the Tomas Rivera Policy Institute at the University of Texas, who has studied the race. He cautioned against using the 1998 race as a gauge of Mr. Bush's potential appeal because turnout was very low and the challenger was very weak. There is no question that Hispanics have emerged as the nation's fastest' growing minority group since Mr. Bush took office in 1995. Demographic studies in Texas predict that Hispanics, mostly Mexican-Americans, will surpass Anglos and become the largest ethnic group by 2030. In Houston, the state's largest city, Hispanics are expected to gain majority status by the end of this decade. Mr. Bush established a very different tone. He named Tony Garza, a Mexican-American, as his first political appointee, as secretary of state. In his first piece of state business, Mr. Bush met with the governors of five Mexican states near the border. He opposed Proposition 187 and supported English Plus, a modified version of bilingual education. His position on Proposition 187 was mostly moot -- Texas did not provide nearly the same amount of benefits to undocumented immigrants as California did -- but it established him as a friendly face in a hostile party. He courted Mexico, supporting the Clinton administration's bailout of the peso when Congressional Republicans criticized the plan. In 1996, when a quirk in the federal welfare overhaul left many legal immigrants without food stamps, Mr. Bush made an emergency expenditure to provide aid to the elderly and disabled until federal officials corrected the problem. Mr. Bush also courted Hispanics on a personal level. He spoke Spanish often, if not always fluently, and talked of shared cultures, a point underscored by his own traditional Christmas menu, which included tamales and enchiladas. ''With the Mexican-American community, we appreciate that his feelings are heartfelt,'' said Mr. Garza, now a member of the Texas Railroad Commission, whose chief responsibility is regulating the oil and gas industry. ''You don't get finger pointing from George W. Bush.'' The contrast between Mr. Bush and other national Republicans was stark, but, in many ways, he was following the path taken by other Texas governors. Texas and Mexico have long shared cultural, historic and economic ties that have made the two interdependent. When the Mexican peso was devalued in the mid-1990's, the ripple effect was felt all along the Texas border; in El Paso, 80 stores closed. The advent of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which lowered trade barriers between Mexico and the United States, has only deepened the mutual self-interest -- state statistics show that more than 228,000 jobs in Texas are now linked to Nafta. ''No governor in Texas has ever done what Pete Wilson did,'' said Dr. de la Garza, the University of Texas government professor. And Mr. Bush, he said, has also used his personal charm to establish himself as a ''buena gent,'' or good guy. ''Above all, he has managed symbols wonderfully, and that's not a trivial issue. He has demonstrated cultural respect.'' A review of Mr. Bush's record shows a more complicated picture. Dan Bartlett, a campaign spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the governor had appealed to Hispanics through broad conservative themes and a cultural emphasis on family and tradition. ''The whole theme of personal responsibility and accountability, coupled with the message of inclusion, has resonated with the Hispanic community in Texas,'' Mr. Bartlett said. Mr. Bush regularly cites statistics showing how test scores of minority students, including those of Hispanics, have risen in Texas during his tenure. Roughly 70 percent of Hispanic students passed the most recent Texas Assessment of Academic Skills, the exam students must pass to graduate. His Hispanic allies, like Alberto Gonzales, whom Mr. Bush appointed to the Texas Supreme Court, called education a critical issue and credited Mr. Bush for appealing to Hispanic voters with an optimistic, inclusive message. Mr. Bush's emphasis on inclusion has focused attention on the 3,041 appointments he has made, perhaps his greatest power as governor. His aides note that in addition to Mr. Garza and Mr. Gonzales, the governor has appointed several other Hispanics to high-level positions, including Jose Montemayor as commissioner of insurance, and Tony Sanchez and Raul Romero to the University of Texas Board of Regents. But state records show that Mr. Bush's appointments still tend to be overwhelmingly white and mostly male in a state that is increasingly less so. Among his appointees, 13 percent are Hispanic, 9 percent are black and 1 percent are other minorities. By comparison, among state residents, 31 percent are Hispanic, 11 percent are black and 3 percent are other minorities. Sixty-three percent of Mr. Bush's appointees are men and 37 percent are women. For any Texas governor, one of the most difficult challenges is addressing the endemic poverty along the Mexico border, and Mr. Bush's political success in places like El Paso has raised questions about what he has done for the region. Politically, the border is regarded as one of the last bastions of Democratic power in Texas, but Mr. Bush sensed an opportunity in 1998. He visited the city at least 13 times during his first term, partly because his wife, Laura, had family ties here, partly because the city offered him a chance to demonstrate his bipartisan and biracial appeal. His local campaign attracted Democratic activists like Terry Diaz, who said she was drawn by Mr. Bush's charisma but also by a pragmatic desire to have his ear for El Paso. Carlos Ramirez, the city's Democratic mayor, angered his party by endorsing Mr. Bush and recalled a frantic Election Day scramble as volunteers handed out fliers at baseball games and canvassed churches, encouraging people to vote. ''It was an extremely emotional, very satisfying effort,'' Mr. Ramirez said. Mr. Bush won El Paso by 600 votes, a narrow margin that gave him a large symbolic victory. His huge re-election win, coupled with his strong showing among Hispanics, buttressed his national reputation as the front-runner for the party's presidential nomination. In El Paso, Mr. Ramirez said the governor had delivered in his promises to help the city, appointing two residents to powerful state educational boards, supporting the city in a water dispute with New Mexico and signing a law intended to speed up water and sewage services to the poorest communities along the border called colonias. But others disagree. Ms. Diaz, for example, ultimately became disenchanted with the governor and dropped out of his campaign, saying he had done too little to address border problems. The high rates of poverty and the uninsured existed for decades, and Ms. Diaz and others said they did not expect Mr. Bush to resolve such rooted problems in such a short time. But Eliot Shapleigh, a Democratic state senator who represents El Paso, including Hispanic neighborhoods, said the border still suffers too many inequities. He said local hospitals struggle because the state reimbursement rate for Medicaid is lower on the border than elsewhere. He also said per capita income on the border had fallen every year since Mr. Bush took office. Mr. Shapleigh and other lawmakers along the border have called for a ''Marshall Plan'' of state investment. ''Governor Bush has been extremely friendly, extremely supportive in public statements, but the state has not turned the corner in dealing with these issues,'' said Bill Schlesinger, a co-director of Project Vida, a nonprofit agency with a clinic in one of El Paso's poorest neighborhoods. Mr. Bush has already been criticized for his efforts in the 1999 legislative session to limit eligibility for the child insurance program to those with family incomes up to 150 percent of the poverty line, even though federal law provided coverage for up to 200 percent. The lower figure would have left 200,000 children without coverage. The governor ultimately signed the law at the 200 percent threshold, and his aides call the issue a priority.
 Michael Turk letter, comments on Sec Andrew M Cuomo's Aug 22 article on Vice Pres Al Gore's agenda, saying affordable housing needs to be addressed in any populist program for new century It is paradoxical that Andrew M. Cuomo, the federal housing secretary, cites as central to Al Gore's campaign the need to make health care and college education affordable to working families but does not mention housing (news article, Aug. 22). It is paradoxical that Andrew M. Cuomo, the federal housing secretary, cites as central to Al Gore's campaign the need to make health care and college education affordable to working families but does not mention housing (news article, Aug. 22).
 Michael R Kagay article on whether votes of people who usually do not vote will make a difference in close presidential election between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore; drawing (M) It's obvious that if everyone eligible voted this November, the number of ballots cast would roughly double. But would those 100 million or so additional votes change the outcome for the main contenders, George W. Bush and Al Gore? The statistics say that if the ''votes'' of nonvoters had been counted, George Bush would have increased his margin of success over Michael Dukakis in 1988; there would have been no change in the margin of Bill Clinton's win in 1992, and his margin would have increased to a landslide in 1996. In 1988, voters preferred Mr. Bush by 8 percentage points. Nonvoters that year also preferred Mr. Bush over Mr. Dukakis, but by 16 percentage points. If everyone had turned out to vote, Mr. Bush's margin over Mr. Dukakis would have been somewhat larger than it was.  Same winner, but bigger. Voters and nonvoters each favored Bill Clinton over President Bush in 1992, and by the same margin, 6 percentage points. Had everyone voted that year, there would have been the same winner and the same victory margin. But Ross Perot would have gained an additional 2 percentage points over the 19 percent he actually received. It shows that nonvoters are not invariably more pro-Democratic than voters, as stereotypes suggest.  Nonvoters were more pro-Bush than voters in 1988, more pro-Clinton in 1996 and indistinguishable in their preferences in 1992.
 In this charged atmosphere, even those who might prefer to carve a middle path are often forced to align themselves with one group or the other, if only for protection. Although Ravitch clearly admires the work of many progressive educators -- Deborah Meier, Howard Gardner and Theodore Sizer are among those she names in ''Left Back'' -- she has often run with the conservatives, serving at one point in the early 1990's as the assistant secretary of education in the Bush administration. Consequently, she is often (wrongly) labeled a right-winger and has suffered the casual professional cruelties of being in the unpopular set. In truth, Ravitch strikes me as a very old-fashioned liberal, of a pre-1968, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. bent. She has described herself as both a Democrat and an Independent, yet is not so partisan as to be averse to working with Republicans. Her positions on issues like standards and multiculturalism are far more nuanced than her critics often give her credit for, and she has a talent, as Albert Shanker did, of speaking her mind, irritating friends and foes alike. In the past, she has come out for higher teacher salaries, instead of merit pay, which must have annoyed some of her colleagues on the right, and earlier this year she publicly quit as a consultant to George W. Bush's presidential campaign when he refused to meet with the Log Cabin Republicans. It's also a little unfair to pin anti-intellectualism in the schools on a small band of theorists ensconced at Teachers College. Anti-intellectualism has always been a feature of American life, arguably more prevalent on the right than on the left. Its best representative at the moment is probably Governor Bush, who calls for improving schools even as he all but brags that he is stupider than his pointy-headed opponent, Al Gore. And the religious right has done far more, in the name of ''creationism,'' to retard the teaching of science in this country than any progressive curriculum. Similarly, women, blacks and immigrants weren't ''left back'' educationally in the first half of this century solely because a few progressive theorists argued for a diversified curriculum!
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman's Senate record, which he has called 'pro-business, pro-trade and pro-economic growth,' discussed in light of decidedly populist note he has sounded as Democratic candidate for vice president; record constrasts sharply with own speech at nominating convention and with Vice Pres Al Gore's attacks on big business; Lieberman is closely allied with insurance, health care and high technology industries; graphs and tables of his Senate campaign contributors; photo (M)8 Mr. Lieberman's pro-business record contrasts sharply not only with his own speech at the Democratic National Convention, but also with the larger message that Vice President Al Gore has been sending recently. In his acceptance speech at the convention -- and since then on the campaign trail -- Mr. Gore has repeatedly attacked ''big tobacco, big oil, the big polluters, the pharmaceutical companies, the H.M.O.'s.'' Mr. Lieberman is not afraid to take on pharmaceutical companies ''when they are wrong,'' said Dan Gerstein, a spokesman for the senator. ''He has opposed the industry on prescription drug prices -- especially at a time of a rising surplus. That is something that Lieberman is proud to stand with Gore and fight for. There is no hesitation there.'' Health insurers have come under particularly sharp attack by Mr. Gore, but Mr. Lieberman has always ''kept an open door and an open mind'' to the industry's arguments, said Karen Ignagni, president of the American Association of Health Plans, the H.M.O. trade group in Washington. Ms. Ignagni predicted that Mr. Lieberman would ''find it difficult'' to reconcile his generally pro-business record with the populist language of the Gore-Lieberman ticket. ''I think it's impossible,'' she said. ''I see it as a political ploy.'' But a financial services lobbyist disagreed, noting that President Clinton was often more pro-business than Mr. Gore: ''This worked effectively for the last eight years. Why, all of a sudden, do they think it will be an impossible situation? Joe Lieberman's qualities won't dry up and blow away if he is elected vice president.'' Before joining the Gore ticket, Mr. Lieberman had already collected nearly $3.3 million for a re-election campaign in which he faced minimal opposition. Executives and political action committees in the insurance, finance and real estate industries were the biggest givers, coming up with $773,386, according to data from the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit group in Washington. Among insurers alone, Mr. Lieberman received more contributions than any other senator.
 The female principal in the movie, Rosemary Gore of Manhattan, has a number of regional theater appearances and 15 independent films to her credit. She portrays Alice Walker, a character she describes as ''very unbalanced.'' Mike Lane of Smithtown on Long Island plays opposite Ms. Gore. This is his eighth independent film, but his role as Michael is his first lead. He describes this role as his meatiest to date.
 David Lebedoff Op-Ed article says Vice Pres Al Gore could lose the 'class war' with Gov George W Bush if voters come to see Gore as the candidate of the meritocracy, the new elite that believes it should run things because it excels in pure reason, and Bush as candidate of the majority, which resents the new elite and prizes other values more dearly than reasoning skills, including tradition, constancy, patience, resolve, tolerance, dispassion, compassion, courage, good humor, humility and faith; cartoon (M) If it is an economic class war, Mr. Gore has a chance of victory. There is a widespread perception of the growing disparity in wealth, and no one disputes that the tax cut Mr. Bush proposes would greatly benefit the very rich. But a more immediate question is how to keep the good times rolling, and Mr. Bush would claim that the credit for them lies elsewhere than with the Clinton-Gore administration, and that he is the true champion of working families. The economic battle for the presidency could go either way. And that brings us to the other battle, the one that Mr. Bush expects to win: the war against the meritocracy. Beginning with the G.I. Bill, college has depended increasingly more on measurable scholastic ability than on the status of wealth or birth.  The good schools, and afterward the good jobs, public and private, have been going to those with the highest grades and SAT scores. The trend accelerated in the 1960's, as federal scholarships and loans and needs-based financial aid further widened the college applicant pool. It is widely assumed that Mr. Bush could not get into Yale today but that Mr. Gore would have a shot at being admitted to Harvard. Mr. Bush is hoping that the backlash against this elitist approach is focused on Mr. Gore. To be seen primarily as a wonk is fatal to a candidate today. Mr. Clinton flew under the voter radar because he was a Southern governor who had the good old boy thing down perfectly. Not that Mr. Bush is really the Midland, Tex., scamp whose drawl can make Lyndon Johnson sound like Dean Acheson. He's the descendant of gentry, the Democrats continually point out, while Mr. Gore is in fact the son of parents who worked their way out of poverty in the South. So why does this war favor Mr. Bush? Because the voters are so alienated by the effect of the meritocracy on the very concept of consent of the governed that our elections have been transformed. Campaigns are framed to be less about issues than about the candidate's background and outlook. If a presidential candidate is seen as primarily a member of the meritocracy, the voters seem to push the other lever, even if it means tax cuts for the rich. Mr. Gore is very vulnerable in any contest decided by resentment of the meritocracy. In two interviews in The New Yorker, his statements are almost impossible to read -- tortured self-analytical psychobabble and social science prose. These are potentially more damaging than Mr. Bush's gaffes -- since a lack of expertise probably plays better than excessive expertise. Mr. Bush would do well to reproduce millions of copies of the Gore interviews and drop them from planes over every swing state. The economic class war being played out in this election could go either way; the new elite class war, only one.
 Polls showing Vice Pres Al Gore pulled even with Gov George W Bush after Democratic convention are reassuring Democrats and upsetting Republicans; standings now are of far less significance than they will be after Labor Day, when voters begin to take closer notice of campaign; most strategists agree Gore has little chance of breaking open wide Electoral College lead early because of Bush's strength in South and near West (M) By contrast, Gov. John Engler of Michigan, a Republican, said it was sobering to see polls showing for the first time that Gov. George W. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore in his state -- a battleground -- had evaporated. By contrast, Gov. John Engler of Michigan, a Republican, said it was sobering to see polls showing for the first time that Gov. George W. Bush's lead over Vice President Al Gore in his state -- a battleground -- had evaporated. In barely a week, Republicans and Democrats have switched places in a striking reversal. After looming over the race for months as the man to beat, Mr. Bush suddenly seemed not so invincible. And after months of reinvention, after months of reassuring restive Democrats, Mr. Gore was, if not on top, certainly on the offensive. The shift was prompted largely by opinion surveys showing that Mr. Gore had pulled even with Mr. Bush after the Democratic convention. ''I'm not ready to sound the alarm at this point,'' said Richard N. Bond, a former chairman of the Republican Party. ''Most Republicans feel this will be a race that's in the margin of error by Labor Day. If it's not, you've got to see where you lost and where Gore gained. And if it's among independents and women, that would be a cause for concern.'' Another reason to hold off on the alarm is the Electoral College. The Republicans' strength in the South and near West gives Mr. Bush a firm foundation of electoral votes. Whatever the polls say about the popular vote, most strategists agree that Mr. Gore's chances of breaking open a wide Electoral College lead, especially this soon, are not realistic. The campaigns are battling fiercely in important regions, particularly the Midwest, for the 270 electoral votes needed to win. Mr. Andrew contended that the Gore bounce would not be fleeting. ''What you do see is a true momentum change here,'' he said. ''Al Gore is now defined not just as his own man, but as a man who stands up for the issues that you care about.'' The campaigns do not want to take chances. To shore up the polls by Labor Day, they are planning a barrage of new television commercials and campaign events; in Mr. Bush's case, to get back on the offensive, and in Mr. Gore's, to stay there. Several Bush campaign officials said they had fully expected Mr. Gore to climb up in the polls after the Democratic convention. But they conceded that they were not prepared for the overwhelmingly positive news coverage he has drawn. Such coverage complicates things for Mr. Bush. Many of his weaknesses did not appear as weakness when he was ahead in the polls. One Bush official in Austin, Tex., said that while he had expected the recent lift for the Gore campaign, he had been startled by the effusive coverage of Mr. Gore. A Bush adviser summed up the campaign's position: ''You'd always rather be 20 points ahead, but nothing has happened in the past six weeks or so that hasn't been anticipated by the Bush people. They almost got Gore's bounce right to the number, internally.'' Day after day, the Gore campaign has essentially driven the media coverage of the campaign for two weeks, from the favorable publicity when Mr. Gore picked Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate and on through the Democratic convention -- and beyond. Now that things are looking up, some Gore operatives portray their position as a vindication of their political skills and the campaign framework they laid out months ago. Just the same, if Mr. Bush does not recover, Republicans may begin to question whether his loyal cadre of top advisers in Texas is really up to running a national campaign. Already, prominent Republicans are finding themselves defending Mr. Bush's inner circle. ''Are the boys from Texas up to it?'' asked Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky. ''This is the most exceptionally run campaign I've ever seen, including Bush '88 and Clinton '92. They're up to it.'' Yet for all the Bush campaign's potency, it is the same organization whose top officials fully expected the governor to win the New Hampshire primary. ''I'm not suggesting that this is a done deal,'' said Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware. ''But the only thing that worries me is somehow, all of a sudden, Al Gore gets kicked in the teeth and it shakes his confidence. I don't know what that would be.'' Then Mr. Biden offered suggestions of two off-limits areas that the Gore campaign never likes to be reminded of: ''Campaign finance and the Buddhist temple.''
 In ''The Presidential Difference: Leadership Style From FDR to Clinton,'' Fred I. Greenstein, a professor of politics at Princeton, offers new insights into the successes and failures of 11 American presidents. His work provides a useful yardstick for considering this year's two presidential contenders, George W. Bush and Al Gore, an unsatisfying choice for many voters who are troubled by Bush's lack of gravitas and Gore's lack of candor. There are some surprises in his assessments that are at odds with popular perceptions of the nation's chief executives, and even serious students of presidential history may find parts of Greenstein's work illuminating. Greenstein says that only three of the 11 presidents he studied ''stand out as fundamentally free of distracting emotional perturbations'' -- Eisenhower, Ford and Bush, none of whom was considered a particularly strong president, although each had virtues that Greenstein maintains are not fully recognized or appreciated. Four others -- Roosevelt, Truman, Kennedy and Reagan -- were marked by emotional undercurrents that did not significantly impair their leadership.'' These four presidents -- except for Truman, all great communicators -- would make most people's lists of the 20th century's dominant chief executives, even though Kennedy's brief presidency was defined more by style than by lasting achievements.
 When the G.O.P. candidate George W. Bush flashed a half-smile that struck some as a smirk, he was widely derided for this facial expression. ''Bush isn't the only presidential candidate to suffer from this elaborately sanctioned lookism,'' wrote Julia Keller in The Chicago Tribune. ''Former Republican hopeful Steve Forbes endured numerous remarks about his blinkless stare . . . while Al Gore has been called 'wooden' so often that he probably measures himself by the board foot.''
 Somalis, despite mixed feelings about Americans, have strong affection for former Pres George Bush and back his son, Gov George W Bush, in United States presidential race; hope Gov Bush will reverse Pres Clinton's policy against American military involvement, although he has not signaled any plan for re-engagement; are growing optimistic that peace talks now under way in Djibouti may lead to return of government, but say any new government would need some funding (M) ''We are following it,'' said Shuayb Abdi Karim, 30. ''And we support Bush.'' Or ''Bush Junior,'' as George W. Bush is sometimes called here. ''We are following it,'' said Shuayb Abdi Karim, 30. ''And we support Bush.'' Or ''Bush Junior,'' as George W. Bush is sometimes called here. That battle marked the beginning of the end for America's military involvement in Somalia, and in all of Africa for that matter, under the Clinton administration. So the logic behind the fervor for George W. Bush here is that he might have a personal stake in reversing that, since his father sent American troops here in the first place. Americans do not have good memories of Somalia (just as there are many Somalis who feel American soldiers went too far in trying to create peace here). And Mr. Bush has given no sign of any plan for re-engaging in one of the most troubled corners of the world if he wins the White House. Perhaps for those reasons, some Somalis are following American politics and this election very closely. Mr. Negeye, at a wedding in a well-guarded hotel in Mogadishu, was talking about how he views Republicans as far better on foreign policy than the Democrats. One Somali said he liked Mr. Bush because Gen. Colin Powell is also a Republican. At one of Mogadishu's beautiful beaches, Abdulahi Ahmed Koronto, 42, said he sees Mr. Bush as having stolen Bill Clinton's old game plan, positioning the Republicans to the center. ''George Bush is a man who has taken policy from the Democrats,'' said Mr. Koronto, a programs officer for a foreign aid agency in better days who is now unemployed. ''He looks very compassionate. His father was not compassionate like him. He's very flexible, no?'' Mr. Bush also has support from Somalia's most famous son, Hussein Aidid. His father, Gen. Muhammad Farah Aidid, was one of Mogadishu's most notorious warlords until his death in a street battle in 1996. The elder Mr. Aidid was, in fact, the man whom the American soldiers were trying to capture in October 1993, when the Black Hawk was downed. The younger Mr. Aidid, 38, who lived for 17 years in the United States and fought as a United States Marine in the Persian Gulf war, returned to Somalia to take over his father's faction. He was a registered Republican in California -- who voted both for Bush and for Clinton in various races, he said -- and he had some advice for the younger Mr. Bush: ''You can't be in his shoes. You have to have your own ideas.''
 When psychologists trace the roots of modern sports mania to primitive warfare, they reveal their ignorance and its contributions to an understanding of the way our earliest ancestors lived. The best evidence on this comes from more modern human groups living in small-scale societies with low population densities: the Inuit, Bambuti, Kung Bushmen and others. In these societies, warfare was unknown. It is not a part of the human genetic code. To say that it is, either as warfare or more harmlessly as a passion for competitive sports, is to project a dangerous and dismal myth about human nature. When psychologists trace the roots of modern sports mania to primitive warfare, they reveal their ignorance and its contributions to an understanding of the way our earliest ancestors lived. The best evidence on this comes from more modern human groups living in small-scale societies with low population densities: the Inuit, Bambuti, Kung Bushmen and others. In these societies, warfare was unknown. It is not a part of the human genetic code. To say that it is, either as warfare or more harmlessly as a passion for competitive sports, is to project a dangerous and dismal myth about human nature.
 Though such battles usually play best on Republican turf, this season the Democratic ticket is ready to rumble. As Joseph Lieberman, a point man on this issue, told the Los Angeles convention, ''No parent in America should be forced to compete with popular culture to raise their children.'' Al Gore seconded the sentiment, and his wife, Tipper, is, of course, a founder of the P.M.R.C.
