 Mr. Cheney's five years at the helm of Halliburton have drawn a great deal of attention -- and criticism -- since he was tapped by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas last month to be his running mate. Democrats ridiculed the Republicans as the big oil ticket, because Mr. Cheney and Mr. Bush worked in the oil industry in Texas. In addition, Halliburton offered Mr. Cheney a retirement package that, as currently structured, would leave him with stock options that are not scheduled to vest until 2001 or 2002 -- meaning that as vice president he would have a great personal interest in the price of oil.
 Irving Horowitz letter disputes August 22 editorial, which advocated one-on-one debates between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush as best way to educate voters and spur public interest
 George W Bush charges that Vice Pres Al Gore's tax plan is so narrow and complicated that it would not lower taxes for many middle-class Americans; photo at historically black Dillard University in New Orleans; Bush holds airport event to introduce two families who, he says, would gain more from his version (M) Gov. George W. Bush sought to seize the offensive today on the issue of tax cuts, asserting that Vice President Al Gore's plan was so narrow and complicated that it would fail to lower taxes for many middle-class Americans. To make his case, Mr. Bush expanded his previously arranged schedule to include two events where he introduced families whose taxes, he said, would be lowered significantly under his own plan, but very little, if at all, under Mr. Gore's. Gov. George W. Bush sought to seize the offensive today on the issue of tax cuts, asserting that Vice President Al Gore's plan was so narrow and complicated that it would fail to lower taxes for many middle-class Americans. To make his case, Mr. Bush expanded his previously arranged schedule to include two events where he introduced families whose taxes, he said, would be lowered significantly under his own plan, but very little, if at all, under Mr. Gore's. ''The so-called 'targeted' tax cut means that some are targeted out of tax relief,'' Mr. Bush said at an airport event in New Orleans, referring to Mr. Gore's plan. He cited the example of the man standing beside him, Andrew Bechac, a high school teacher and football coach who supports a wife and two young children on $40,000 a year. Mr. Bush said that if his tax cut was enacted, Mr. Bechac would pay the federal government $475 a year, about $1,600 less than he now does. In a later speech, Mr. Bush returned to the example of the Bechacs, making a more concrete pitch for his tax-cut proposal than he was  able to muster earlier in the week, when he stumbled over some numbers and then conceded that he had to do a better job of selling his plan. ''Under my opponent's plan, he gets no tax cut,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Bechac. ''He gets no tax cut. I ask you, I ask Americans, to look at the facts in these tax plans.'' In the evening, when Mr. Bush arrived in Miami, he introduced yet another family that he said would benefit under his plan. With these events and examples, which Mr. Gore's aides derided as selective and misleading, Mr. Bush was clearly trying to recover from his earlier missteps. At the same time, he sought to make light of those fumbles, which threw him off the education message that he had said he would be focusing on this week. Mr. Bush was also signaling that he was not going to back away from his proposal to cut taxes by about $1.3 trillion over the next decade, which many polls suggest may not be in line with the priorities of most American voters. Mr. Gore has proposed a more limited tax cut of $500 billion. And Mr. Bush was confronting head on two of the principal obstacles to selling a big tax cut: many voters' belief that politicians are not really going to deliver the goods, or that the total savings would ultimately be pocket change. But while Mr. Bush presented Mr. Bechac as a typical case, Mr. Gore's aides said he was an aberrant one. ''They may have finally found one working family that does better under the Bush plan than the Gore plan,'' said Ron Klain, a senior adviser to Mr. Gore. ''While Governor Bush can play games with particular examples, he can't change the truth that most working families do better under Gore than Bush.'' The Gore campaign quickly released an analysis suggesting that if the Bechacs did some of the things  that trigger tax breaks under the Gore plan -- like paying for day care for their children or taking a standard deduction instead of itemizing or putting money in certain kinds of savings accounts -- they might get an even bigger tax cut. The Bush campaign said that none of that was relevant to the Bechac family. Mr. Bush's plan cuts the income tax rate for all taxpayers in all income brackets, including the wealthiest Americans, who would get by far the most money back in simple dollar terms. Mr. Gore's plan does not cut rates, but rather provides tax breaks for people who incur expenses for particular needs, like child care, elderly care and school tuition, or who are saving money for retirement or college. Those reductions in taxes apply, for the most part, only to families with combined incomes of less than $100,000 a year. Mr. Bush's aides said today that because Mr. Gore's plan has an income ceiling and pivots on certain conditions, about 50 percent of taxpayers -- about 50 million people -- would not see their taxes lowered. Mr. Klain said that only about 30 million taxpayers would not qualify for Mr. Gore's tax cuts. The back-and-forth over taxes suggested how large the issue could loom in this election. Mr. Gore and his aides have asserted that Mr. Bush's tax cut would gobble up surpluses and endanger prosperity. Mr. Bush and his aides have levied the same accusation about Mr. Gore's spending proposals, which are larger than Mr. Bush's. The Texas governor had previously employed the strategy of showcasing middle-class people and the kind of tax breaks they would get during his battle in the Republican primary against Senator John McCain of Arizona. Like Mr. Gore, Mr. McCain complained that Mr. Bush was lavishing too much of his tax cut on wealthy Americans. Aides said that Mr. Bush would continue throughout the coming weeks to introduce families like the Bechacs. But he had not, at the start of the week, intended to do that today, when he was also unveiling a new education proposal. Even before his plane had left Austin, Tex., this morning, Mr. Bush was talking about tax cuts, saying that his belief in them was impervious to polls. Mr. Bush said a desire for tax cuts ''may not show up in that survey you read, but it's going to show up in this guy's wallet.'' He was apparently referring to taxpayers like Larry Melow, who appeared in Miami with Mr. Bush, who said Mr. Melow's $3,458 federal tax bill would be reduced by about $2,100 under his proposal. Mr. Melow makes about $62,000 a year working for the State of Florida, where Mr. Bush's brother Jeb is governor. Turning to Mr. Bechac, Mr. Bush said, ''Somebody asked me today on the plane, 'You know, the polls said people, hard-working people, don't want tax relief.' '' ''And I mentioned that,'' Mr. Bush added, ''and I think your reaction was to laugh out loud.''
 For the first time, Mr. Carter called on Mr. Clinton to declare the refuge a national monument, which would infuriate many Alaskans because it would almost certainly prevent development. Mr. Clinton does not plan to declare the area a monument, his aides said today, but they did not rule out the possibility that he might change his mind in the waning days of his presidency, especially if Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, is elected. The question of what to do with the Arctic refuge, which has been largely overlooked outside Alaska, could be the biggest environmental decision by the next president. Mr. Bush favors opening the refuge to oil and gas development, while Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee, says it should be protected, although he has not called for designating it as a monument.
 George W Bush's cancellation of Republican party television ad attacking Al Gore's trustworthiness exposes tensions within Bush campaign over whether to go negative now, given Bush's insistence that voters abhor such tactics; commercial in question shows six-year-old interview in which stammering Gore says Pres Clinton has never lied in his political career; photo; some Bush advisers reportedly urged using commercial even after concerns were raised about its fairness; debate takes on urgency with polls showing tight race (M) The cancellation of a Republican Party television advertisement attacking Al Gore's trustworthiness has exposed tensions within the Bush campaign over whether to go negative against the vice president now. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said this morning that he had stepped in to block the advertisement. But despite his insistence that voters abhor negative advertising and yearn for an elevated discourse, some of his advisers had argued that the party should run the advertisement, officials close to the discussions said. The cancellation of a Republican Party television advertisement attacking Al Gore's trustworthiness has exposed tensions within the Bush campaign over whether to go negative against the vice president now. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said this morning that he had stepped in to block the advertisement. But despite his insistence that voters abhor negative advertising and yearn for an elevated discourse, some of his advisers had argued that the party should run the advertisement, officials close to the discussions said. Mr. Bush's objections aside, the officials said that his campaign was still poised to run other commercials that raise questions about Mr. Gore's truthfulness and ethics. ''There's plenty to let loose on,'' said one Bush adviser. ''We can have a pretty effective fusillade. All the research has been done. It's all there.'' The commercial, which the Republican Party pulled on Wednesday after Mr. Bush intervened, used excerpts from a six-year-old interview in which a stammering Mr. Gore said President Clinton had never lied in his political career. Mr. Bush told reporters today that he objected to the advertisement, which was financed by the Republican National Committee. ''I think it's appropriate to challenge the man's credibility,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to Mr. Gore. ''I don't think it's appropriate to challenge the man's credibility in that context.'' Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, acknowledged that some Bush advisers wanted to run the commercial. ''There were some people who felt the ad was fine,'' she said. ''Some people felt the ad was not fine.'' Some Bush advisers were so determined that the campaign play hardball against Mr. Gore that they urged that the commercial be used even after concerns were raised about its fairness, according to people close to the discussions. The night before the advertisement was pulled, Matthew Dowd, a Bush campaign official, attended a focus group at which the Republicans sought reaction to an assortment of possible advertisements, including the one that was shelved. The discussions in the Bush campaign and at the Republican Party over the advertisement reflect a continuing debate among Bush advisers over strategy toward the Gore campaign. They take on an urgency as polls show the race is tightening -- and each side is struggling to gain an upper hand. Bush campaign officials and outside advisers said the campaign had every intention to run commercials that could be defined as negative. But they insisted that they had not settled on when -- and that the timing and exact content were still under discussion. Asked whether the Bush campaign had a commercial that featured Mr. Gore's infamous appearance at a Buddhist temple for a fund-raising event, Ms. Hughes said: ''I will choose not to answer that question at this point. I don't want to tip our hand.'' But, Ms. Hughes said, ''We believe that Vice President Gore's lack of credibility is an issue. There are a variety of different scripts that are in the works that deal with issues including credibility.'' On the one hand, running advertisements against Mr. Gore would be the best way, as one Bush adviser put it, to ''clip Gore's wings.'' The intention would be to drive up Mr. Gore's negative ratings -- and halt his rise in the polls -- in the week since the Democratic convention. But the advisers said such a move could be particularly risky for their campaign because Mr. Bush has tried to make a virtue out of his desire to stay upbeat. While Mr. Gore also has to take care not to be labeled as too harsh in his advertising, the Democrats have been skillful in cloaking their negative advertising as part of issue advertisements. During the Republican convention, the Democratic Party unleashed several negative advertisements that, among other things, assailed the record of Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate. But, because the vice president never emphasized a desire to remain positive, the Gore campaign is not in the predicament that the Bush campaign is. Another factor is that given the questions that have been raised about Mr. Gore's fund-raising practices -- and the scandals of the Clinton administration -- there are more questions of a personal nature to raise about Mr. Gore. Mr. West also said that Mr. Gore should be careful how he attacks. ''Gore has the risk of coming across as an attack dog just because people seem to like him a little less personally,'' Mr. West said. Mr. Bush has to be especially careful about advertisements that attack Mr. Clinton because -- as the Republican Party found in the 1998 Congressional campaign -- attempts to revisit scandals like Mr. Clinton's relationship with a White House intern can backfire. Whatever the Bush campaign does, the Republican Party intends to run tough commercials against Mr. Gore. ''We will have ads that raise questions about Al Gore's credibility and integrity,'' said Clifford D. May, the party's communications director, ''because there are plenty of questions to be raised.'' The Republican Party commercial, which was never broadcast, suggests that Mr. Gore, in saying Mr. Clinton has not uttered an untruth, was not acknowledging Mr. Clinton's misstatements about his relationship with the intern. But the advertisement was based on an interview in which Lisa Myers, a correspondent for NBC News, asked Mr. Gore about an attack he made on Oliver North, who was then running for Senate from Virginia. The exchange about Mr. North was edited out of the advertisement, which had the tag line, ''Think Al Gore will say anything?'' Mr. Bush said he objected to the commercial because ''it had nothing to do with the affairs of the White House.'' But even William M. Daley, the chairman of the Gore campaign, said he did not think the Republicans were behind a plot to get free publicity for the advertisement -- while making Mr. Bush look virtuous by objecting to it.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, who spent the day discussing his overall tax-cutting plan, supports repeal of the estate tax. His Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, prefers a narrower retooling of exemptions to benefit farmers and small business owners.
 Rep Rick A Lazio moves to distance himself from Gov George W Bush's tax cut plan, offering his own package of business and personal tax reductions that by his campaign's calculation is nearly 40 percent smaller than Bush's; his proposals include one for allowing taxpayers to deduct the payroll tax that funds Social Security from their federal income taxes, much the way state and property taxes are now treated; says proposal, combined with a menu of tax cuts long advocated by Congressional Republicans, like eliminating inheritance tax and so-called marriage penalty, would save the average New York family about $3,000 a year in taxes; proposes permitting parents to put aside up to $500, free of tax, to pay for primary and secondary education in parochian and other private schools; graph (M) Representative Rick A. Lazio moved to distance himself from Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut plan today, offering his own package of business and personal tax reductions that by his campaign's calculation is nearly 40 percent smaller than the one Mr. Bush has made a cornerstone of his presidential campaign. Representative Rick A. Lazio moved to distance himself from Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut plan today, offering his own package of business and personal tax reductions that by his campaign's calculation is nearly 40 percent smaller than the one Mr. Bush has made a cornerstone of his presidential campaign. Mr. Lazio's speech today came in a week in which Mr. Bush has found himself defending the fiscal prudence of his $1.3 trillion, 10-year tax cut, in the face of attacks by Democrats and polling data suggesting that the idea has not stirred much interest among voters. And in New York, Mr. Lazio's opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton, has repeatedly sought to link Mr. Lazio to Republican tax cut proposals that she has said are too broad and has described as a threat to the nation's future prosperity. Mr. Lazio's response today suggested some concern in his campaign about that line of attack. In addition to invoking an issue that Republicans have seized on in election after election over the past two decades -- tax cuts -- Mr. Lazio today seemed to be making a definite effort to move away from Mr. Bush's tax cut plan, if not the Republican presidential candidate himself. A campaign press release put the cost of Mr. Lazio's tax cut at $776 billion over the next 10 years. ''By comparison,'' Mr. Lazio's campaign said,  ''George W. Bush's tax plan would cost $1.3 trillion over 10 years, and Al Gore's tax plan would cost around $500 billion over 10 years.'' And Mr. Lazio, in a news conference, was notably cool to Mr. Bush's tax plan, which Mrs. Clinton has repeatedly criticized as excessive. ''I am comfortable with the plan that I have laid out right now, in terms of raw size, the macro number,'' Mr. Lazio said. ''I'm going to keep my options open on what Governor Bush's proposal is until we see what kind of revenues come in next year. I just prefer to make sure that we have a restrained approach that will allow a pay-down of the debt, will allow us to invest in the prescription benefit, and will give us the ability to have some enhanced investment in education at the same time.'' Mrs. Clinton's advisers moved to tether Mr. Lazio to Mr. Bush's economic policies. They asserted that his estimate of the cost of his tax cut was grossly understated -- they put it at $1.24 trillion over 10 years -- and said it would undermine the country's economic health.
 A BOOST FOR GORE  New polls show Vice President Al Gore has enjoyed a significant postconvention boost in four crucial big states, overtaking Gov. George W. Bush in Minnesota and perhaps in Michigan and increasing his lead in New Jersey and California. A BOOST FOR GORE  New polls show Vice President Al Gore has enjoyed a significant postconvention boost in four crucial big states, overtaking Gov. George W. Bush in Minnesota and perhaps in Michigan and increasing his lead in New Jersey and California. In Michigan, an EPIC-MRA poll showed Mr. Gore ahead of Mr. Bush by two points, but that lead was within the poll's margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. In a preconvention poll, he trailed Mr. Bush by eight points. In Minnesota, a Mason-Dixon Poll gave Mr. Gore an eight-point lead over Mr. Bush. A July Mason-Dixon Poll had Mr. Bush ahead by three points. The New Jersey poll, conducted by Quinnipiac University, gave Mr. Gore a 12-point lead. A New Jersey poll taken just before the Republican convention had Mr. Gore ahead by only four points. In California, a Field Poll had Mr. Gore leading Mr. Bush by 13 points. The previous Field Poll, in June, had him ahead by 11 points. NATIONAL MONUMENTS AN ISSUE  Dick Cheney suggested yesterday that some of the new national monuments created by President Clinton might be reviewed and rescinded if he and George W. Bush were elected. A BIG FUND-RAISING NIGHT  Vice President Al Gore pulled in more than $1.25 million last night in a pair of fund-raising dinners in Washington for the Democratic National Committee. The first dinner drew 30 people, most of them Indian-Americans, who paid $5,000 each. With other contributions, the dinner yielded $250,000. The second dinner drew about 60 people, most of them friends of Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who also attended. They each paid or raised varying amounts, with a maximum of $50,000, for a total of $1 million. Both dinners were served at the Mayflower Hotel, but the second was a Glatt Kosher meal, the pure form of Kosher food, blessed by a rabbi and provided by a restaurant, Dahan of Washington. Mr. Lieberman, in playful imitation of Mr. Gore at the convention, gave his wife an especially long kiss, and said, ''I don't want you to think there's any kind of competition on this ticket, but I told Hadassah I'm not going to stop until we reach seven seconds, which is the current world record.''
 Correction of August 24 article about visit by Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman to Jewish community center in Florida; Yiddish greetings noted An article yesterday about a visit by Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to a Jewish community center in Florida misattributed a Yiddish greeting. It was Mr. Lieberman, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''Shalom aleichem''; Mr. Gore said, ''Mazel tov.'' An article yesterday about a visit by Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to a Jewish community center in Florida misattributed a Yiddish greeting. It was Mr. Lieberman, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''Shalom aleichem''; Mr. Gore said, ''Mazel tov.''
 Across the country, cutting taxes may not be the political weapon it once was, as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas seems to be discovering on the presidential campaign trail. But in New Jersey, where property taxes remain the nation's highest per capita, the idea never loses currency. Across the country, cutting taxes may not be the political weapon it once was, as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas seems to be discovering on the presidential campaign trail. But in New Jersey, where property taxes remain the nation's highest per capita, the idea never loses currency.
 Mexican Leader in Washington  President-elect Vicente Fox Quesada discussed his vision of a virtually borderless North America with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore. He is to meet with Gov. George W. Bush in Texas today. Bush Campaign Split on Tactics  The cancellation of a Republican Party television ad attacking Al Gore's trustworthiness has exposed tensions within the Bush campaign over whether to go negative against the vice president now. Gov. George W. Bush used people he presented to campaign audiences to illustrate his contention that Mr. Gore's tax-cutting plan was so narrow and complicated that it would not lower taxes for many middle-class people. Mr. Gore's aides derided Mr. Bush's examples as selective and misleading. Lazio Offers Alternative To Bush Tax Cut Plan  Representative Rick A. Lazio moved to distance himself from Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut plan, proposing a package of reductions that his campaign said was nearly 40 percent smaller than the Bush presidential campaign is promoting.
 Op-Ed article by Gregory Palast, columnist at The Observer of London, on San Diego's soaring power bills in wake of California deregulation; says California's electricity plague can be traced to Public Utilities Commission's infatuation with Britain's free market venture in early 1990's; says five giant international electricity sellers, all new to California, have imported tricks and maneuvers learned in Britain for manipulating power pool auction process, and in single month have produced profits once permitted for an entire year; says growing boycott by California customers is bad news for presidential candidates Al Gore and George W Bush, both of whom have supported deregulation (M) The electricity fiasco should be a godsend for Al Gore's campaign. After all, it was Mr. Fessler and his fellow Republicans who threw California's consumers to the meager mercies of the marketplace. And Gov. George W. Bush pushed through deregulation in Texas, which is widely expected to produce hefty returns for a former business partner, Sam Wyly, owner of GreenMountain.com, a power seller. But while Mr. Gore spoke out in Los Angeles against ''powerful forces,'' on this subject he's in a difficult position. Despite recent warnings from federal regulators about the California situation, the Clinton-Gore administration has promoted California-style deregulation as a model for the nation. Someone's ready to feel California's pain, and it may not be good news for Mr. Gore. During the Democrats' big show, Ralph Nader went to San Diego to remind boycotters that he was founding father of the Utility Consumer Action Network, the 46,000-member local group leading the anti-corporate uprising.
 Tax-cut proposals of presidential nominees George W Bush and Al Gore compared (S) How big is Gov. George W. Bush's proposed tax cut? There is no single answer. Over the first nine years that the program could be in effect starting in the 2002 fiscal year, the first to begin after Mr. Bush would take office, the tax cut is estimated by Congress's nonpartisan Joint Tax Committee to reduce federal revenue by about $1.3 trillion. How big is Gov. George W. Bush's proposed tax cut? There is no single answer. Over the first nine years that the program could be in effect starting in the 2002 fiscal year, the first to begin after Mr. Bush would take office, the tax cut is estimated by Congress's nonpartisan Joint Tax Committee to reduce federal revenue by about $1.3 trillion. In the case of a $1.3 trillion tax cut, the government's interest bill would be roughly $300 billion higher over nine years than if there were no tax cut. So it would also be fair to say that Mr. Bush's tax cut would use $1.6 trillion of the surplus. But there's a wrinkle. Major tax and spending programs are usually described in terms of their costs over 10 years, not nine. In the 10 years starting in 2002, Mr. Bush's tax plan would reduce revenue by about $1.6 trillion. If the interest effect were added, the 10-year reduction in the budget surplus would be about $1.9 trillion. Of course, the same standards could be applied to Vice President Al Gore's proposals. The Gore campaign describes his plan as a $500 billion tax cut over 10 years starting in 2001. (For the sake of argument, Mr. Gore assumes that his tax cut would start next year, so the cost of the cut can be matched against the current 10-year surplus projection.) If the interest component were included, it would be a $620 billion tax cut. But Mr. Gore has also proposed spending just over $1 trillion of the surplus. His campaign calculates that the overall tax and spending plan would have an interest cost of $247 billion over 10 years, meaning that Mr. Gore would use nearly $1.8 trillion of the surplus.
 Mr. Fox, who takes office on Dec. 1, met with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore; he is to meet Gov. George W. Bush in Texas on Friday. At the White House, the State Department and the vice president's residence, he was congratulated for winning the fairest election in Mexican history on July 2, defeating the ruling party and ending its seven decades of often authoritarian and corrupt government. Mr. Fox, who takes office on Dec. 1, met with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore; he is to meet Gov. George W. Bush in Texas on Friday. At the White House, the State Department and the vice president's residence, he was congratulated for winning the fairest election in Mexican history on July 2, defeating the ruling party and ending its seven decades of often authoritarian and corrupt government. Mr. Gore found the idea of open borders ''clearly problematic,'' said his national security adviser, Leon Fuerth, and Mr. Bush repeated today that he thought ''we ought to enforce our borders.'' Aides said Mr. Clinton expressed concern that the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement, or Nafta, which reduced cross-border trade barriers dividing the United States, Mexico and Canada, had not raised real wages in Mexico. And they said that Mr. Gore had asked Mr. Fox's help in building support for free trade among environmental and labor groups, which have often viewed Nafta as a malevolent force. Mr. Gore and Mr. Fox spent an hour talking, Mr. Fuerth said, touching on trade, the environment, human rights, democracy and two interwoven problems confronting Mexico: the international traffic that fills the enormous demand for drugs in the United States, and the official corruption that smooths the flow of the drugs.
 Sam Husseini letter disputes August 22 editorial, which advocated one-on-one debates between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush as best way to educate voters and spur public interest ''Stop Arguing and Start Debating'' (editorial, Aug. 22) advocates one-on-one debates between Al Gore and George W. Bush as the best approach to educate voters and spur public interest. But recent history suggests otherwise. ''Stop Arguing and Start Debating'' (editorial, Aug. 22) advocates one-on-one debates between Al Gore and George W. Bush as the best approach to educate voters and spur public interest. But recent history suggests otherwise.
 That transformation frames the message I have brought this week to President Clinton and the candidates George W. Bush and Al Gore. The full advent of democracy will complement our economic reforms, bring them to full fruition and better distribute their benefits. The fight against corruption, accountability of public officials, the rule of law and security for all citizens will provide the assurances that Mexico's partners are expecting. These are the issues Mexicans strongly raised during the presidential campaign, and they are also at the root of some doubts our friends abroad -- investors, creditors, tourists -- have harbored. My first priority after taking office will be to confront these challenges forthrightly. That transformation frames the message I have brought this week to President Clinton and the candidates George W. Bush and Al Gore. The full advent of democracy will complement our economic reforms, bring them to full fruition and better distribute their benefits. The fight against corruption, accountability of public officials, the rule of law and security for all citizens will provide the assurances that Mexico's partners are expecting. These are the issues Mexicans strongly raised during the presidential campaign, and they are also at the root of some doubts our friends abroad -- investors, creditors, tourists -- have harbored. My first priority after taking office will be to confront these challenges forthrightly.
 Gary Boyer letter comments on Howell Raines's August 23 Editorial Observer column on Vice Pres Al Gore's pugilistic prose I read with relief Howell Raines's Aug. 23 Editorial Observer about Al Gore's pugilistic prose. I was beginning to think I was the only one who found all that fight talk somewhat curious. I read with relief Howell Raines's Aug. 23 Editorial Observer about Al Gore's pugilistic prose. I was beginning to think I was the only one who found all that fight talk somewhat curious.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column compares Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore to two final contestants in television program Survivor (M) If George W. Bush were a ''Survivor'' contestant, he would have been Kelly, who made it to the finals with her ability to recall the details of her former teammates' family histories. If George W. Bush were a ''Survivor'' contestant, he would have been Kelly, who made it to the finals with her ability to recall the details of her former teammates' family histories. The fact that Richard went home with the $1 million has caused many Americans to question the existence of a benevolent deity, and we will not be so cruel as to suggest that if Al Gore had been on the island, he would have been Richard. But Mr. Gore did tell the Democratic convention that he was not concerned about being lovable. This came after four days of continuous effort to convince the nation that the vice president was adorable as all get-out, and was therefore a very Richard thing to do. And weirdly, as the show wound down, the contestants began talking a little like Mr. Bush. The people on the island had the advantage of some careful editing, but you still couldn't help noting that a lot of them tended to rush verbally forward, stringing words together without much concern for where the trail was taking them. (One convoluted rationale by a Richard supporter concluded with the announcement that ''Kelly was more double-faced.'') Like Kelly, Mr. Bush has had a not-great week. Mr. Gore is rising in the polls. There's a growing suspicion that the public is never going to embrace the $1.3 trillion tax cut that sits like a great wart in the middle of the Bush agenda. And on Monday, the candidate delivered a speech that connoisseurs of Bushian malapropisms regarded as a four-star keeper. He also promised to ''work to end terrors -- tariffs and barriers,'' and to bring an end to ''four years of Clinton-Gore.'' His attempts to defend the tax cut were marred by an unfortunate tendency to mix up billions and trillions. As a finale, Mr. Bush assured the audience that victory was theirs because ''we're talking about issues in a way the American people can understand.'' Tired politicians always tend to mess up their syntax. Unfortunately, Mr. Bush's Iowa speech came after he had taken a day off the trail to return to Austin, for a schedule in which the word ''nap'' figured prominently. Perhaps Mr. Bush can turn all this to his advantage. The babbling thing seems to be spreading, and Americans may prefer a president who would not look down on them if they forgot to insert verbs in their sentences. They might conclude that at least he's not, you know, like, double-faced.
 With Al Gore's nomination for president (front page, Aug. 18), both major parties have chosen standard-bearers who are men of self-professed religious faith. But faith, in a political context, is irrelevant -- unless it serves to shape positions on public policy and impels believers to strive for ethical solutions to the country's problems. With Al Gore's nomination for president (front page, Aug. 18), both major parties have chosen standard-bearers who are men of self-professed religious faith. But faith, in a political context, is irrelevant -- unless it serves to shape positions on public policy and impels believers to strive for ethical solutions to the country's problems.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, who has had months of political misfortune, is in political groove as he accepts raucous ovation from union carpenters in Chicago; photo; Democratic nominee gets post-convention lift as polls responde approvingly to his choice of Joe Lieberman as running-mate, his separation from Pres Clinton, his speech at party convention and picturesque cruise down Mississippi; Republican strategist William Kristol observes that George W Bush may actually have to win rather than 'watching Gore lose' (M) Vice President Al Gore entered a convention hall in Chicago on Tuesday afternoon to a raucous ovation from union carpenters that would have been hard to imagine during the many dark days of his lengthy campaign for the presidency. The union members, packed six deep behind rope lines, reached frantically toward Mr. Gore as he high-fived his way through the hall. At one point, he found himself almost spread-eagled as he reached for one hand beyond the rope line on his left and another beyond the line on his right. Vice President Al Gore entered a convention hall in Chicago on Tuesday afternoon to a raucous ovation from union carpenters that would have been hard to imagine during the many dark days of his lengthy campaign for the presidency. The union members, packed six deep behind rope lines, reached frantically toward Mr. Gore as he high-fived his way through the hall. At one point, he found himself almost spread-eagled as he reached for one hand beyond the rope line on his left and another beyond the line on his right. When he finally made it to the lectern, Mr. Gore put his hand over his heart in what seemed an earnestly emotional gesture and thanked the laborers for their welcome. That is a new feeling for Mr. Gore, whose campaign has struggled to catch a break through months of misfortune, some of it self-inflicted, some not. But in the last three weeks, as he has watched the country and the polls respond approvingly to his selection of a running mate, to his separation from President Clinton, to his speech to the Democratic National Convention, and to a picturesque postconvention cruise down the Mississippi, Mr. Gore is finally in a political groove. It has clearly made him a better candidate, firmer in his purpose, confident in his message, comfortable in his skin. And it has happened not just at an opportune moment, but also at a critical one. If Mr. Gore had emerged from the convention without this kind of lift, not just in the polls but also in the energy of his crowds and his campaign, the race might well have been lost. As it is, if Mr. Gore defeats Gov. George W. Bush in November, historians will undoubtedly see this period as a turning point. And voter surveys released yesterday show that Mr. Gore is on a roll, erasing Mr. Bush's lead nationwide and receiving good news in several crucial states. He has pulled even in Michigan and has increased his lead in New Jersey and California. For the moment at least, the transformation has reinforced the legend of Mr. Gore as a political clutch performer. And it has been all the more striking because it has coincided with a rare moment of off-message unsteadiness for Mr. Bush. After such prolonged adversity for Mr. Gore's campaign -- the scandals involving Monica Lewinsky and campaign fund-raising, the perceived pandering on Elian Gonzalez, the constant tweaking of message and image, the profligate spending, the bickering at headquarters -- Democrats and Republicans alike have noticed the difference. Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster not affiliated with the Gore campaign, conducted a focus group on Wednesday night in a St. Louis suburb and was amazed by the shifting perceptions of Mr. Gore. The voters interviewed, Mr. Hart said, now see Mr. Gore more as a leader and less as Mr. Clinton's subordinate. They understand his agenda, he said, and can express reasons to vote for Mr. Gore, not simply against Mr. Bush. ''It was remarkable,'' Mr. Hart said. ''Gore's lift off the convention is much more than a numerical lift. It's a platform and a platform for him to build upon.'' William Kristol, a Republican strategist and the publisher of The Weekly Standard, said Mr. Gore had benefited immensely from the transition of the Democratic ticket from Clinton-Gore to Gore-Lieberman. And Mr. Kristol said Mr. Gore had demonstrated boldness by selecting Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate and by using his convention speech to lay out a forward-looking agenda. ''Bush may actually have to win this campaign now instead of just watching Gore lose it,'' Mr. Kristol said, ''and that's starting to sink in with some Republicans.'' That being said, both Mr. Hart and Mr. Kristol emphasized that such moments could be transitory and that Mr. Gore could squander his newfound appeal by returning to a plodding, awkward form of his not so distant past. But for the time being, Mr. Gore is having fun. On his riverboat trip down the Mississippi, he stood atop the upper deck and waved boyishly to hikers on the distant bluffs. Like Mr. Clinton, he has discovered the joy of wading into crowds and lingering along a rope line. He grabs pens to sign T-shirts and, at one stop this week, a cantaloupe. The raspy hoarseness that afflicted him all week made him sound positively Clintonesque. Last Saturday night, Mr. Gore broke a deep freeze with his campaign press corps by inviting reporters to an off-the-record gathering on the riverboat. It went so well that he invited the reporters back for another get-together on Tuesday. Unlike Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore cannot always excite a crowd purely with the force of his personality. But Mr. Gore can take the energy from a crowd and make it his own. His crowds, while not approaching the 25,000 that showed for Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore in St. Louis on their 1992 bus tour, have been respectable in their size and expressive in their support. In little Keokuk, Iowa, on Sunday night, some 2,000 people waited in a park for his arrival at 10:10 p.m., about an hour late. Those who travel to see him say they find Mr. Gore to be down-to-earth, a trait not always associated with him in the past. Debbie L. Mundy, a self-employed house cleaner who listened to Mr. Gore in Moline, Ill., last Sunday, said she would vote for him at least partly because the new prosperity had provided plenty of work for her husband, a union electrician. But she also said she and others in the area now viewed Mr. Gore as he wants them to -- as his own man with his own message. Mr. Gore does, in fact, seem comfortable with his message. He explains it forcefully, but without the shouting that once seemed so contrived. The recent prosperity has been great, he says, but some have been left out, and he will broaden the impact through tax cuts and new spending aimed at the middle class. The enemy, he makes it clear, is not big government but selected big industries, including oil, insurance and pharmaceuticals. A CBS News poll taken just after the Democratic convention, one of several that now show Mr. Gore with a slight lead, found that 61 percent of those questioned said Mr. Gore was articulating what he wanted to accomplish. In a poll taken two weeks earlier, only 36 percent said so. Another factor has been Mr. Lieberman, the Connecticut senator and a friend of Mr. Gore's for 15 years. He clearly puts the Vice President at ease and his sense of humor encourages Mr. Gore to show his own. The public approval of the selection has given Mr. Gore confidence in his own judgment, and after eight years as second fiddle he seems to relish sitting in the first chair. The two men plan to campaign together a lot, often on ''double dates'' with their popular wives. And so, the Gore campaign moves toward Labor Day with the sense that it is clicking on all cylinders, at least for now. ''This campaign,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary, ''was like a car where you turn the engine and it almost catches and almost catches. And then, last week, it finally caught.''
