 Mr. Krugman may be correct that George W. Bush's tax-cut plan provides greater tax savings to high-income Americans. But he does not mention the important fact that the tax increases of Presidents Bush and Clinton disproportionately affected higher-income families, and they -- on a dollar basis -- have contributed most of the money that makes up today's surplus. To reduce taxes now primarily for lower-income Americans is tantamount to government-sponsored wealth distribution. If this is what Mr. Krugman and Al Gore want, they should simply say so.
 The Genesis of a Slogan  The term ''working families,'' which is increasingly popular with Democrats, was used by Vice President Al Gore as far back as 1988. The Genesis of a Slogan  The term ''working families,'' which is increasingly popular with Democrats, was used by Vice President Al Gore as far back as 1988.
 Among the critics who have accused the administration of inaction to date is Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee. In an interview with The Seattle Times on Aug. 12, Mr. Bush said policies that had restricted logging and thinning of underbrush had ''made the forests much more dangerous to fire.''
 Re ''Al Gore as Fall Programming'' by Gail Collins (column, Aug. 18): Re ''Al Gore as Fall Programming'' by Gail Collins (column, Aug. 18): I listened to what Al Gore had to say as he accepted the Democratic nomination. Unlike George W. Bush, he went beyond platitudes to tell us what, specifically, he wanted to do about issues like health care and the environment. The fact that sometimes Mr. Gore may speak a little stiffly means absolutely nothing to me. Also irrelevant are Tommy Lee Jones's speech at the convention, Tipper Gore's video presentation, and how any of this ''played'' with the public.
 Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush sharply attacks Clinton administration's military policies; says country's armed forces have declined to state of serious physical and emotional disrepair and that he is committed to reversing trend; tells convention of Veterans of Foreign Wars in Milwaukee that today's servicemen and women are confronting intolerable situation; repeats proposals to increase military spending; unveils new plan for federal government to spend one-time amount of $310 million for construction and repair of public schools that serve roughly 570,000 children of service people and are financed through federal Department of Education; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked the Clinton administration's military policies today, saying that the country's armed forces had plummeted to a state of serious physical and emotional disrepair and that he was committed to reversing the decline. Speaking to thousands of people at a convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Milwaukee, a city he visited early in the day before traveling to Des Moines, Mr. Bush said today's servicemen and women were confronting ''back-to-back deployments, poor pay, shortages of spare parts and equipment and rapidly declining readiness.'' Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked the Clinton administration's military policies today, saying that the country's armed forces had plummeted to a state of serious physical and emotional disrepair and that he was committed to reversing the decline. Speaking to thousands of people at a convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Milwaukee, a city he visited early in the day before traveling to Des Moines, Mr. Bush said today's servicemen and women were confronting ''back-to-back deployments, poor pay, shortages of spare parts and equipment and rapidly declining readiness.'' The Texas governor said there were too many ''soldiers who are on food stamps and soldiers who are poorly housed.'' Ticking off a list of what he characterized as other troubling indicators, Mr. Bush added that there were recruitment shortfalls in various branches of the military, units that were measurably not ready for combat and severe morale problems. ''The facts are stark and the facts are real,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The current administration inherited a military ready for the dangers and challenges facing our nation. The next president will inherit a military in decline. Mr. Bush restated proposals he had made to increase military spending, including his call for a raise for people in the armed forces that would add $1 billion in annual salary to the increase already authorized by Congress and signed into law last year. That proposal fit into Mr. Bush's overall effort in this postconvention period of focusing on education -- his bridge to independent and swing voters -- in states that either lean slightly Democratic or have voted Democratic in the last two or three presidential elections. Wisconsin and Iowa have not voted Republican in a presidential election since 1984, when Ronald Reagan was re-elected. But a few polls taken before the party conventions suggested that Mr. Bush had a chance of victory in both states. Karen P. Hughes, the Bush campaign's director of communications, said that Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, would travel to 19 states from Friday to Aug. 31. All but four of those voted Democratic in the last two presidential elections. In Des Moines, Mr. Bush went to what Ms. Hughes reminded reporters was the 93rd school that he had visited so far over the 14-month course of his presidential campaign. ''We're working our way toward 100,'' she said, ''to highlight the importance Governor Bush places on educating our children.'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, disputed Mr. Bush's portrayal of the United States military as inadequately prepared. Even so, he said, Vice President Al Gore had also called for additional spending on the military, including further raises. Mr. Hattaway also questioned how Mr. Bush could afford more money for the armed forces in light of his proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut over the next 10 years. Some of the military cutbacks that Mr. Bush criticized today began in the administration of his father, President George Bush, although the former president was in part reacting to diminished needs after the end of the cold war. Mr. Bush called Mr. Cheney, who was not on the campaign trail with him, ''one of the greatest secretaries of defense this nation has ever known.'' ''In my administration,'' Mr. Bush said, ''the Department of Veterans Affairs will act as an advocate for veterans seeking benefits and claims, not act as an adversary.''
 Barry Langman letter likens Al Gore to successful television spinoff, such as Frasier, not to short-lived sequel Joanie Loves Chachi Re ''Al Gore as Fall Programming,'' by Gail Collins (column, Aug. 18): Re ''Al Gore as Fall Programming,'' by Gail Collins (column, Aug. 18): Ms. Collins suggests that Al Gore may be the first episode of ''Joanie Loves Chachi'' to Bill Clinton's ''Happy Days.'' But not every TV spinoff is a weak rehash of a tired original, destined for audience rejection. The clear intention of the Democratic National Convention this year -- and the selection of Joseph I. Lieberman as Mr. Gore's running mate -- was to persuade the public that a different supporting cast and a new outlook will enable this second banana to headline a new show successfully. Put differently, the goal is to portray Al Gore not as a Chachi but more like a Frasier or a Rhoda or a George Jefferson.
 Comments by Sen Patrick J Leahy and Tom Harkin, and by Housing Sec Andrew M Cuomo and Tipper Gore echoing 'working families' slogan of Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign noted; photos
 Gore Surges in Several Polls  Six public opinion polls conducted for news organizations since the Democratic convention last week showed Vice President Al Gore leading Gov. George W. Bush, though in two cases by only one percentage point. Bush's Plan for Military  Gov. George W. Bush attacked Clinton administration military policies, saying the armed forces had fallen into disrepair. Mr. Bush proposed adding $310 million to a program that aids schools overcrowded by children of federal workers and military personnel.
 There is no doubt that the Clinton-Gore administration's proudest economic accomplishment was balancing the federal budget. Al Gore would like voters to trust him as the guardian of that legacy and of the surplus that has replaced the deficits of the 1980's and early 1990's. Hence, in his campaign, he makes much of his plans to use more of projected surpluses for paying down the national debt than would George W. Bush. Mr. Gore also talks a great deal about the ''cost'' of Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut. But Mr. Gore's spending proposals also carry costs. One estimate, by the National Taxpayers Union, puts the dollar size of Mr. Gore's new spending  at more than $2 trillion over 10 years -- enough to take up the entire non-Social Security surplus without anything left over for tax cuts. (Both candidates rule out spending the portion of the surplus attributable to Social Security.) Even the lowest estimates in the press put the figure at well over $1 trillion, with Mr. Gore's tax cuts reducing the surplus by an additional $500 billion. There is no doubt that the Clinton-Gore administration's proudest economic accomplishment was balancing the federal budget. Al Gore would like voters to trust him as the guardian of that legacy and of the surplus that has replaced the deficits of the 1980's and early 1990's. Hence, in his campaign, he makes much of his plans to use more of projected surpluses for paying down the national debt than would George W. Bush. Mr. Gore also talks a great deal about the ''cost'' of Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut. But Mr. Gore's spending proposals also carry costs. One estimate, by the National Taxpayers Union, puts the dollar size of Mr. Gore's new spending  at more than $2 trillion over 10 years -- enough to take up the entire non-Social Security surplus without anything left over for tax cuts. (Both candidates rule out spending the portion of the surplus attributable to Social Security.) Even the lowest estimates in the press put the figure at well over $1 trillion, with Mr. Gore's tax cuts reducing the surplus by an additional $500 billion. Moreover, Mr. Gore's initiatives are of a kind that could all too easily lead to a return of deficits if the budget surpluses don't materialize as planned. He makes more proposals than Mr. Bush for entitlements -- programs that continue without annual appropriations. True, Mr. Bush's $1.6 trillion tax cut would also be written into law as continuing indefinitely. But history shows that presidents and Congresses are far more willing to raise taxes in the event of a revenue shortfall than they are to cut entitlements. In the end, Mr. Gore's and Mr. Bush's plans would reduce the surplus by an equivalent amount, assuming that they both got their way with Congress and kept all of their promises -- something that is of course unlikely. Because presidents cannot enact programs on their own, voters know they must look at the candidates' proposals not only at face value, but also as an indication of their differing philosophies of government. In this respect, there is a clear division between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore believes that government should direct and control the use of the surplus that is not allocated to debt reduction, whether on the tax side or the spending side. He would increase government spending substantially more than Mr. Bush, would cut taxes less, and would aim more of his tax cuts to specific taxpayer behavior -- giving parents a credit to pay for their children's after-school programs, for example. It is fair to characterize most of Mr. Gore's proposed tax cuts as little different substantively from direct spending, except that they go through the tax code rather than the appropriations process. By contrast, Mr. Bush would ''spend'' more of the surplus on across-the-board tax cuts. Moreover, most of his reductions, in contrast to Mr. Gore's, would not depend on taxpayers' behavior, but would be given to all of them in the form of rate decreases. Cutting taxes allows people to keep more of their money, so that they decide, rather than the government, how to apportion it. Some may invest their savings, and some may spend it, but either way it will be the taxpayer's decision, not the government's. And since the economic stimulus from tax rate reductions is greater than that from new spending or targeted tax cuts, the net budgetary cost of Mr. Bush's proposals would likely be considerably less than the gross figure Mr. Gore alludes to. Finally, the cost of a presidential candidate's program cannot be measured solely in terms of its impact on the budget. Many initiatives could impose large costs on the private sector in the form of regulations. In this area, too, Mr. Gore's ideas would seem the costlier. His plans regarding global warming and health maintenance organizations, for example, would have substantial costs for business. The question of whose program costs more is important, but the ''costs'' of federal policies go beyond direct revenue lost or money spent. The effect on the economy as a whole (and with it, future tax collections) can be profound, and that is where the deep philosophical differences of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush come seriously into play. Bruce Bartlett, a senior fellow with the National Center for Policy Analysis, was a deputy assistant treasury secretary in the Reagan and Bush administrations.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on issues facing presidential nominees Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore draws comparison with television program Survivor (M) Well, it took a year, but we've finally got those presidential candidates nominated. And thanks to the conventions, we now understand that George W. Bush likes nothing better than to hang around with members of minority groups, that Al Gore likes nothing better than to hang around with Tipper, and that everybody in the Reform Party is crazy. Well, it took a year, but we've finally got those presidential candidates nominated. And thanks to the conventions, we now understand that George W. Bush likes nothing better than to hang around with members of minority groups, that Al Gore likes nothing better than to hang around with Tipper, and that everybody in the Reform Party is crazy. Do you know why the Democrats say the average family would only save 62 cents a day under the Bush tax cut, and the Republicans say it's thousands of dollars? It's because there are tons of families toward the bottom who don't have any income taxes to cut. The Gore people always average them in. How much would a typical family save under the Al Gore tax cut? How much would a really, really rich family save under the George Bush tax cut? I used to think the way Gore keeps talking about health care was pandering, but then I noticed that the most dimwitted person on the ''Survivor'' island was Sean the doctor. Don't the medical schools screen their students anymore? I think it's safe to assume that deep in his heart, Al Gore is even more worried about the ice cap than you are. What about George W. Bush? Mr. Bush thinks the jury is still out on global warming. Not to mention evolution. I think the Bush campaign should talk more about the polar ice cap and less about bringing morality back to the White House. Everybody knows Al Gore would never do anything to hurt Tipper. Look, the Republicans believe the immorality started in 1992, when Bill Clinton stole the election from George Bush with the help of Ross Perot and big donors with murky Asian connections, then turned around and stole their issues, and the credit for the economy. They also blame the Clintons for everything that happened in the 60's, including Nehru jackets. Obviously, you are not going to wipe all that out by electing a monogamous Democrat.
 ''Right now, he thinks things are going his way,'' a Defense Department official said. ''He's outlasted the Clinton administration. He outlasted the Bush administration. I think his perception is he can outlast them all.''
 The last collisions between American and Russian submarines occurred in 1992 and 1993. In a break from cold war secrecy, both the Bush and Clinton administrations disclosed the accidents publicly.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph I Lieberman end four-day riverboat tour of Mississippi River in Hannibal, Mo, Mark Twain's boyhood home; Gore again moves to convey that his political message is built on foundation of substance; portrays himself as candidate of specifics; photo (M) For Vice President Al Gore these days, there is no devil in the details. As he finished his four-day riverboat tour of the Mississippi River with a floating seminar on tax policy -- a significant departure from the crap games that once prevailed on these waters -- Mr. Gore tried to convey once again that his political message is built on a foundation of substance. For Vice President Al Gore these days, there is no devil in the details. As he finished his four-day riverboat tour of the Mississippi River with a floating seminar on tax policy -- a significant departure from the crap games that once prevailed on these waters -- Mr. Gore tried to convey once again that his political message is built on a foundation of substance. On his postconvention trip down the Mississippi, which began on Friday morning and ended here today in Mark Twain's boyhood home, Mr. Gore has underscored the theme of his policy-laden convention acceptance speech by portraying himself as the candidate of specifics. Indeed, Mr. Gore likes to be very specific about how specific he is being. ''If you don't want specifics,'' he told the crowd at a riverside rally here tonight, ''now is the time to leave.'' At a rally earlier today in Quincy, Ill., Mr. Gore critiqued Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow a portion of Social Security payroll taxes to be invested in the private markets, and then asked: ''Where are the specifics? Where does the money come from?'' Mr. Gore's obsession with specifics, and his nonstop promotion of his obsession, serves a dual purpose. At one level, he is trying to draw substantive distinctions between his policy proposals and those of his Republican opponent. From health care and education to Social Security and tax cuts, Mr. Gore argues that his positions will do more than Mr. Bush's to improve the lives of middle-class Americans, who control the swing vote in this election. But at a somewhat more subliminal level, Gore aides make clear, the vice president's focus is intended to reinforce questions about Mr. Bush's intellectual heft. And so even as Mr. Gore technically sticks to his pledge not to wage personal attacks against Mr. Bush, he is able to use policy to plant doubts not only about his opponent's positions but also about his depth and acuity. It is terrain where Mr. Gore clearly feels he holds an advantage, and it reflects his campaign's effort to turn a perceived liability -- the candidate's wonkishness -- into an asset. ''Rather than make apologies for giving people specifics, Gore is being proud of it,'' said Greg Simon, a senior adviser to Mr. Gore. ''The other side is trying to win on charm, but charm doesn't help you with prescription drugs or putting your kids through school.'' Mr. Gore voiced a similar theme aboard the riverboat, the Mark Twain, as he conducted a discussion this morning on tax cuts with several area residents who had been brought aboard as props. Most of the forum consisted of an arithmetic lesson that compared Mr. Bush's call for a deep reduction in income tax rates with Mr. Gore's own proposals for tax cuts aimed at those struggling to afford college tuition, long-term care and child care. But before delving into policy, Mr. Gore said: ''I don't go for the old approach that says just give sound bites and public relations and images and that kind of thing and keep the facts hidden until after the election. I think the specifics are important.'' His comments came on a day when Mr. Gore rose early to conduct five brief network television interviews, and when he used the picturesque deck of the Mark Twain as a backdrop for a number of interviews with local television reporters. In his defense, Mr. Gore can be self-deprecating about his tactics. In an impromptu news conference aboard the riverboat today, he said he sensed from the enthusiasm of his crowds that his devotion to detail was paying off ''because people appreciate the effort to lift the tone of the campaign to substance and not just sound bites.'' Then he added with a laugh, ''Although that in itself is a sound bite.'' The strategy is also driving Mr. Gore's public comments about proposed debates with Mr. Bush, who has said he would debate the vice president three times but has not said when or where. In the news conference today, Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of ''procrastinating,'' and said that ''the American people have a right in this day and time to be respected with an adult, intelligent discussion of what the major issues are in a give-and-take without the slick image-makers intervening.'' Mr. Gore's use of the phrase ''adult, intelligent discussion'' may or may not have been arbitrary. But his aides have been more explicit. ''People are beginning to ask the question more and more,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary. ''Does George W. Bush have what it takes to be president?'' For the most part, that is the message that Mr. Gore's crowds take from his speeches. ''The key point when you're specific is that you're accountable,'' said Robert E. Merrick, a 49-year-old physician who attended today's rally in Quincy. As for Mr. Bush, Dr. Merrick said, ''He certainly hasn't presented anything that would make you think he has the ability to do the job.'' But at other moments on this trip, there have been doubts about exactly how much detail the public really craves. As the riverboat paused in a lock in Wisconsin on Friday, Mr. Gore stood on the top deck and exchanged small talk with several people on shore. ''Anybody have any questions on any of the issues?'' he asked. Nobody did.
 NADER QUESTIONS GORE AS POPULIST -- Ralph Nader, the nominee of the Green Party, challenged Vice President Al Gore's populist credentials yesterday and urged him to reject campaign money from industries that he criticized during his address to the Democratic National Convention. ''In his speech he challenged and criticized the giant drug companies, the oil companies, the pharmaceutical industry, the H.M.O.'s,'' Mr. Nader said at a news conference in Los Angeles. ''He talked populist but buys into corporate power.'' Speaking outside the Staples Center, site of the Democratic National Convention last week, Mr. Nader called on Mr. Gore to return campaign money contributed by ''big tobacco, big oil, big polluters, the pharmaceutical companies, the H.M.O.'s.''
 Six public polls conducted for news organizations since Democratic convention show Vice Pres Al Gore leading Gov George W Bush of Texas, though in two cases by only single percentage point; findings of some recent polls detailed (M) Six public polls conducted for news organizations since the Democratic convention have all shown Vice President Al Gore leading Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, though in two cases by only a single percentage point, a difference that is statistically insignificant. The postconvention gains for Mr. Gore were generally larger than the bounce recorded by the same polls for Mr. Bush. But the Bush gains generally fell off quickly. If Mr. Gore's also do, he will find himself trailing Mr. Bush again. Six public polls conducted for news organizations since the Democratic convention have all shown Vice President Al Gore leading Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, though in two cases by only a single percentage point, a difference that is statistically insignificant. The postconvention gains for Mr. Gore were generally larger than the bounce recorded by the same polls for Mr. Bush. But the Bush gains generally fell off quickly. If Mr. Gore's also do, he will find himself trailing Mr. Bush again. Moreover, in none of the polls does Mr. Gore's lead exceed the margin of sampling error, which ranged from three to five percentage points, a fact that underlines the narrow, uncertain margins. Three of the polls were released today. A CBS News poll of 956 registered voters conducted Friday through Sunday showed Mr. Gore leading Mr. Bush, 45 percent to 44 percent, with 6 percent for Ralph Nader of the Green Party and 1 percent for Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party. A comparable poll taken two weeks earlier, just after the Republican convention, gave Mr. Bush 50 percent and Mr. Gore 34 percent. Mr. Gore had never led Mr. Bush in a CBS News or CBS News/New York Times poll this year. Kathleen A. Frankovic, director of surveys for CBS News, said the advantage for Mr. Gore extended beyond the horse-race numbers. ''He improved the public's assessment of him as having strong qualities of leadership and someone who could be trusted. Over all, the favorable evaluation of Gore is now the same as that for Governor Bush,'' Ms. Frankovic said. Similarly, a Zogby International Poll for Reuters, conducted on the same three days among 1,004 likely voters, gave Mr. Gore a 44 percent to 41 percent lead, with 5 percent for Mr. Nader and 2 percent for Mr. Buchanan. A week earlier, the same poll had Mr. Bush up, 43 percent to 40 percent, with 7 percent for Mr. Nader and 2 percent for Mr. Buchanan. The last time a Zogby Poll showed Mr. Gore with a lead was in early February, when he had a one-point margin. An ABC News/Washington Post poll of 896 registered voters from Friday through Sunday, Mr. Gore has 46 percent to Mr. Bush's 44 percent, with 4 percent for Mr. Nader and 3 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Before the Democratic convention, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore in that poll, 48 percent to 40 percent, with 5 percent for Mr. Nader and 2 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Three polls conducted and released earlier pointed in the same direction. A Gallup poll of 697 likely voters for CNN and USA Today, taken on Friday and Saturday, had Mr. Gore leading Mr. Bush, 47 percent to 46 percent. Mr. Nader had 3 percent and Mr. Buchanan 2. One week earlier, before the Democratic convention, Mr. Bush had 55 percent, Mr. Gore 39 percent and Mr. Nader 2 percent, with less than 1 percent for Buchanan. Mr. Gore last led in one of these polls at the beginning of April. Another Friday-Saturday poll, done for Newsweek by Princeton Survey Research among 806 registered voters, gave Mr. Gore a 48 percent to 42 percent lead, with 3 percent for Mr. Nader and 1 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Eight days earlier, that poll found Mr. Bush leading, 48 percent to 38 percent, with 3 each for Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan. The first postconvention poll, conducted among 508 registered voters Thursday night for NBC News, showed Mr. Gore with a 46 percent to 43 percent lead over Mr. Bush, with 2 percent for Mr. Nader and 1 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Just before the convention, Peter D. Hart and Robert Teeter, who conduct the NBC polls, found Mr. Bush with 44 percent, Mr. Gore with 41 percent, Mr. Nader with 5 percent and Mr. Buchanan with 2 percent. None of their previous polls had found Mr. Gore ahead. Dr. Frankovic said the Gore bounce measured by the CBS News Poll had been exceeded only once in her polling, by Governor Bush's father. In 1988, she said, Vice President George Bush went from 17 point deficit to a 6 point lead over Gov. Michael S. Dukakis. Mr. Bush never trailed again.
 Editorial says there should be at least three presidential debates between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, beginning as soon as possible and shown on prime-time network television; says two campaigns should meet immediately and agree on format (M) With the Republican and Democratic conventions completed, the next potentially decisive event in the presidential campaign will be the debates between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Both camps have begun arguing over the format and number of debates. Mr. Bush's team wants to consider options other than the nationally televised one-on-one format sponsored since the late 1980's by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The obvious public interest is for Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush to have a chance to face and challenge each other directly, with questions coming from journalists or an audience of citizens. There should be at least three such debates on nationwide television in prime time, beginning as soon as possible. In some years the presidential debate commission, a nonpartisan group, has excluded third- and fourth-party candidates so that the Democratic and Republican nominees can hold a more focused exchange of their views. In 1996 this page questioned the commission's decision to exclude Ross Perot. We argued that since Mr. Perot had run a strong race in 1992 and still had a broad national standing four years later, he had the right to debate President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole. This year, however, neither Ralph Nader nor Patrick Buchanan has yet reached the status of a candidate with demonstrated national support. Should that change as the campaign progresses, the commission can respond accordingly. For now, the public deserves to see Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore lay out the substantial differences between them, without interference from third- or fourth-party candidates who have not built solid constituencies. With the Republican and Democratic conventions completed, the next potentially decisive event in the presidential campaign will be the debates between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Both camps have begun arguing over the format and number of debates. Mr. Bush's team wants to consider options other than the nationally televised one-on-one format sponsored since the late 1980's by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The obvious public interest is for Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush to have a chance to face and challenge each other directly, with questions coming from journalists or an audience of citizens. There should be at least three such debates on nationwide television in prime time, beginning as soon as possible. In some years the presidential debate commission, a nonpartisan group, has excluded third- and fourth-party candidates so that the Democratic and Republican nominees can hold a more focused exchange of their views. In 1996 this page questioned the commission's decision to exclude Ross Perot. We argued that since Mr. Perot had run a strong race in 1992 and still had a broad national standing four years later, he had the right to debate President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole. This year, however, neither Ralph Nader nor Patrick Buchanan has yet reached the status of a candidate with demonstrated national support. Should that change as the campaign progresses, the commission can respond accordingly. For now, the public deserves to see Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore lay out the substantial differences between them, without interference from third- or fourth-party candidates who have not built solid constituencies. Since the Democrats met in Los Angeles last week, the political news for Mr. Gore has looked more favorable, and it is understandable that he would want more debates rather than fewer. Not only have the polls improved for the vice president, but they also show that the public is more inclined to favor him on the economy, Social Security, education and health. It stands to reason in Mr. Gore's camp that a debate might underscore these and other issues. Mr. Bush, on the other hand, has developed into a forceful and articulate candidate with what many voters believe are appealing leadership qualities. His confident manner could easily make up for any inability to recite facts and legislation as Mr. Gore has shown he can do. In one of those paradoxes of the so-called expectations game, the Bush team has already begun talking up Mr. Gore's well-known debating skills. Karen Hughes, the Texas governor's communications director, said over the weekend that ''we want to make sure it's not a yelling contest or something undignified.'' But her criterion should not become an excuse for the Bush camp to insist on an informal disorganized discussion in place of a a focused examination of issues, broadcast on all the television networks and allowing for plenty of time for rebuttals on either side. Though the political conventions did not draw as many viewers as they have in the past, the abrupt changes in opinion ratings show that when television devotes at least some time to the campaign, the public starts to pay attention. That is why an early start on debates, shortly after Labor Day, would be good for all candidates. Aides to Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush should meet right away with the presidential commission and agree on a format.
 Article examines proposal by Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush to add $310 million to impact aid program for public education, increasing its budget by more than one-third (M) Now comes Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee for president. In a speech in Milwaukee today to the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Mr. Bush proposed adding $310 million to the impact aid program, increasing the budget by more than a third. ''Our men and women in service put their lives on the line to defend our freedom,'' Mr. Bush said. ''We have a special obligation to rebuild the schools that educate their children. As president, I will ensure that this obligation is met. Thomas M. Corwin, the acting deputy assistant secretary for elementary and secondary education, said today that over the years, some presidential candidates have been more eager than others to do away with the program. But Mr. Corwin said he could not think of a single one before Governor Bush who proposed expanding it.
 New television commercial by Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush, addressing education and other 'tough problems,' appraised; photos (M) The Republican presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Dick Cheney began showing two new commercials in 21 states yesterday. One deals with Mr. Bush's education proposals and the other declares that now is the time to deal with ''tough problems,'' such as Social Security, declining moral values and education. The Republican presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Dick Cheney began showing two new commercials in 21 states yesterday. One deals with Mr. Bush's education proposals and the other declares that now is the time to deal with ''tough problems,'' such as Social Security, declining moral values and education. ON THE SCREEN -- Mr. Bush accepting the Republican presidential nomination. Children running in a school hallway. Mr. Bush again. Then four quick cuts, showing alphabet blocks, children reading and other school scenes, followed by another scene of Mr. Bush from the convention. THE SCRIPT -- Mr. Bush: ''Seven out of 10 fourth graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book. Millions are trapped in schools where violence is common and learning is rare.'' Announcer (as school scenes shift): ''The Bush education agenda: Reform Head Start, focus on reading, restore local control, triple funding for character education, hold schools accountable for results.'' Mr. Bush: ''Now is the time to teach all our children to read and renew the promise of America's public schools.'' ON THE SCREEN -- Mr. Bush, in a sport shirt, talking to the camera. Then, as he discusses problems, pictures of a classroom, of elderly women singing around a piano with trophies on it, of a black woman and of a teenage girl in a shot that widens to include a teenage boy. Then Mr. Bush again. THE SCRIPT -- Mr. Bush: ''This is a moment in history when we have a chance to focus on tough problems. It's not always popular to say 'Our children can't read' or 'Social Security needs improving' or 'We have a budget surplus and a deficit in values.' But those are the right things to say. And the right way to make America better for everyone is to be bold and decisive, to unite instead of divide. Now is the time to do the hard things.'' ACCURACY -- Aside from the assertion about reading levels in schools in the poorest neighborhoods, which is based on a federal Department of Education study, neither advertisement includes factual statements that could be either accurate or inaccurate. Mr. Bush has indeed made the education proposals that his commercial cites. SCORE CARD -- The education commercial is intended to re-emphasize one of Mr. Bush's political strengths, the impression that he cares deeply about education, long a Democratic strong point. The ''Hard Things'' commercial is intended to underline an argument made in his acceptance speech that the Clinton administration squandered the opportunity presented by economic prosperity to solve major problems. And its call ''to unite instead of divide'' seeks to imply that the Gore campaign is divisive and negative. That was a Bush strength after the Republican convention, but a CBS News Poll released on Monday shows that more people now say Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, is spending more time on the attack. Other advertisements for Mr. Bush are available from The New York Times on the Web: www.nytimes.com/politics
 Presidential campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore latches on to populist 'working families' theme as way of appealing to women, especially working women who not only juggle family and job but also look to government for help in meeting needs of family; use of theme by some leading Democratic backers noted; photos (M) The phrase is suddenly everywhere. In his acceptance speech last Thursday, Vice President Al Gore mentioned ''working families'' nine times. Party officials told other speakers to use the phrase, and they did, over and over. Now the Gore campaign is printing up signs with it and repeating it time and again on the road. ''In the name of all the working families who are the strength and soul of America, I accept your nomination for president of the United States,'' Mr. Gore declared halfway through his 52-minute speech in Los Angeles. The phrase is suddenly everywhere. In his acceptance speech last Thursday, Vice President Al Gore mentioned ''working families'' nine times. Party officials told other speakers to use the phrase, and they did, over and over. Now the Gore campaign is printing up signs with it and repeating it time and again on the road. ''In the name of all the working families who are the strength and soul of America, I accept your nomination for president of the United States,'' Mr. Gore declared halfway through his 52-minute speech in Los Angeles. While Democrats have been speaking to ''working families'' for years, the Gore campaign has recently latched on to the theme as a way of appealing to women. But unlike the pitch in the last two elections, directed to Volvo-driving suburban ''soccer moms,'' Mr. Gore's appeal this time is to the ''waitress mom,'' the working woman who not only juggles family and a job but also looks to the government for help in meeting the needs of her family. So as his campaign has steamed through the populist heartland in recent days, Mr. Gore has talked less about gun control and abortion rights, topics more likely to appeal to the more affluent ''soccer moms'' and more about bread-and-butter economic issues like adding a benefit to Medicare to pay for prescription drugs and shoring up Social Security. Mr. Gore, the son of a populist Southern senator, used the ''working families'' phrase in his 1988 campaign for president. And it became popular among Democrats after the Republicans swept the Congress in 1994, and the party of the little guy needed to regroup its base. But when Mr. Gore formally began his campaign more than a year ago, he seemed more focused on busy, relatively upscale suburban parents who were snagged in traffic jams and could say good night to their children only by cell phone. Mr. Gore tried out the concept of ''working families'' late last year with the slogan ''Change that works for working families.'' It was noticeable for its double-barreled emphasis on work. But by that time, the threat from former Senator Bill Bradley was growing and the theme did not reflect what Mr. Gore was saying on the campaign trail. Besides, it was too clunky. The slogan, along with others like ''practical idealism,'' vanished as quickly as it appeared, as Mr. Gore slipped more naturally into combat mode with the phrase ''Stay and fight!'' Then about two months ago, as Mr. Gore began drafting his speech for the convention, the phrase ''working families'' re-emerged. It came up in the normal course of the focus groups that most campaigns conduct, and advisers said it was tested with a so-called people meter, a hand-held device that test groups of consumers can use to register their reaction to products, or in this case,  to political language. ''These are not new words in the dictionary,'' a top Gore strategist said. ''You hear things that the candidate says, you expose people to it, there are some things that resonate more than others, you get feedback from crowds and in the course of that, the language of the campaign begins to take shape. Behind the phrase lies an entire political strategy. The phrase, along with Mr. Gore's populist fervor, marks a broad, thematic shift, intended to energize the party's base, which polls had shown to be less enthusiastic in their support of Mr. Gore than the Republican base was in supporting Gov. George W. Bush. Anne Brown, 34, a schoolteacher who attended the opening rally for Mr. Gore's boat ride down the Mississippi in La Crosse, Wis., said she responded to the phrase because ''we know what he's talking about.'' Ms. Brown went to the rally with her 2-month-old daughter and her 55-year-old mother, who has lung cancer, and said she especially appreciated the Democrats' support of the Family and Medical Leave Act. ''It lets you be at home with your family as long as possible,'' she said, adding that she was leaning toward Mr. Gore for this reason. A top Gore adviser said: ''Working women in general encompass one of the largest elements of persuadable voters in this election. One of the great accomplishments of our convention was to soften up Bush's vote and expand our scope of opportunity.'' There was some evidence today that Mr. Gore's approach was having some effect. Several polls showed Mr. Gore's standing among voters improved after the convention, largely because of stronger support from women. A CNN poll showed Mr. Gore beating Mr. Bush, his Republican rival, by 20 percentage points among women. It also showed Mr. Bush beating Mr. Gore by 20 percentage points among men. The Gore campaign believes that getting the ear of these women is a crucial first step toward getting their vote, and that as Mr. Gore wins over lower-income voters, he can advance up the economic ladder to win higher-income voters. ''They are a large bloc of voters who are anxious to see who will be their champion,'' said the Gore strategist. ''As the vice president gains more standing with more voters, others will come -- like blue collar men -- and he'll have the capacity to talk to other groups higher up in income scale, like the wired workers.'' Mr. Gore's tax cuts are aimed specifically at working families -- tax credits for college tuition, day care, after-school programs, long-term health care, retirement and investments. He is offering $500 billion in tax cuts and credits over 10 years, which might seem a lot for someone who has criticized Mr. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut, but Mr. Gore said today on the last leg of his boat trip that his own tax cuts ''will go to the right people.'' A Gore adviser who helped coax the phrase ''working families'' from the focus-group stage to the candidate's lips explained its purpose this way: ''It implies we're talking about the people who really need government to be on their side, particularly the federal government, where so many programs from retirement, security and health emanate, and the federal government would be a real partner in terms of education.'' The idea of getting help for education costs spoke directly to Lou Cook, 48, a mother of three, who showed up at a rally Saturday for Mr. Gore in Dubuque, Iowa. She said that her local property taxes, which pay for her public schools, were so high that she needed help. ''All of us who work for a living have to send our kids to school, pay taxes and mortgages, and we know the only way our kids are going to benefit themselves is through education,'' Ms. Cook said. Gore advisers said they were not worried that the phrase sent a subliminal message, as Mr. Bush has charged, that ''working families'' was code for class warfare. They said that this tack by the Bush campaign could help Mr. Gore because it steered the conversation away from whether Mr. Bush was more likable than Mr. Gore. ''When Bush says 'class warfare,' that's a sign he's moving to our terrain,'' one Gore aide said. ''Bush wins if we talk on his terrain about 'affability.' ''But if we move the argument from 'Kumbaya' '' the aide said, referring to the good vibes engendered by the Bush campaign, ''to 'fighting for working families,' Gore wins.''  THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE RALLYING CRY
