 Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman campaign together in southeast Florida, setting off a frenzy at a largely Jewish community center in Tamarac and asserting that they will compete aggressively in this critical state; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, campaigned in southeast Florida for the first time today, setting off a frenzy at a largely Jewish community center and asserting that they would compete aggressively in this critical state. Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, campaigned in southeast Florida for the first time today, setting off a frenzy at a largely Jewish community center and asserting that they would compete aggressively in this critical state. ''I can't tell you how important Florida is,'' Mr. Lieberman told the crowd that filled an 800-seat auditorium in the Kings Point Community Center and flowed over into an adjacent room. ''I honestly believe that Al Gore and I are going to win Florida and as a result are going to win the election in November.'' Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman were playing on long-established Democratic terrain today in a state that is by no means the Democratic stronghold it once was. But by traveling here -- Mr. Gore will be back in the state on Monday -- the new Democratic team was able to test its ability to excite party loyalists whose support will be vital in November. Not surprisingly, Mr. Lieberman received an even warmer reception than Mr. Gore. Some wept with pride as they greeted him. Others called him a mensch. Sophie K. Gold, 72, said she was ''kvelling and ecstatic'' when Mr. Gore selected Mr. Lieberman. ''I felt 10 feet tall,'' she said, ''and very skinny.'' Representative Robert Wexler, who represents this area, said that Mr. Lieberman was regarded as ''a rock star, like Barbra Streisand'' in south Florida, and that his ability to turn out votes would make the Democrats surprisingly competitive as anybody could ever believe a Democratic ticket could be. And Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman did their best to speak the crowd's language. Mr. Lieberman introduced Mr. Gore as a ''Yiddishe neshoma,'' a Jewish soul. All the attention paid to his wife, Hadassah, and Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, he said, made the candidates feel like ''nuchshleppers,'' or afterthoughts. Mr. Gore, for his part, greeted the crowd with a hearty ''shalom aleichem.'' For the most part, the Democrats were playing to voters they had locked up before the Lieberman selection. And in any event, Jews comprised only 6 percent of the state's voters in 1996. The most recent public polls, taken before Mr. Gore's post-convention surge, showed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas with a double-digit lead in Florida. Susan MacManus, a political scientist at the University of South Florida, said she thought the state was in play but would give a slight edge to the Republicans. Mr. Gore, she said, is primarily ''coming to Florida to raise money and solidify his strongest supporters.'' David Colburn, a historian at the University of Florida, said Mr. Gore would have difficulty overcoming the popularity and organizational might of Mr. Bush's brother, Jeb, the state's governor, and in surmounting the state's business-oriented, antitax ethos. And yet, all indications are that Mr. Gore is making a serious play for Florida. His aides argue that the resources they are devoting to the state are too significant to be dismissed as a mere head fake aimed at seducing Mr. Bush into wasting time and money here. On Monday, Mr. Gore plans to travel to Tallahassee, where Jeb Bush sits as governor. Florida also is one of 17 key states where the campaign is broadcasting its first television advertisement, which began airing in three markets here on Tuesday. The ad is currently running in the Tampa, Orlando and West Palm Beach markets. Mr. Bush plans to visit Florida on Friday, and the advertisements he began broadcasting this week also are airing in Florida. ''We feel real good about our chances in Florida right now,'' said Dan Bartlett, a Bush spokesman. Florida is probably the largest state that both campaigns view as tightly contested. Mr. Gore holds an edge in California, a state with 54 electoral votes that President Clinton and Mr. Gore won in both 1992 and 1996. The same is true in New York, with 33 electoral votes, which has been won by Republicans only three times since 1960. Mr. Clinton won the state easily in the last two elections. Mr. Bush is expected to rout Mr. Gore in the governor's home state, Texas, which has 32 electoral votes. Two hundred and seventy electoral votes are needed to win. Some Florida Democrats worried that Mr. Gore had signaled his surrender in the state by not placing Senator Bob Graham on his short list of potential running mates. And Florida remains the locus of what is considered the vice president's most debilitating blunder -- his break with the White House in calling for permanent resident status for Elian Gonzalez. In a state where 18 percent of the population is 65 or older, the largest proportion of elderly in any state, Mr. Gore used today's appearance to promote his proposal for a $3,000 income tax credit for long-term care. The credit would go either to individuals whose disabilities or illnesses leave them unable to care for themselves, or to family members who pay for their relatives' care. The Gore campaign estimates that up to five million Americans would be eligible for the credit. Aides to Mr. Gore project that the initiative would cost $27 billion over 10 years. The plan is one component of Mr. Gore's $500 billion menu of targeted tax cuts that would take effect over the next decade and would primarily benefit middle-class Americans. Mr. Bush, by contrast, would cut taxes by $1.3 trillion over 10 years, primarily through an across-the-board reduction in income tax rates. The Bush plan includes a tax deduction for long-term care insurance premiums, at a cost of $5.1 billion over five years, and a new tax exemption, valued at $2,750, for each elderly spouse, parent or relative that a caregiver tends to in the home. That proposal would cost $2.3 billion over five years. The Gore campaign released calculations today showing that the benefit for middle-income Americans, such as a couple earning $60,000 or a single mother earning $40,000, would be greater under Mr. Gore's plan than under Mr. Bush's plan. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT  Correction:  August 25, 2000, Friday  An article yesterday about a visit by Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to a Jewish community center in Florida misattributed a Yiddish greeting. It was Mr. Lieberman, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''Shalom aleichem''; Mr. Gore said, ''Mazel tov.'' An article yesterday about a visit by Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to a Jewish community center in Florida misattributed a Yiddish greeting. It was Mr. Lieberman, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''Shalom aleichem''; Mr. Gore said, ''Mazel tov.''
 Gov George W Bush is put on defensive about his tax-cut plan at a time when he is supposed to be seeking support of women and independent voters; Bush's relaxed campaign schedule and his freqent comments about resting and sleeping make him seem less than a ball of fire (M) Gov. George W. Bush was supposed to be spending this week focusing on education, the issue with which his campaign is wooing women and independent voters. Gov. George W. Bush was supposed to be spending this week focusing on education, the issue with which his campaign is wooing women and independent voters. After Vice President Al Gore's fiery pledge at the convention on Thursday night to fight long and hard for the presidency and the people he wanted to serve, Mr. Bush had his chance to reclaim the spotlight. Mr. Bush's advisers said today that they were not concerned. The adviser and others said they had always expected the rise in Mr. Gore's poll numbers and that the news media's spotlight on anything and everything that looks like a sign of trouble in Mr. Bush's campaign was an equally predictable part of the ever-shifting dynamics of the race. While Mr. Bush's advisers have taken great pains recently to talk about how many states he planned to visit in late August, a preliminary schedule for the next week and a half showed Mr. Bush taking three days off of the campaign trail over the weekend, traveling just three days next week and then taking three days off the trail before Labor Day. Mr. Bush himself makes frequent comments about resting and sleeping and a sensible pace, concerns that do not exactly portray him as a ball of fire. His advisers sought to frame this as an advantage, saying it casts him as a sensible man not utterly consumed by politics. ''Gore runs the risk of looking like he's just an absolute, total political animal,'' one adviser said. But Mr. Bush's acknowledgment that he had to sell his suggested tax cut more strongly than he has pointed to a different problem: that a proposal that resonated with the Republican base in the primaries could give pause to swing voters in the general election. Many polls suggest that tax cuts are low on a majority of voters' wish lists. Although there was discussion in Mr. Bush's campaign before he made that proposal last year about whether the cost of it -- $1.6 trillion over nine years -- was too large, Mr. Bush has promoted his plan as a matter of unswerving principle and economic justice, and both he and his advisers said he would not retreat from it. ''Bush has walked into a significant trap of his own making on this,'' said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster. And one Republican strategist in Washington who sometimes advises the Bush campaign conceded, ''What's Bush going to do? No matter how hard he pushes his tax plan, it doesn't seem to catch fire.'' Several other Republican strategists and pollsters said that a basic appetite among Americans for tax cuts was obvious in the fact that Mr. Gore has offered a proposal that would cost $620 billion over 10 years, and that Mr. Bush simply needed to push his plan in more deliberate ways. During long stretches of time on the stump, especially recently, he has often cast it in broad, ideological terms. John McLaughlin, a Republican pollster, said that Mr. Bush ''has got to sell this as a kitchen-table, pocketbook issue: This is what it means to you.'' Interestingly, Mr. Bush's unprompted defense of his tax cut this week was an effort to explain how spending and surplus projections over the next week enabled him to accomplish his proposals. ''The minute he tries to get deep into the weeds, a la Al Gore, who's excellent there, it runs counter to his personality,'' an adviser acknowledged.
 And yet. And yet there are times, such as when he tried mustering enthusiasm for his party's presidential candidate, Gov. George W. Bush, during a recent interview (''He is a, uh, very nice guy'') or when he said there was no compelling reason for a moratorium on the death penalty, or, especially, when he stresses small government and individual liberty, that the 47-year-old Mr. Campbell, a former constitutional law professor at Stanford University, sounds remarkably like a Republican Party animal. Ms. Feinstein, a moderate who was once mayor of San Francisco, is acknowledged as the most popular elected official in California. She garnered nearly one million more votes than anyone else on the March primary ballot, including Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore.
 Reno Discusses Gore Decision  Attorney General Janet Reno portrayed her decision not to name a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's statements about his role in 1996 fund-raising activities as a one that cleared him only of making false statements in an April 18 interview with investigators. She said the four-year inquiry into fund-raising would continue. Taking a Step on Warming  Texas' three natural resource commissioners, all appointees of Gov. George W. Bush, said global warming was a serious problem and that the state would explore ways to cut its emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases.
 William Safire Op-Ed column speculates as to whether Pres Clinton, who faces possible indictment after he leaves office for perjury and obstruction of justice in Paula Jones sexual harassment lawsuit, will receive pardon from Vice Pres Al Gore if Gore is elected president (M) Asked in April by newspaper editors about a presidential pardon by Clinton's successor, Al Gore said: ''President Clinton is way ahead of you on this. He said publicly some time ago that he would neither request or accept a pardon.'' Before the same group a day later, Clinton left out the ''accept'' part: ''The answer is I have no interest in it. I wouldn't ask for it.'' Gore treats the question of pardon as mooted by Clinton's dismissal of the idea. And too many have bought the notion that a pardon must be sought or ''accepted.'' This means Gore will have to stop dancing away from the question as if the pardon decision were somehow shared with the pardonee. It's time he chose the hard right over the easy wrong answer. (For Bush, it would be an opportunity to demonstrate nonpartisan compassion on a grand scale.)
 Law enforcement officials say Atty Gen Janet Reno's decision not to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Vice Pres Al Gore's statements about his role in 1996 fund-raising activities means Gore is essentially clear of any criminal jeopardy (M) The decision by Attorney General Janet Reno not to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's statements about his role in 1996 fund-raising activities means Mr. Gore is essentially clear of any criminal jeopardy, law enforcement officials said today. The decision by Attorney General Janet Reno not to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's statements about his role in 1996 fund-raising activities means Mr. Gore is essentially clear of any criminal jeopardy, law enforcement officials said today. In acknowledging that she had rejected the advice of a top Justice Department investigator to name a special prosecutor, Ms. Reno sought to portray her decision as a narrow one that cleared Mr. Gore only of making false statements in an April 18 interview with law enforcement officials. She said the four-year inquiry into fund-raising would continue. But some law enforcement officials said that the reasoning Ms. Reno used in declining to seek a special prosecutor meant that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to investigate Mr. Gore for any issue related to his role in raising campaign donations in the 1996 presidential campaign. Ms. Reno said she had concluded that the transcript of the April 18 interview did not show that Mr. Gore was lying when he insisted that White House coffees and his 1996 visit to a Buddhist temple were not fund-raising events. In June, Robert J. Conrad Jr., the head of the campaign finance unit at the Justice Department, recommended that a special counsel be named to investigate whether Mr. Gore had made false statements in describing his role in the April 1996 visit to a Buddhist temple in Hacienda Heights, Calif., and numerous coffee sessions at the White House with potential donors. Both the appearance at the Hsi Lai Temple and the coffees resulted in campaign donations to the Democratic Party or the national ticket. Mr. Gore told Mr. Conrad in the April interview that he did not regard any of those events as fund-raising events. Mr. Gore initially said he had been at only one such coffee. Mr. Conrad then told him that the record showed that he had, in fact, been the host at 23 of them and had attended an additional eight with President Clinton as the host. But the law enforcement officials said Mr. Gore's only potential legal liability was whether he had misrepresented the events, not his participation in them. That means Mr. Gore is inoculated from new efforts to prosecute him as he heads into the final months of his presidential campaign. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said: ''We are pleased with today's Justice Department announcement. However, Al Gore is going to continue to do what he has been doing all along, focus on America's families.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, said in a statement, ''While it's clear that Al Gore engaged in a number of questionable fund-raising activities and then gave the F.B.I. statements that continue to raise all the issues of his credibility, the American people are sick and tired of all these scandals and investigations. The best way to put all these scandals and investigations behind us is to elect someone new.'' On two previous occasions, Ms. Reno rejected advice to seek an outside criminal inquiry of Mr. Gore. She did so on those occasions over the objections of Louis J. Freeh, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and several senior Justice Department officials, including Charles G. LaBella, a predecessor of Mr. Conrad.
 Dick Cheney's record as chief executive of Halliburton, which Gov George W Bush cites as a plus in a vice presidential candidate, is subject to considerable dispute; some present and former company executives praise him for doubling the company through mergers and a growing government business, but others say Cheney failed to keep a sufficiently tight rein on company's aggressive pursuit of overseas energy projects and road-building work in US; some Wall Street analysts describe Cheny's performance as little better than average; executives at Dresser Industries, which merged with Halliburton in 1998, were startled to learn after the deal closed that several of the major projects negotiated by Cheney's management team were much less healthy than they appeared on Halliburton's books and were racking up significant losses; photo; graph (L) The Dresser merger was the biggest deal of Mr. Cheney's five years at Halliburton and the losses that arose soon afterward were one of several missteps in a business record that has become part of his political resume since he was nominated to be the Republican candidate for vice president. The Bush campaign has defended his multimillion-dollar retirement payment from Halliburton as fair compensation for a job well done. ''The American people should be pleased they have a vice-presidential nominee who has been successful in business,'' said Karen P. Hughes, communications director for the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush. In assessing Mr. Cheney's record at Halliburton, it is difficult to say -- as it would be with any large corporation -- what specific role the chief executive played in each initiative during his tenure. For example, it is not clear how much of a hand Mr. Cheney had in his management team's decision to start bidding more aggressively on smaller-scale highway projects. The company won a host of new contracts, but ran into difficulties in North Carolina and Mr. Bush's home state of Texas for failing to meet deadlines for completing the work. The projects were small by Halliburton standards, $20 million or less, but a company insider said the losses on several of them rose as high as $4 million to $5 million each. North Carolina and Texas fined the company for its tardiness and North Carolina officials went further, barring Halliburton from bidding on road work in the state. The company's travails in Texas are no secret: A partial list of the penalties, totaling $359,450, is on the Web site of the Bush administration's highway department.
 Texas' three natural resource commissioners, all appointees of Gov George W Bush, say that global warming is a serious problem and that state will explore ways to cut its emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases; Bush has so far said that although earth's climate appears to be warming, more research must be done to determine whether human activities are the cause (M) Texas' three natural resource commissioners, all appointees of Gov. George W. Bush, said yesterday that global warming was a serious problem and that the state would explore ways to cut its emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases. The decision, although just a tentative move toward action, was praised by some private environmental groups. They said it could signal a shift in the global-warming stance of Mr. Bush, who so far has said that although earth's climate appears to be warming, more research must be done to determine whether human activities are the cause. Texas' three natural resource commissioners, all appointees of Gov. George W. Bush, said yesterday that global warming was a serious problem and that the state would explore ways to cut its emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases. The decision, although just a tentative move toward action, was praised by some private environmental groups. They said it could signal a shift in the global-warming stance of Mr. Bush, who so far has said that although earth's climate appears to be warming, more research must be done to determine whether human activities are the cause. International negotiations on cutting greenhouse gases are to resume this fall, and emission reductions are  an issue on which Mr. Bush and his presidential campaign opponent, Vice President Al Gore, have sharply differed. Mr. Gore has pushed for aggressive action to cut emissions, while Mr. Bush has cautioned against haste.
 Surveys by American Petroleum Institute and US Energy Information Administration show sudden drop in crude oil inventories, sending home heating oil prices to their highest in a decade; on New York Mercantile Exchange, price of crude oil for October delivery jumped 80 cents, or 2.6 percent, to $32.02 a barrel, while price of heating oil for September delivery rises 5.26 cents, or 5.8 percent, to 95.61 cents a gallon; Clinton administration is again mentioning possibility of using oil from government's Strategic Petroleum Reserve to help push prices lower; connections of Republican ticket of George W Bush and Dick Cheney to oil industry will sharpen focus on issue this fall, especially if it is cold; Clinton says he will discuss high oil prices this weekend when he meets with Nigeria's Pres Olusegun Obasanjo, member of OPEC (M) The Clinton administration is again mentioning the possibility of using oil from the government's Strategic Petroleum Reserve to help push prices lower. And the connections of the Republican ticket of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney to the oil industry will sharpen the focus on the issue this fall, especially if it is cold.
 Mr. Fox plans to use his informal meetings with President Clinton and the two American presidential candidates, Vice President Al Gore and  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, to encourage them to join in his vision of a sea change in relations along the 2,000-mile border, in particular one more open to the flow of Mexican laborers. As he does so, the voices of those workers he has helped train in his home state will echo in the background.
 But Americans should wonder why the Dallas-based oil services company went further and allowed Mr. Cheney to keep 400,000 more stock options that he would ordinarily have had to work additional years to acquire. Under the terms of his employment contract, Mr. Cheney could have retired at age 62 and by that time would have earned these additional options. But as part of his retirement package, Halliburton's board of directors allowed Mr. Cheney to retire at age 59 and still keep these options. The board also accelerated the vesting of some restricted shares. That special favor, worth at least $6 million at today's prices and potentially a lot more, would tie Mr. Cheney's financial fortunes to those of the company -- and therefore to the price of oil -- well into a potential Bush-Cheney administration. Mr. Cheney should have turned the favor down, and taken only the substantial stake he had already earned. But Americans should wonder why the Dallas-based oil services company went further and allowed Mr. Cheney to keep 400,000 more stock options that he would ordinarily have had to work additional years to acquire. Under the terms of his employment contract, Mr. Cheney could have retired at age 62 and by that time would have earned these additional options. But as part of his retirement package, Halliburton's board of directors allowed Mr. Cheney to retire at age 59 and still keep these options. The board also accelerated the vesting of some restricted shares. That special favor, worth at least $6 million at today's prices and potentially a lot more, would tie Mr. Cheney's financial fortunes to those of the company -- and therefore to the price of oil -- well into a potential Bush-Cheney administration. Mr. Cheney should have turned the favor down, and taken only the substantial stake he had already earned.
 Your Aug. 20 news article ''U.N. Reform Group Assesses U.S. Candidates'' reports that Al Gore has called for changes in the 1997 treaty banning land mines as a precondition for accession to the ban. During the treaty's framing, United States policy makers pitched these same changes, which were rejected by the other participating countries. Your Aug. 20 news article ''U.N. Reform Group Assesses U.S. Candidates'' reports that Al Gore has called for changes in the 1997 treaty banning land mines as a precondition for accession to the ban. During the treaty's framing, United States policy makers pitched these same changes, which were rejected by the other participating countries.
 Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush will both meet the new Mexican leader during his current visit to the United States. Both candidates should use the opportunity to learn more about his immigration ideas.
 Jerry L. Martin, president of the American Council of Trustees and Alumni, cheered when George W. Bush tapped Dick Cheney as his running mate. He cheered again when Al Gore chose Senator Joseph I. Lieberman. Jerry L. Martin, president of the American Council of Trustees and Alumni, cheered when George W. Bush tapped Dick Cheney as his running mate. He cheered again when Al Gore chose Senator Joseph I. Lieberman.
 Republican National Committee cancels plans to use a television commercial showing Vice Pres Al Gore saying in 1994 interview with NBC that neither he nor Pres Clinton lied in their political careers; among reasons is a fear that swing voters might see it as an unfair effort to saddle Gore with responsibility for Clinton's deceptive remarks about his affair with Monica Lewinsky (M) The Republican National Committee has canceled plans to use a television commercial showing Vice President Al Gore saying in a 1994 interview with NBC that neither he nor President Clinton had lied in their political careers. The commercial was pulled, Republican officials said, because it did not make clear the date of the interview, nor did it explain that Mr. Gore was responding to questions about the United States Senate campaign of Oliver L. North in Virginia. There was also fear, they said, that swing voters would see the commercial as an unfair effort to saddle Mr. Gore with responsibility for Mr. Clinton's deceptive remarks about his affair with a White House intern. The Republican National Committee has canceled plans to use a television commercial showing Vice President Al Gore saying in a 1994 interview with NBC that neither he nor President Clinton had lied in their political careers. The commercial was pulled, Republican officials said, because it did not make clear the date of the interview, nor did it explain that Mr. Gore was responding to questions about the United States Senate campaign of Oliver L. North in Virginia. There was also fear, they said, that swing voters would see the commercial as an unfair effort to saddle Mr. Gore with responsibility for Mr. Clinton's deceptive remarks about his affair with a White House intern. But other Republicans said the commercial, produced by National Media, showed a television set on a kitchen table. The television is on, and the screen shows an excerpt from the 1994 interview by Lisa Meyers, who was asking Mr. Gore about his description of Mr. North as a ''pathological liar.'' ''Uh, none spring to mind, I'll tell you that,'' Mr. Gore replied. ''Not that I have heard. Absolutely not,'' Mr. Gore answered. At Mr. Gore's campaign headquarters in Nashville yesterday, some advisers professed disappointment that the advertisement was not shown as scheduled. They said they were certain that the advertisement would have backfired on the Bush campaign, angering voters because it did not make clear the time or context of the interview. ''This is just the latest indication of disarray in the Bush campaign,''  said Mr. Gore's communications director, Mark Fabiani. 'Yesterday Bush failed to coherently defend his tax plan. Today Bush is mired in an indefensible ad debacle.'' He and other Republicans also emphasized that Mr. Gore's character and integrity were likely to be the subject of future advertisements paid for by the Republican National Committee. ''The issue of Al Gore's credibility remains to be discussed in this campaign,'' Mr. May said. ''But clearly we don't want to have an ad out that would confuse people in any way.'' One adviser to the Bush campaign said yesterday that senior officials at the Republican National Committee first approached the Bush campaign on Wednesday with concerns about the advertisement. ''We believe Al Gore's credibility is an issue, but to raise that issue, it  has to be done in a credible way,'' the adviser said. ''And this particular ad, with the date, might have been taken out of context.'' Asked if there was concern that the ad could undercut Mr. Bush's pledge to raise the tenor of campaigning, the adviser replied: ''We think the tenor of the campaign is important, but it's also important to set the record straight. They've run $30 million worth of ads, the bulk of them being attack ads on Governor Bush's leadership in Texas.''
 This year is supposed to be different. The ebullient George W. Bush wraps his arms around the education issue at every opportunity. Dick Cheney, who voted against funding for Head Start when he was in Congress, said this week that education was probably ''the single most important issue'' in the presidential campaign. Vice President Al Gore strongly supports the legislation, but Governor Bush does not. He has derided it as a ''bricks and mortar'' approach to education reform. The Republicans do not have a lot of credibility on the education issue. That will hardly improve if Governor Bush and Mr. Cheney travel the country claiming to be education champions while at the same time standing in the way of those programs that would help children most.
 Elena Smith opposes suggestion by Sean Wilentz (Op-Ed Aug 21) that Vice Pres Gore discuss Pres Clinton's impeachment; says it would violate his pledge to run positive campaign Should Al Gore follow Sean Wilentz's advice to discuss President Clinton's impeachment (Op-Ed, Aug. 21), he would indeed violate his campaign pledge to run a positive campaign. After all, George W. Bush has never said that Mr. Gore was responsible for the Lewinsky scandal. When Mr. Bush says that he intends to restore honor and dignity to the office of the president, in fact he is making a general and pointed reference to the scandals of both men, including the campaign finance scandal of 1996 and Mr. Gore's Buddhist temple fund-raiser. Should Al Gore follow Sean Wilentz's advice to discuss President Clinton's impeachment (Op-Ed, Aug. 21), he would indeed violate his campaign pledge to run a positive campaign. After all, George W. Bush has never said that Mr. Gore was responsible for the Lewinsky scandal. When Mr. Bush says that he intends to restore honor and dignity to the office of the president, in fact he is making a general and pointed reference to the scandals of both men, including the campaign finance scandal of 1996 and Mr. Gore's Buddhist temple fund-raiser. Calling on Mr. Gore to attack the House Republicans, who were, at least in their minds, obeying the Constitution, would be a divisive and losing tactic for Mr. Gore, who is finally having some success distancing himself from ''that woman'' and that scandal.
 Charles A Weinberg letter says Sean Wilentz is right by advising Vice Pres Al Gore (Op-Ed, Aug 21) to discuss Pres Clinton's impeachment Sean Wilentz is right to advise Al Gore to embrace impeachment (Op-Ed, Aug. 21). The Republicans in Congress, unable to control their fanatical hatred of President Clinton, wielded the Constitution as a weapon when they could not get him any other way. The high crime? Lying (under oath) about sex. Sean Wilentz is right to advise Al Gore to embrace impeachment (Op-Ed, Aug. 21). The Republicans in Congress, unable to control their fanatical hatred of President Clinton, wielded the Constitution as a weapon when they could not get him any other way. The high crime? Lying (under oath) about sex.
 CLINTON ELUDING THE LIMELIGHT -- President Clinton is working hard to leave the limelight to Vice President Al Gore, aides say. He scrapped plans to travel to Atlanta yesterday to celebrate the fourth anniversary of the welfare reform law. It seems the Gore campaign preferred that he not go, a message that William M. Daley, the campaign chairman, passed along to John D. Podesta, the president's chief of staff. Mr. Clinton did go to New Jersey yesterday for two low-key political fund-raisers. But he kept the focus on Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, saying that the most important thing was for the two ''to go out and spread the message, engage in the debate and make sure the American people know what the choices are before them.'' CLINTON ELUDING THE LIMELIGHT -- President Clinton is working hard to leave the limelight to Vice President Al Gore, aides say. He scrapped plans to travel to Atlanta yesterday to celebrate the fourth anniversary of the welfare reform law. It seems the Gore campaign preferred that he not go, a message that William M. Daley, the campaign chairman, passed along to John D. Podesta, the president's chief of staff. Mr. Clinton did go to New Jersey yesterday for two low-key political fund-raisers. But he kept the focus on Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, saying that the most important thing was for the two ''to go out and spread the message, engage in the debate and make sure the American people know what the choices are before them.'' CHENEY IN CALIFORNIA -- Dick Cheney was also in California yesterday, but the issues he hit hardest had nothing to do with corporate or electric power. Rather he emphasized three themes that have become central to the Bush-Cheney campaign in recent days: bolstering education, the military and the nation's sense of honor and integrity, the latter almost always a none-too-subtle reference to President Clinton's conduct in the White House. In Bakersfield, Mr. Cheney told a group of high school students in the Junior Reserved Officers Training Corps that ''nothing is more essential to education than teaching character,'' and he suggested that permitting prayer in public schools would help accomplish the job. ''We want our children to learn to read and write, but we also want them to know right from wrong,'' he said. ''''My time as secretary of defense taught me the enormous importance, if you will, of character in terms of the functioning of the U.S. military. No military organization can survive without honor and integrity.''
