 ''His first plan is a big tax scheme that just doesn't add up,'' Mrs. Clinton told supporters at a rally in Kingston, N.Y., today, citing reports in Newsday and The Daily News today that assert that some of Mr. Lazio's figures are wrong. She also accused the congressman of trying ''to be Bush Lite'' with his plan.
 Editorial says looming environmental problems, both at home and worldwide, have taken a back seat in presidential campaign but cannot begin to be solved without presidential involvement; says Gov George W Bush has expressed a general concern for environment but Vice Pres Al Gore has outlined more detailed remedies and conveyed a more assertive approach to enforcement (M) This is the sort of thing that Al Gore loves to talk about, but so far global warming has barely entered the presidential campaign. In fact, except for a three-day period when Mr. Gore talked about energy policy, environmental questions generally have been hidden behind big-ticket items like Social Security, taxes and national defense. But few issues are as vexing and contentious as those that touch on the relationship between people and nature -- issues like clean air, the degradation of the oceans and marine life, the preservation of open space and biodiversity, and climate change. This is the sort of thing that Al Gore loves to talk about, but so far global warming has barely entered the presidential campaign. In fact, except for a three-day period when Mr. Gore talked about energy policy, environmental questions generally have been hidden behind big-ticket items like Social Security, taxes and national defense. But few issues are as vexing and contentious as those that touch on the relationship between people and nature -- issues like clean air, the degradation of the oceans and marine life, the preservation of open space and biodiversity, and climate change. So far, Mr. Gore has taken a more assertive approach than Gov. George W. Bush on all of these questions. Mr. Gore helped devise the administration's aggressive regulatory strategies under the clean air and water laws and fortified Mr. Clinton's resolve to oppose Republican efforts to weaken those laws. He can also be expected to continue Mr. Clinton's efforts to guard and expand the public lands. In Texas, Mr. Bush has pursued a cooperative approach emphasizing voluntary solutions to environmental problems, and has said that as president he would turn over ''significant'' authority to local governments. While he supports the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund, he has criticized important administration initiatives on wilderness protection and has promised to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration. Global warming, of course, is Mr. Gore's signature environmental issue, and he is likely to give it a kind of prominence that Mr. Clinton did not. He has also unveiled an ambitious and fairly detailed menu of subsidies and market incentives aimed at helping industry achieve dramatic reductions in greenhouse gases. Mr. Bush agrees that global warming is a problem, but so far he has given no details of what he would do about it. The candidates' positions on warming reflect the overall pattern of the campaign to date on environmental matters. Mr. Bush has expressed general concern for these issues, and on Friday singled out the preservation of tropical forests as a priority in his diplomacy with Latin America. But Mr. Gore has outlined more detailed remedies and conveyed a more muscular attitude about enforcement.
 Gore Challenges Bush On Health Plan Details  Vice President Al Gore called for an intelligent discussion of health care policy as part of the presidential campaign, and suggested that Gov. George W. Bush's proposals, particularly for a prescription drug benefit for the elderly, have yet to meet a ''minimal standard of substance for serious debate.'' Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate, said Mr. Bush was still working on a plan for financing a prescription drug benefit. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Mr. Gore's running mate, called for a greater role for religion in American public life in comments at one of Detroit's largest African-American churches. His themes, including declaring that belief in God is the basis of morality and of the nation, were remarkably similar to those commonly voiced by conservative Republicans. Also, the president of the Detroit branch of the N.A.A.C.P. praised Mr. Lieberman for defending the interests of blacks. Cheney Addresses Military Cuts  Mr. Cheney acknowledged that the military cutbacks he and Mr. Bush have campaigned against began when Mr. Cheney was defense secretary for Mr. Bush's father, but he blamed the Clinton administration for making ''far deeper'' cuts that he said had left the military ''in decline.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore, in telephone interview, attacks Gov George Bush's health care policy, reiterating his own proposals in detail and mocking opponent's position as lacking minimal standard of substance for serious debate; elaborates on theme he will use in coming days in clear attempt to keep presidential campaign's agenda firmly on Democratic turf and to push Bush further on defensive; aides suggest health care is winning issue as recent polls have given Gore overwhelming advantage when voters were asked which candidate would do better job dealing with health care in general and prescription drug prices in particular; campaign's use of health care to highlight risks they see in Bush's proposed $1.3 billion, 10-year reduction in income tax rates, which it claims would leave little of federal surplus for new spending programs noted; health care may be issue that can reinforce notion that Gore, who focused attention on health care during 16 years in House and Senate, is more knowledgeable and better prepared than Bush; Republican vice presidential running mate Dick Cheney acknowledges that Bush does not yet have plan for financing prescription drug benefit for elderly; providing such benefit under Medicare, at cost estimated at $253 billion over next 10 years, is centerpiece of Gore's platform; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore attacked Gov. George W. Bush on health care policy yesterday, using a telephone interview to reiterate his own proposals in detail and to mock his opponent's positions as lacking ''a minimal standard of substance for serious debate.'' Mr. Gore's comments came on a day when each campaign dispatched a surrogate to attack the other's positions on health policy, and when Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, acknowledged in two television interviews that Mr. Bush did not yet have a detailed plan for financing a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. Providing such a benefit under Medicare, at a cost estimated at $253 billion over 10 years, is a centerpiece of Mr. Gore's platform. Vice President Al Gore attacked Gov. George W. Bush on health care policy yesterday, using a telephone interview to reiterate his own proposals in detail and to mock his opponent's positions as lacking ''a minimal standard of substance for serious debate.'' Mr. Gore's comments came on a day when each campaign dispatched a surrogate to attack the other's positions on health policy, and when Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, acknowledged in two television interviews that Mr. Bush did not yet have a detailed plan for financing a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. Providing such a benefit under Medicare, at a cost estimated at $253 billion over 10 years, is a centerpiece of Mr. Gore's platform. Mr. Gore's interview on health care, initiated by his campaign, elaborated on a theme that he plans to address throughout a four-day trip this week. It was a clear attempt to keep the campaign's agenda firmly on Democratic turf and to push Mr. Bush further on the defensive after a rocky week. Mr. Bush plans to spend the week talking about education on a six-state tour that begins today. He had hoped to do the same last week, but wound up devoting much of his time to defending his tax cut plan from daily criticism by the Gore campaign. Aides to Mr. Gore have made it clear that they believe health care is a winning issue for the vice president. Recent polls have given Mr. Gore an overwhelming advantage when voters were asked which candidate would do a better job dealing with health care in general and with prescription drug prices in particular. Mr. Gore and his aides also have used health care to highlight the risks they see in Mr. Bush's proposed $1.3 billion, 10-year reduction in income tax rates, which they claim would leave little of the federal surplus for new spending programs. And because Mr. Gore focused much of his attention on health care during his 16 years in the House and the Senate, the Gore campaign views health policy as an issue that can reinforce the notion that Mr. Gore is more knowledgeable and better prepared than Mr. Bush. In the telephone interview, Mr. Gore used several similar constructions to question Mr. Bush's seriousness. ''What's good for the American people is to have an adult, intelligent discussion of the specifics of these issues,'' Mr. Gore said. Also in the interview, conducted from his residence in Washington, Mr. Gore criticized recent television advertisements by the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee. The Bush advertisement, which began airing late last week, said that Mr. Bush, the governor of Texas, would ''make prescription drugs available and affordable for every senior who needs them,'' while the party's commercial accused Mr. Gore of ''pushing a big government plan that lets Washington bureaucrats interfere with what your doctor prescribes.'' Mr. Gore scoffed at those claims. ''We need to honor our democracy and redeem the promise of the American system and not hide behind glib television advertising that disguises what really's been proposed,'' he said. ''I'm waiting for the plan. The ad says there's a plan. Where is the plan?'' The vice president has proposed a prescription drug benefit that would  pay all drug costs for the approximately 13 million uncovered Medicare recipients with incomes of 135 percent of the poverty level and below. That would cover individuals making about $12,000 a year and couples making about $14,000 a year, Gore aides said. Those with higher incomes would pay half of the cost of their drugs up to $5,000 and then would pay nothing more once they had spent $4,000 of their own money in a given year. Mr. Bush, said his spokesman, Ari Fleischer, would ''build on'' a plan devised by a bipartisan commission headed by Senators Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee, and John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana. That plan would seek to spur competition between public and private health insurance plans for Medicare recipients, giving consumers a choice of public and private plans, some of which would provide a prescription drug benefit. Mr. Bush also has said he supports a sliding prescription drug subsidy for the low-income elderly, but would leave exact amounts to be determined in negotiations with Congress, Mr. Fleischer said. Mr. Fleischer and other Bush aides have said that the governor's plan for paying for prescription drugs would not cost the federal government any money because other reforms to the Medicare system would save enough to pay for the drug coverage. Asked in the interview to address the Clinton administration's inability to pass a universal health care plan in its first two years, Mr. Gore said, ''Well, first of all, this campaign is about the future and not the past.'' He later cited the creation of the Children's Health Insurance Program, which has, since its passage in 1997, provided health care coverage for about 2 million children. About 11 million children remain uninsured out of 44 million total uninsured in the country. Mr. Gore also noted the administration's efforts to extend the solvency of Medicare and the Kassebaum-Kennedy law that made it easier to maintain health insurance after changing employers. Mr. Gore said he did not think it was risky for a Democratic candidate to place such a heavy emphasis on health policy in light of his own administration's troubled record. The vice president said he would begin that process by expanding the Children's Health Insurance Program and Medicaid to provide coverage for all children by 2005. In all, Mr. Gore would spend more than $500 billion over 10 years on health care initiatives, about one of every three dollars available from the surplus. Early this afternoon, the Gore campaign put Donna E. Shalala, the secretary of health and human services, on a conference call with reporters to promote the vice president's health care plans. Several hours later, the Bush campaign responded by making Mr. Frist available for a conference call. He derided Mr. Gore's prescription drug proposal as a ''one-size-fits-all'' government plan whose benefit to the elderly, after premiums and copayments, would amount to only 13 cents a day. ''Seniors won't have the wool pulled over their eyes,'' he said. ''They clearly won't get what's being advertised by Vice President Gore.'' Two hours earlier, the Bush campaign had issued a news release claiming that the benefit would amount to only 5 cents a day, but changed the number after a recalculation, Mr. Fleischer said. In the interview, Mr. Gore emphasized that his prescription drug plan ''covers every senior, and I have budgeted for it, spelled out the cost, and fit it within a balanced budget.'' He said that Mr. Bush's plan ''for providing a tiny drug subsidy to insurance companies'' would not work because the premiums needed to cover drug costs would remain unaffordable for many seniors. In recent weeks, Mr. Gore has repeatedly blamed the pharmaceutical and insurance industries for driving up drug costs and limiting access to coverage. ''He has voted on high-profile matters against the wishes of the big pharmaceutical companies and the insurance companies,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The fact that many of them are headquartered in his state and have supported him is not of concern to me in any way to me.''
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column on Gov George W Bush's linguistic gaffes and malapropisms offers language-mangling quotes from several other politicians (M) Reporters covering George W. Bush's presidential campaign are having a field day with his so-called Bushisms. It's understandable. They're irresistible. Reporters covering George W. Bush's presidential campaign are having a field day with his so-called Bushisms. It's understandable. They're irresistible. Back in February, Mr. Bush said of John McCain, ''He can't take the high horse and then claim the low road.'' You want economic insight? ''We ought to make the pie higher,'' Mr. Bush said. The danger if Mr. Bush keeps this up is that we will start to think of him as some kind of champ in the fine art of malaprophesizing. That would be a mistake. Consider, for starters, that the term Bushism initially referred to that great malapropartist George Herbert Walker Bush, the 41st president of the United States and father of the current contender. President Bush once said, ''We're enjoying sluggish times, and not enjoying them very much.'' He said, ''It's no exaggeration to say the undecideds could go one way or another.'' He said, in a reference to Dan Quayle: ''My running mate took the lead, was the author of the Job Training Partnership Act. Now, because of a lot of smoke and frenzying of bluefish out there, going after a drop of blood in the water, nobody knows that.'' So, as you see, this ability of the younger Mr. Bush to get entangled in the obscurer thickets of the language is not that unusual. The plain truth is that politicians have always been brilliant at finding new ways to insert their feet into mouths that inevitably are running too much. Which is why you have books with titles like ''Political Babble: The 1,000 Dumbest Things Ever Said by Politicians.'' And, ''The 267 Stupidest Things Democrats Ever Said.'' (There's one for Republicans, too.) So Mr. Bush should take heart. He's not the only one out there hacking away at the language. He might say on ''Meet the Press,'' ''Laura and I really don't realize how bright our children is sometimes until we get an objective analysis.'' Or, on the  ''Today'' show: ''I don't have to accept their tenants. I was trying to convince those college students to accept my tenants.''
 Interview with Stan Greenberg, Pres Clinton's pollster throughout his long march to White House, who has signed on with Gore campaign (Public Lives); photo (M) Mr. Greenberg, a former Yale political science professor and a longtime interpreter of the political yearnings of the white middle class, quietly signed on with Vice President Al Gore's campaign five weeks ago. His action represented a certain closure: he had left Mr. Clinton after the debacle of 1994, when the Democrats lost the House and the Senate and Mr. Clinton shook up his political team. Mr. Greenberg, a former Yale political science professor and a longtime interpreter of the political yearnings of the white middle class, quietly signed on with Vice President Al Gore's campaign five weeks ago. His action represented a certain closure: he had left Mr. Clinton after the debacle of 1994, when the Democrats lost the House and the Senate and Mr. Clinton shook up his political team. Mr. Greenberg, 55, does not really want to talk about the strategy of the Gore campaign, which has taken a markedly populist turn in recent weeks (a turn that escalated with Mr. Greenberg's arrival, although the Gore campaign dismisses the connection). Mr. Greenberg dismisses the idea that there is a clear tension between that economic populism and the ''new Democrat'' philosophy championed by Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore in 1992, which was willing to break with liberal orthodoxy on issues like trade and welfare reform. ''Al Gore's a new Democrat, he's always been a new Democrat, his message derives from who he is and what he's been saying in his political life,'' Mr. Greenberg said. But the pollster contends that Mr. Gore's candidacy comes at a new stage in American politics. Mr. Clinton's challenge was to deal with the Democratic Party's past, to persuade disaffected voters that the Democrats were not ''a big-spending party that's culturally elitist,'' Mr. Greenberg said. Mr. Gore's challenge is to build on that credibility and show that Democrats ''can manage the future,'' modernizing institutions like Medicare and the public school system wisely and carefully, using the surplus for great national needs. In that context, Mr. Greenberg asserts, the huge tax cut proposal of Gov. George W. Bush represents a failure of vision. It would mean ''that we're going to take the surplus and give it to individuals, now, to spend it, now, with no sense of what it would mean for the future.'' He added that Senator John McCain ''understood this moment much better than Bush does.'' But he dismissed the notion that the Bush team in Austin, clannish and focused, was the dangerous equivalent of the winning Clinton team of 1992. ''They may have too tight a team and maybe too mechanical a vision of how to get him elected president,'' Mr. Greenberg said.
 This adds to the evidence that unions have lost faith in the legally prescribed method for organizing workers -- secret ballot elections conducted by the National Labor Relations Board. Laws meant to further workers' rights to union representation need to be repaired or replaced. Why haven't we heard specific suggestions for labor law reform, not just the platitudes about helping workers and working families, from George W. Bush and Al Gore?
 In Washington, however, Mr. Chang cut a very different figure. There, he attended state dinners at the White House and visited informally with the president. He hired Mr. Clinton's chief fund-raiser as a consultant and cultivated senators and congressmen from both parties. The chairman of his company, a retired Navy admiral, had been chief of staff to George Bush when he was vice president. Among the first and most important of Mr. Chang's Washington contacts was Daniel J. Murphy, a high-profile lobbyist with a gleaming government resume. A retired four-star admiral, Mr. Murphy had commanded the Navy's Sixth Fleet, had served as chief of staff to George Bush when he was vice president, and had been a deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and a deputy undersecretary of defense. After resigning from Vice President Bush's staff in 1985, Mr. Murphy went to work as a lobbyist, first for Gray & Company, a firm closely tied to the Reagan administration, and then on his own. He quickly built a reputation for putting business ahead of politics, representing the Marxist government of Angola, trying to drum up business in Gen. Manuel Noriega's Panama, and maintaining a friendship with Tongsun Park, the former South Korean lobbyist and intelligence agent, long after Mr. Park's ties to American congressmen touched off a political scandal involving United States officials in the late 1970's. ''He was at the White House once a month, when I was there,'' said one former assistant who worked for Mr. Chang during the latter half of the Bush administration. Mr. Bush's spokesman said the former president did not recall ever meeting Mr. Chang, and there are no records that he ever made a private visit to the White House. With Mr. Bush out of the White House and South Korean financiers pressing him for repayment on the grain deal, Mr. Chang began to cultivate the Democrats. Mr. McAuliffe said he went back after learning that Mr. Murphy was acting as Panacom's chairman, and after Mr. Courter assured him that Mr. Chang had enough money to buy the company. He said one of Mr. Chang's lawyers also gave him a Korean newspaper clipping indicating that former President Bush had already met with Korean officials on Panacom's behalf, something that one of Mr. Chang's former lawyers, Michael Critchley, also asserted during a hearing in federal court. A spokesman for Mr. Bush, Gian-Carlo A. Peressutti, said this was untrue. The former president, he said, had been in Korea on behalf of another American firm, the Carlyle Group, which is headed by former Republican adminstration officials.
 The candidates have been more overt about their religious faith this year than in any other presidential campaign in memory. Gov. George W. Bush has said that his favorite political philosopher is Jesus, ''because he changed my heart.'' Vice President Al Gore, a professed born-again Christian, has said that when faced with tough decisions, he asks himself, ''What would Jesus do?'' Unlike many conservative Christian politicians, Mr. Lieberman has not taken positions like advocating prayer in schools or saying that religious groups should take over much of the burden of social services now shouldered by government -- a position taken by Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee. But Mr. Lieberman, who refers at every campaign stop to his Jewish faith and the role of religion in Mr. Gore's life, went further today than he previously had in this campaign in asserting a role for religion in politics and public discourse. From the day Mr. Gore chose Mr. Lieberman, the first Democratic senator to publicly berate President Clinton over his extramarital affair, as his running mate, the Gore campaign has made it plain that it sees his religion and rectitude as an antidote to Republican efforts to use Mr. Clinton's ethical lapses as a campaign issue. Mr. Lieberman has often tied his talk of faith to his criticism of vulgarity in popular culture. That link, which he reiterated today, allies him, both in fact and in the public mind, with Tipper Gore's longstanding campaign against violent and sexually explicit lyrics in popular music. Mr. Gore took up the call at the Democratic National Convention, speaking against what he said was ''a culture with too much meanness and not enough meaning.'' ''We have to deal with why he went to Mississippi, because he got involved in our struggle,'' Mr. Anthony said. ''It does mean something. I ain't read about no Bushes in Mississippi. I ain't seen no Cheneys on no freedom marches.'' At the afternoon rally, Mr. Lieberman focused on the Democrats' plans to set money aside to protect Medicare and Social Security, and to provide prescription drug coverage under Medicare, while accusing Mr. Bush of ignoring those issues.
 The military's readiness -- particularly efforts to recruit new soldiers and re-enlist the ones it has -- has become an issue in this year's presidential campaign, and the latest recruiting numbers could provide fodder for both Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. While Mr. Gore can point to the recruiting turnaround for the active forces, Mr. Bush can emphasize the shortages on the Reserves' side. ''We have the same concerns about morale, recruiting and re-enlistment for the Reserves as we do for the regular forces,'' a spokesman for the Bush campaign, Ray Sullivan, said on Friday. The Gore campaign did not respond to questions about Reserve recruiting.
 Republican vice presidential nominee Dick Cheney acknowledges that military cutbacks he and Gov George W Bush have campaigned against began when he was defense secretary but blames Clinton administration for making 'far deeper' cuts that he says left military in decline, television interview; echoes many of Bush's assertions, saying armed forces suffer from low morale, unreadiness and difficulty recruiting and retaining personnel; Gore campaign rebuts charges; says Bush and Cheney have lost all credibility on defense issue (M) Dick Cheney acknowledged yesterday that the military cutbacks he and Gov. George W. Bush have campaigned against began when he was defense secretary for Mr. Bush's father, but he blamed the Clinton administration for making ''far deeper'' cuts that he said had left the military ''in decline.'' Dick Cheney acknowledged yesterday that the military cutbacks he and Gov. George W. Bush have campaigned against began when he was defense secretary for Mr. Bush's father, but he blamed the Clinton administration for making ''far deeper'' cuts that he said had left the military ''in decline.'' The Republicans have seized on the issue of military strength since Mr. Bush told the Republican National Convention earlier this month that the military is ''low on pay, parts and morale.'' Mr. Bush said that two divisions of the Army were not ready for duty -- a claim rebutted by the Pentagon, which said that two units had been unprepared last fall, when soldiers were deployed in Bosnia and Kosovo, but were now ''combat ready.'' Yesterday, Mr. Cheney echoed many of Mr. Bush's assertions, saying that the armed forces suffered from low morale, unreadiness and difficulty recruiting and retaining personnel. He strongly criticized Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, for disputing the Bush campaign's assessment, saying, ''The only conclusion I can draw from Al Gore's comments about all this is that either he doesn't know what's going on in the U.S. military or he chooses not to tell the truth about it.'' The Gore campaign took exception. ''I think Bush and Cheney have lost all credibility on the defense issue,'' said Doug Hattaway, a campaign spokesman. ''America has the strongest, most capable fighting force in the whole world. Mr. Cheney has already admitted that the military downsizing began under the Bush-Quayle-Cheney administration. The Clinton-Gore administration stopped this free fall and enacted the largest military investment since Reagan.'' Juleanna Glover Weiss, a spokeswoman for Mr. Cheney, said that no one had more credibility on military issues than Mr. Cheney, who, as secretary of defense under President Bush, oversaw the Persian Gulf war of 1991. ''Vice President Gore is trying to sweep the military preparedness issue under the rug so he can be held blameless,'' she said.
 President Clinton, in a statement, called the figures ''further proof that the Clinton-Gore administration's anticrime strategy of more police on our streets and fewer guns in the wrong hands has helped to create the safest America in a generation.'' Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for Republican presidential candidate George W. Bush's headquarters, told The Associated Press, ''It's typical for the Clinton-Gore administration to take credit for good things in America.'' But, he added, ''much of the credit for the decline in crime has to go to governors and local officials who have passed tougher laws, longer prison sentences and lowered parole rates.''
 ''This is the most important event in Cartagena's history since President Bush came here in 1990,'' said Mayor Benedetti. ''But this is even bigger.'' Mr. Bush's visit here to a regional presidential anti-narcotics conference -- with the usual bevy of reporters and camera crews -- helped bring a 34 percent increase in tourists the next year, local officials say.
