 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush campaign in Florida; Gore makes party's annual pilgrimage to retirement condominiums of Broward County north of Miami, loyal Democratic base; Bush meets with largely Cuban-American audience in Miami, long-devoted Republican constutuency (M) It seemed a long way to travel to preach to the choir. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each courted Florida voters this week, but spoke mostly to the already converted. Mr. Gore made his party's usual pilgrimage to the retirement condominiums of Broward County north of Miami, a loyal Democratic base, where he spoke about protecting Social Security. It seemed a long way to travel to preach to the choir. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each courted Florida voters this week, but spoke mostly to the already converted. Mr. Gore made his party's usual pilgrimage to the retirement condominiums of Broward County north of Miami, a loyal Democratic base, where he spoke about protecting Social Security. ''I got goose bumps,'' said Renee Kugler, 66, of Tamarac, at Mr. Gore's talk on Wednesday. Mr. Bush, the Texas governor campaigning in the state where his brother, Jeb Bush, is in his first term as governor, met today with a largely Cuban-American audience in Miami, a long-devoted Republican constituency. He challenged Fidel Castro to embrace democracy, and got a standing ovation. ''There may have been five minutes during the Democratic National Convention when I stopped to think about how well things are going,'' said Heidi Marcelo, a 20-year-old Cuban-American, at Mr. Bush's talk this morning at Florida International University. ''Now I've gone right back to Bush.'' But far back in the audience at Mr. Bush's speech, Jorge Herrera wondered why a candidate would court votes he already has instead of trying to change other voters' minds. Mr. Herrera, a minority among Cuban-Americans, plans to vote for Mr. Gore. ''Gore needs to come here,'' said Mr. Herrera, 19, who studies political science at Florida International. ''I come from a middle class family, and Gore seems to suit my needs more,'' he said. Other young Cuban-Americans might side with him if they saw Mr. Gore in person, Mr. Herrera said. He came to hear Mr. Bush with an open mind, willing to be swayed, said Mr. Herrera, who lives in Miami. But, he said, ''all Bush talked about today were the things that people here wanted to hear,'' such as continued sanctions against Cuba, and expanded trade elsewhere in Latin America. Mr. Gore did not seek votes in Little Havana. Mr. Bush did not court the condo vote. Mr. Bush did not reach out to black Miamians, almost a forgotten constituency in Miami. But then, neither did Mr. Gore. ''Mr. Gore is already pretty solid with the black community down here,'' said Garth Reeves, publisher emeritus of The Miami Times, a newspaper devoted to black readers. ''We're a little afraid of Bush.'' ''Gore doesn't talk about anything interesting,'' said Fred Truby, a 37-year-old fund-raiser for nonprofit organizations. ''Who is he? He's a Southern boy but he's a senator's son. He went to Vietnam for the war, but he didn't fight. ''I'm really upset about Bush,'' said Mr. Truby, who lives in South Miami. ''While his dad was president, he was just a party boy.'' In Miami, where a large part of the population was Republican to begin with and incensed by the Clinton administration's handling of the Elian Gonzalez custody battle, Mr. Bush was welcomed as a hero. Mr. Bush did not mention Elian Gonzalez -- he did not have to. Many players in the saga -- including Ramon Saul Sanchez, who organized street protests -- were in the audience, and are already in his camp. Mr. Gore's much-talked-about break from Mr. Clinton on the Elian Gonzalez case -- saying that he thought a family court should decide the matter -- has been largely dismissed and even ridiculed here as a political gesture. So, instead of dwelling on that issue, Mr. Bush tersely denounced Mr. Castro and promised to resurrect free-trade negotiations with Latin America. ''He should have been more verbal about the situation in Cuba,'' said Alex Acosta, 18, who studies international relations at Florida International. But he considers himself a strong Bush supporter. The Republican rallies at Florida International have, like the Democratic rallies at the condos, become a  political tradition. Mr. Bush's father and brother kicked off their Florida campaigns here. Earlier this week, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, had that same warm reception, if not more so, in what people refer to here as the condo canyons. Mrs. Kugler said she was willing to consider Mr. Bush, but quickly dismissed him after seeing recent news coverage of him. He just seemed fake, she said. ''I just don't like Bush,'' said Mrs. Kugler, who moved to South Florida 28 years ago. ''He has this look on his face, this smirk. He just doesn't cut it for us.'' Mr. Lieberman, by contrast, ''oozes with compassion,'' Mrs. Kugler said. And Mr. Gore is tightly bound to them by his political promises. Lil Kaufman, who lives in the Kings Point condo in Tamarac, said there were some ''undecideds'' among the older residents going into Mr. Gore's visit, but ''I think they're decided now.'' It was not that Mr. Gore pulled huge numbers to him on this trip, but cemented the cracks in his support, older residents here said. ''Florida is a tough one for Gore,'' said J. P. Monroe, a political science professor at the University of Miami. ''This state is leaning Bush.''
 Gov George W Bush, in campaign speech at Florida International University, accuses Clinton administration of neglecting Latin America and vows to make region center of his foreign policy agenda in way that would place it on par with American interests in Europe and Asia; accuses administration of pursuing aimless strategy with regard to Latin America of 'summits without substance;' says he would pursue ties not as afterthought but as fundamental commitment; says futures of both regions are inextricably intertwined, and that those who ignore Latin America do not understand America itself; proposes few new programs to help countries in Latin America and to protect US interests; some discussed; photo (M) Charging that the Clinton administration had neglected Latin America, Gov. George W. Bush pledged today to put those countries at the center of his foreign policy agenda and outlined a way of thinking about the region that placed it on a par with American interests in Europe and Asia. Mr. Bush's remarks, at Florida International University in Miami -- a site chosen by his campaign for its cultural, ethnic and immigrant links to Latin America -- were part of an indictment of the administration, which he said had pursued an aimless strategy in Latin America of ''summits without substance.'' Charging that the Clinton administration had neglected Latin America, Gov. George W. Bush pledged today to put those countries at the center of his foreign policy agenda and outlined a way of thinking about the region that placed it on a par with American interests in Europe and Asia. Mr. Bush's remarks, at Florida International University in Miami -- a site chosen by his campaign for its cultural, ethnic and immigrant links to Latin America -- were part of an indictment of the administration, which he said had pursued an aimless strategy in Latin America of ''summits without substance.'' But the speech also dwelt in an unusually lengthy and vigorous way on Mr. Bush's sense of the importance of the region to the United States. [Excerpts, Page A9.] ''Our future cannot be separated from the future of Latin America,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Should I become the president, I will look south not as an afterthought, but as a fundamental commitment.'' Mr. Bush also said that President Clinton had ''dropped the ball'' on trade, failing to build on the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Mr. Clinton inherited from Mr.  Bush's father and pushed through Congress, with a broader free-trade zone throughout the hemisphere. And he complained that Mr. Clinton had not obtained so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress to conclude further trade pacts with individual countries. Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, proposed a few new programs to help countries in Latin America and protect the interests of the United States, but they involved relatively small amounts of money. After the speech, Mr. Bush traveled to the Dallas suburb of Richardson for a private meeting with Vicente Fox Quesada, the president-elect of Mexico. Both the speech and the meeting with Mr. Fox allowed the Texas governor, whose lack of expertise on foreign policy has been highlighted by several verbal gaffes and challenged by Vice President Al Gore, to cast himself as a statesman engaged in the affairs of the world. Mr. Bush and Mr. Fox followed their meeting with a news conference at which they exchanged gifts -- Mr. Fox got a Stetson-style hat that Mr. Bush called a sombrero while Mr. Bush got cowboy boots -- and Mr. Bush repeated a pledge from his speech that if he is elected president, he will arrange a summit meeting with Mr. Fox in November, before either man is inaugurated. Mr. Bush said at the news conference that this would signal his belief that the relationship between the United States and Mexico was one ''of the most importance.'' Mr. Bush's remarks and events today also carried a potential political advantage. The Republican nominee has been trying hard to woo the votes of Hispanics, and their support for him could determine whether he wins some of the states with the most electoral votes, like Florida, where Mr. Gore has recently mounted an aggressive campaign. Mr. Bush appealed directly to Cuban-Americans in Florida, where his brother Jeb is governor, with a strongly worded vow in his address, titled ''Century of the Americas,''  promising not to ease economic sanctions against Cuba unless its leader, Fidel Castro, instituted democratic reforms. ''My word to you, Mr. Castro: let your people live in freedom,'' Mr. Bush said, drawing perhaps his loudest ovation. The speech and the conversation with Mr. Fox, who met the day before with Mr. Clinton and, separately, Mr. Gore, came at the end of one of the rockiest weeks in Mr. Bush's campaign since the spring primaries. But his advisers said that the speech was scheduled weeks ago, and they noted that unlike several of his previous addresses on international affairs, this one allowed him to claim some firsthand knowledge of the subject, given that Texas and Mexico share a border. Mr. Bush, for example, had met Mr. Fox at least two times before today. But Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said Mr. Bush was clearly not prepared to represent the United States to the world. Other aides to Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush's remarks ignored many of the administration's successful efforts in Latin America. They noted that Nafta, which opened trade between the United States, Mexico and Canada, was signed into law by President Clinton in 1993. But Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, said Mr. Clinton nonetheless warranted blame, because it was his responsibility ''to state an agenda and persuade and cajole people to follow it.'' Ms. Rice said Mr. Bush's comparison of Kosovo and Colombia was not an argument against military intervention in the former place or for such intervention in the latter. Rather, she said, it was an expression of Mr. Bush's philosophy that ''you start with strong neighbors and reach out from there.'' She and Mr. Bush both said that the Clinton administration's recent approval of extra aid to Colombia for a fight against drugs and corruption was the right course of action. In previous foreign-policy speeches and remarks on the campaign trail, Mr. Bush has identified many areas of the world as especially important to the United States, including the Far East, the Middle East and Russia. Mr. Bush has not yet made a priority of Africa, which has been discussed more extensively by his rival, Mr. Gore. Like Mr. Clinton, however, neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Gore has suggested that they would change the American position that there is no strategic interest in Africa that would warrant either military intervention or major economic aid. Both Ms. Rice, in interviews with reporters, and Mr. Bush, in the address itself, said that what the Clinton administration -- Mr. Bush called it the Clinton-Gore administration -- had essentially failed to do was perpetuate and extend the strides in peace, democracy and trade that were well under way in 1992. That was when Mr. Bush's father, in the last full year of his presidency, lost his re-election bid to Bill Clinton. Ms. Rice worked as a Russia expert on the National Security Council under President George Bush. Ms. Rice said that while Mr. Clinton signed Nafta, ''I think the Bush administration laid the groundwork.'' Reflecting on the situation when his father, whom he did not actually name, left office, Mr. Bush said, ''The promise of that moment has been squandered.'' Mr. Bush said both in his speech and at the news conference with Mr. Fox that he believed the border between the United States and Mexico needed to be vigorously enforced, but that it must be done ''in humane ways.'' Mr. Fox has called for a more open border, and Mr. Bush said the men had discussed that issue, but the Texas governor dwelled on their common belief that Mexico was a country and economy on the rise. ''His victory sends a strong signal of reform and modernization in Mexico,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Fox's election.
 Excerpts from speech by Gov George W Bush on US policy in Latin America (M) Following are excerpts from the prepared text of a speech on United States policy in Latin America that was delivered on Friday by Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, at Florida International University in Miami, as released by the Bush-Cheney campaign. Following are excerpts from the prepared text of a speech on United States policy in Latin America that was delivered on Friday by Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, at Florida International University in Miami, as released by the Bush-Cheney campaign.
 Robert H Frank Op-Ed article criticizes the anti-government oratory of recent decades and particularly that of Gov George W Bush, who believes returning tax dollars to 'the people who earned them' is a good way to cut government 'waste'; says the network of auto repair shops maintained by National Highway Traffic Safety Administration until it was abandoned in anti-regulatory zeal of Reagan administration would have provided an early warning about problems with Firestone tires; says private companies and individuals are just as liable to waste the money they do not pay in taxes as the government is to waste the money they do pay (M) Some politicians insist that many safety regulations were unnecessary in the first place, since no company wants a reputation for products that kill; businesses simply need an opportunity to regulate themselves. For example, George W. Bush has backed legislation that leaves industrial polluters substantially free to regulate themselves in Texas, which now has the most polluted air and water of any state. But, in common with others in the anti-government movement, he has also advocated so-called tort reform legislation that makes it much more difficult for injured parties to pursue their claims in court, should the unshackled businesses fail to police themselves. By far the most important item on the agenda of the anti-government movement has been to shrink government by cutting off tax revenue. Mr. Bush promises ''to return tax dollars to the people who earned them,'' dismissing Mr. Gore and other critics as ''people who think the bureaucrats in Washington know how to spend your money more wisely than you do.'' Would Mr. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut, which would mainly benefit the wealthiest families, reduce waste? Although depriving the government of this revenue would undoubtedly eliminate at least some wasteful government spending, it would also stimulate the construction of even bigger mansions. Such investments would inevitably entail a measure of waste, just as the anti-government movement claims. But the additional private spending stimulated by Mr. Bush's tax cuts would also entail some waste. In the end, we must decide whether we want safer tires or bigger sport utility vehicles.
 If he simply held them, every action by a Bush-Cheney administration would be scrutinized for whether it was helping Halliburton's stock price. That would be sensitive for any major company that has government contracts, but it would be particularly touchy for Halliburton, since the company is in the oil services industry and its stock price is heavily influenced by the price of oil, which could be affected by United States energy policy.
 Peter A Corning letter comments on Bob Herbert's August 21 Op-Ed column on presidential campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore As Bob Herbert warns (column, Aug. 21), Gov. George W. Bush should be careful about using the term ''class warfare'' against the Democrats; it might turn around and bite him. As Bob Herbert warns (column, Aug. 21), Gov. George W. Bush should be careful about using the term ''class warfare'' against the Democrats; it might turn around and bite him.
 Gov. George W. Bush is betting that a $1.3 trillion tax cut will help him win the White House in November. But will it also squander the federal surplus? Will it extend the nation's economic boom, or kill it? Business executives, scholars and politicians assess the Bush tax proposal. Article, Page A8. Gov. George W. Bush is betting that a $1.3 trillion tax cut will help him win the White House in November. But will it also squander the federal surplus? Will it extend the nation's economic boom, or kill it? Business executives, scholars and politicians assess the Bush tax proposal. Article, Page A8.
 Assessments of Gov George W Bush's sweeping tax cut proposal by some leading business executives, scholars and politicians; photos (M) Not since Ronald Reagan in 1980 has a Republican nominee's promise of a sweeping tax cut played so dominant a role in the presidential race. The New York Times asked a number of business executives, scholars and politicians to assess Gov. George W. Bush's tax plan. Not since Ronald Reagan in 1980 has a Republican nominee's promise of a sweeping tax cut played so dominant a role in the presidential race. The New York Times asked a number of business executives, scholars and politicians to assess Gov. George W. Bush's tax plan. I want to comment not so much on the details of the Bush tax reduction plan as on aspects of the economic philosophy behind its size. The sometimes implicit but often explicit theory is that private spending at the margin is much more socially valuable than public spending. Hence, the relaxation of the fiscal constraint should be largely done through tax cuts and increased private spending rather than by putting more funds into certain public programs, although Bush has made defense an exception. But presently this society is not spending enough on schools to prevent many of them from physically crumbling. Our airport space and traffic control systems are greatly overstretched, causing misery for American passengers. Many of our public parks are a disgrace in terms of their maintenance. All of this is lost from view and implicitly denied in a tax cut proposal that only sees benefits from increased private spending, as the Bush proposal does. It really makes no economic or social sense. From an economic standpoint, it is not clear that we would want to stimulate the economy at this point. But if we did, cutting taxes for wealthy people, which is what Bush mainly proposes, would not be the way to do it. There is very little argument for his tax cut in terms of economic incentives, since much of it goes to reducing the marriage tax and the inheritance tax, which barely change incentives at all. Al Gore will say the Bush cuts favor the rich, but to my mind it is well known that the people at the upper income levels pay most of the taxes, so any tax cut is going to seem to favor the rich. If when the government needs more money you put it mainly on the rich, eventually you find that the rich are paying most of the taxes. So any cut will favor them. Taken as a whole, the Bush tax cut is not good economic policy, because it's too massive. The revenue losses are quite substantial and would grow over time. The current budget situation, although certainly more favorable than it appeared a few years ago, is still such that the short-run surpluses overstate the long-run fiscal stance of the government. And we are overstating the short-run surpluses to the extent they incorporate funds that shouldn't be considered available or depend on questionable assumptions. It's like the old Yiddish proverb that you can't dance at two weddings at the same time. When you look at the arithmetic, you can't have these massive tax cuts and at the same time leave no child behind. You can't do that and be a compassionate conservative. If you're going to make an investment in the health, skills, intellect and character of children in America, you can't do it on a tin-cup budget. With the kind of tax cuts Bush wants, there's nothing left. You can't have it both ways. That was the great ideological victory of President Reagan. You can argue that his tax cuts were regressive, but the real point was that they so eroded the revenue base that they made any kind of investment look fiscally irresponsible, which was probably what he wanted and believed in. But that approach doesn't work for Governor Bush, who wants to be seen as a compassionate conservative. He can't live up to his own rhetoric. The Bush plan is a broad tax cut that gives tax reductions to every income group in America. It does so through the reduction of marginal tax rates, which we believe encourages savings and investment. That's an economic policy. Gore, on the other hand, has specific, targeted tax cuts, which basically say to people, ''If you act the way government wants you to act, you will get to keep some of your money.'' I don't think that's economic policy; it's a social-engineering concept. The Bush plan has a very positive effect on job creation. Today most small businesses pay taxes through individual income tax rates. By reducing marginal individual rates, it reduces the burden on small businesses. It would also increase savings for education and increase investment in scientific research and the development of new technology. It's new technology that will allow America to remain the most competitive economy in the world. Either the Gore or Bush proposal has laudable objectives. But the first question you have to ask yourself is, What is broken in the economy? If it is not broken, what are you doing? I would be quite careful about fiscal stimulus from either the tax side or the spending side. Most of our attention should be focused on paying down the national debt, because we have far too low a personal savings rate. George Bush's tax-cutting plan will nurture Internet prosperity by reducing personal tax rates, eliminating the estate tax, ameliorating the marriage penalty and easing penalties on successful low-end wage earners. It will also prevent Washington from gobbling up the barrel of overflowing surpluses. The plan uses only a quarter of the $4.6 trillion budget surpluses expected over the next 10 years. It does not touch Social Security surpluses, and leaves $700 billion for debt reduction and other priorities. Positive economic incentive effects from reduced marginal tax rates will push out the aggregate supply curve to more than absorb demand increases without raising prices. No need for Fed tightening.
 Republicans release ad sharply attacking Vice Pres Al Gore's plan for prescription drug benefit for older Americans (M) Two days after canceling one advertisement that attacked Vice President Al Gore on his trustworthiness, the Republicans today released another that sharply criticizes Mr. Gore's plan for a prescription drug benefit for older Americans. It is the first attack commercial of the postconvention campaign. The Republican National Committee is spending $7 million to broadcast the 30-second advertisement in nine states beginning Monday. The sum is a huge one this early, and it underscores how urgently the Republicans believe they need to counter Mr. Gore's surge in the polls. Two days after canceling one advertisement that attacked Vice President Al Gore on his trustworthiness, the Republicans today released another that sharply criticizes Mr. Gore's plan for a prescription drug benefit for older Americans. It is the first attack commercial of the postconvention campaign. The Republican National Committee is spending $7 million to broadcast the 30-second advertisement in nine states beginning Monday. The sum is a huge one this early, and it underscores how urgently the Republicans believe they need to counter Mr. Gore's surge in the polls. Even as the party prepares to run the commercial, the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, is distancing itself from it by buying its own commercial on the subject but without the comparison to Mr. Gore's plan or the suggestion that Mr. Gore's plan is bad for older Americans. The party commercial says in part: ''And Al Gore? Gore opposed bipartisan reform. He's pushing a big-government plan that lets Washington bureaucrats interfere with what your doctors prescribe. The Gore Prescription Plan: Bureaucrats decide. The Bush Prescription Plan: Seniors choose.'' While the narrator says that Mr. Gore opposed reform, the commercial shows Mr. Gore speaking in the White House briefing room, gesturing defensively. The implication is that the the vice president is explaining his opposition to the Bipartisan Medicare Commission, but the image is strikingly similar to that of his news conference two years ago when he said seven times that there was ''no controlling legal authority'' over whether he raised money from the White House. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said that the commercial was misleading because Mr. Bush had not offered a specific prescription drug plan. Republican strategists acknowledged that Mr. Gore had gained ground with his constant discussion of prescription drugs and said that the party hoped at least to neutralize his success on this issue. There seemed little concern among Republican officials that the party would be branded as the first to go negative in what has rapidly become the opening round of the fall campaign. Their real concern is that Mr. Gore has successfully pivoted into the fall campaign by discussing an issue voters care about. And with that pivot, Mr. Gore, after months of stasis, began setting the campaign agenda at a time when the Bush campaign has appeared off-course. Republicans have been watching Mr. Gore's favorable rating rise in polls and his unfavorable rating fall. Mr. Bush on Wednesday canceled a commercial that had been sent out to 350 television stations. It used excerpts from an interview with Mr. Gore from six years ago in which he said that President Clinton had never lied. The ambivalence over the commercial reflected a debate on how negative Mr. Bush should go against Mr. Gore and how soon. The emergence of the new commercial effectively answers that question, for now. The party and the campaign want to erode Mr. Gore's success; putting the attack in the mouth of an anonymous narrator in a commercial paid for by the party allows Mr. Bush to claim the high road but still get the message across. In the commercial, Mr. Bush says:  ''Every senior will have access to prescription drug benefits.'' ''This is one of the issues on which he has had an advantage over us,'' one Republican strategist said of Mr. Gore. ''This is a recognition that Gore has gotten people talking about this issue and it ranks in the double-digits with people.'' Mr. Bush says he favors prescription drug coverage for those on Medicare. But he has not set any money aside for it. Mr. Gore has earmarked $253 billion over 10 years for providing prescription drugs through Medicare. Mr. Bush has said that Medicare should cover the entire cost of health care, including the cost of drugs, for low-income older Americans, but the Gore campaign says that this excludes too many people.
 John E Hofmann letter disputes Bob Herbert's August 21 Op-Ed column on presidential campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore Mr. Herbert wants us to believe that Al Gore is not engaged in class warfare. What Mr. Herbert doesn't mention, and what Mr. Gore refuses to acknowledge, is where the surplus comes from in the first place. Mr. Herbert wants us to believe that Al Gore is not engaged in class warfare. What Mr. Herbert doesn't mention, and what Mr. Gore refuses to acknowledge, is where the surplus comes from in the first place. The government already transfers huge sums of money from the rich to the poor. Apparently, Mr. Herbert believes that the surplus belongs not to the people who financed it but to the government to distribute as Al Gore sees fit.
 Arthur R Yeager letter, commenting on August 19 article, rejects Gov George Bush's complaint about Vice Pres Al Gore's divisiveness until he explains how he intends to control excesses of Republican Party's contentious leadership Re ''After Convention, Bush Chides Gore for Divisive Tone'' (front page, Aug. 19): A deaf ear must be turned to George W. Bush's complaint about Al Gore's divisiveness until the Texas governor explains just how he intends to control the excesses of his own party's contentious leadership. Re ''After Convention, Bush Chides Gore for Divisive Tone'' (front page, Aug. 19): A deaf ear must be turned to George W. Bush's complaint about Al Gore's divisiveness until the Texas governor explains just how he intends to control the excesses of his own party's contentious leadership. To be credible in his call for civility, Mr. Bush must make clear whether he now supports the House leadership's action and what role they might play in a Bush administration.
 Article on economic policy issues underlying political debate over Gov George W Bush's tax cut proposals; focuses on scale of proposal, which would reduce all income tax rates and federal revenues by $1.3 trillion in nine years, starting in 2002, and use up $1.6 trillion of surplus during period; queries whether plan fits within projected budget surpluses or could endanger government's chance to pay off national debt, whether it would extend long business expansion or lead red-hot economy into recession, whether it would apportion federal budget surplus fairly to everyone, and whether tax cuts represent more productive economic use of surplus than increased government spending (M) In the shorthand of presidential politics, Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut proposal is either an overdue effort to return to citizens what is rightfully theirs, or, as Vice President Al Gore puts it, a risky scheme to reward the wealthy. In the shorthand of presidential politics, Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut proposal is either an overdue effort to return to citizens what is rightfully theirs, or, as Vice President Al Gore puts it, a risky scheme to reward the wealthy. Does Mr. Bush's tax cut fit within the projected federal budget surpluses, or would it endanger the government's chance to pay off the national debt? Would the Bush plan extend the long business expansion or lead the red-hot economy to blow a gasket? Would it apportion the federal budget surplus fairly to everyone? Are tax cuts -- especially those, like Mr. Bush's, that would reduce income tax rates -- a more productive economic use of the surplus than increased government spending? Much of the focus is on the scale of Mr. Bush's plan, which would reduce all income tax rates, double the child credit, provide a break for married couples, repeal the federal estate tax and expand the deductibility of charitable contributions. Mr. Bush's tax cut would reduce federal revenues by $1.3 trillion in the nine years starting in 2002, and it would use up $1.6 trillion of the surplus over that period. That figure includes the increased interest costs the government would have to pay if any of the surplus was spent or used for tax cuts. But that would make Mr. Bush's plan considerably smaller than the tax cut championed by President Ronald Reagan in 1981. If it had not been partially offset by subsequent tax increases before it became fully effective, the Reagan plan as passed would ultimately have amounted to an annual tax cut equal to 4 percent of the gross domestic product, according to a calculation by Robert S. McIntyre, the director of Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal research group. If fully enacted, the Bush plan would eventually reduce taxes by about 1.5 percent of the gross domestic product, Mr. McIntyre said. Over the first nine years of the Bush tax cut, starting in 2002, the total surplus is projected by the Congressional Budget Office to be $4.3 trillion, assuming that government spending rises at the rate of inflation. So on the face of it, Mr. Bush's tax cut in that nine-year period -- $1.3 trillion plus $300 billion in interest costs -- would still leave $500 billion for other purposes. Both parties are heading toward adding a prescription drug benefit to Medicare. There is backing in both parties for tax cuts not included in Mr. Bush's proposal. And Mr. Bush has made expensive commitments of his own, from expanding access to health care to building a national missile defense. But Mr. Bush's team said there was plenty of money available for the tax cut and for other needs. Mr. Bush has said he can save $200 billion over the next decade by improving the way government operates, and he has vowed to crack down on government spending. His plan makes no provision for taking the Medicare surplus off the table. Even after adding $256 billion in spending increases over 10 years for the military, education, agriculture and other programs, his advisers say there would still be a substantial buffer left. ''Governor Bush asked us to identify the biggest problems in the tax code and come up with a way of fixing them,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, the head of Mr. Bush's economic team. Mr. Bush's team said the fiscal stimulus would be very modest, and in any case would be far less than the stimulus created by the government spending increases backed by Mr. Gore and President Clinton. Moreover, Mr. Lindsey said, Mr. Bush's tax cut would be phased in gradually over the decade, and, ''No one knows what the economic circumstances will be in 2004 or 2005.'' As Mr. Gore has increasingly emphasized a populist message, he has tried to focus attention on who would benefit most from Mr. Bush's proposal. Mr. Bush's team looks at the question from a different angle, suggesting that lower-income people would benefit proportionately more than upper-income people, at least relative to the size of their existing tax bills. The Bush campaign produced figures showing that a family of four with two incomes totaling $47,500 -- the national median -- would see its federal income taxes decline by 56 percent under the Bush plan, to $1,493 from $3,393 under current law. By contrast, a family of four with one worker making $250,000 would see its tax bill fall by 13 percent, to $59,187 from $68,031. ''High-income people would pay a bigger proportion of the tax bill after the Bush tax cuts than before them,'' Mr. Lindsey said.
 Steven A Ludsin letter comments on Howell Raines's August 23 Editorial Observer column on Vice Pres Al Gore's 'punchy language' Re ''A Look Behind Al Gore's Punchy Language,'' by Howell Raines (Editorial Observer, Aug. 23): I thought Mr. Raines put his finger on the pulse of Al Gore's convention speech and his campaign strategy.  But I think it is unrealistic to believe that the fight mode of the presidential campaigns may prove tiresome to voters. Re ''A Look Behind Al Gore's Punchy Language,'' by Howell Raines (Editorial Observer, Aug. 23): I thought Mr. Raines put his finger on the pulse of Al Gore's convention speech and his campaign strategy.  But I think it is unrealistic to believe that the fight mode of the presidential campaigns may prove tiresome to voters. The post-convention bounce in Mr. Gore's poll numbers indicates that the pugilistic imagery struck a chord. The fighting words served Mr. Gore well by perpetuating the Democratic tradition of fighting for the underdog or disenfranchised.
 Just as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has sought this week to snuff out mounting criticism of his presidential campaign's $1.3 trillion, 10-year tax cut plan, which Democrats have also characterized as too risky, Mr. Lazio set out right away to back up his plan.
 LIKE MINDS  Vice President Al Gore has found a soul mate, at least in his views of how government should work. He is Vicente Fox Quesada, the president-elect of Mexico, who is so simpatico with Mr. Gore that he ordered up a Spanish translation of a Gore report on reinventing government. Mr. Gore wrote the 150-page report, titled ''From Red Tape to Results,'' in 1994. The next year, Mr. Fox made it required reading for his staff. The gist of it is that government should be run more like a business, with attention to customer service and performance agreements. LIKE MINDS  Vice President Al Gore has found a soul mate, at least in his views of how government should work. He is Vicente Fox Quesada, the president-elect of Mexico, who is so simpatico with Mr. Gore that he ordered up a Spanish translation of a Gore report on reinventing government. Mr. Gore wrote the 150-page report, titled ''From Red Tape to Results,'' in 1994. The next year, Mr. Fox made it required reading for his staff. The gist of it is that government should be run more like a business, with attention to customer service and performance agreements.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman campaigns in Delaware, where he accuses Gov George W Bush of distorting Democrats' tax cut proposal; says it is time for 'honest' debate on subject; photo (M) Senator Joseph I. Lieberman accused Gov. George W. Bush today of distorting the Democrats' tax cut proposal, saying it was time for ''an honest debate'' on the subject. Making his first solo campaign foray as Vice President Al Gore's running mate, Mr. Lieberman sought to take advantage of the trouble Mr. Bush has had in selling his tax cut plan, a central plank in his platform. The governor has proposed an across-the-board tax cut totaling about $1.3 trillion over the next decade, while the vice president has called for a targeted $500 billion tax cut package. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman accused Gov. George W. Bush today of distorting the Democrats' tax cut proposal, saying it was time for ''an honest debate'' on the subject. Making his first solo campaign foray as Vice President Al Gore's running mate, Mr. Lieberman sought to take advantage of the trouble Mr. Bush has had in selling his tax cut plan, a central plank in his platform. The governor has proposed an across-the-board tax cut totaling about $1.3 trillion over the next decade, while the vice president has called for a targeted $500 billion tax cut package. With polls showing that Americans are not clamoring for tax relief in a time of prosperity, Mr. Bush said this week that he had done a poor job of explaining his plan. To that end, he appeared on Thursday in New Orleans with the Bechac family, an in-the-flesh example of who, he said, would save money under his plan, but not under Mr. Gore's. But Mr. Lieberman, who appeared before 300 cheering supporters at a community center here, contended that the Bechac family could save money under Mr. Gore's plan, and he pointed to an article in today's Wall Street Journal to support his contention. The article said the Bechacs could benefit under Mr. Gore's plan if they took advantage of college and retirement savings programs Mr. Gore has proposed. ''Governor Bush said that he had to do a better job of explaining his plan. With all due respect, the problem isn't explaining the plan. The problem is the plan itself.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, argued that the two proposals were not comparable, because the Gore plan would require families to set aside money in approved savings accounts for retirement and college to reap most of the tax benefits. ''You have to take a significant step before you're even eligible for Al Gore's tax relief,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''The clear difference here is under Governor Bush's plan it's plain and simple. You get a tax cut automatically and immediately.'' The Democrats clearly see the tax issue as working to their advantage, and not just because Mr. Bush struggled this week to defend his plan. Cutting against the Republican orthodoxy that deep tax cuts are both good policy and good politics, Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman have attacked the Bush plan as a threat to the nation's economic health that would benefit mainly the rich. Andrew Bechac makes about $40,000 a year as a teacher, and his wife, Margaret, stays home in Mandeville, La., with their two girls. Under Mr. Bush's proposals to award a tax credit of $500 per child and to reduce the lowest bracket to 10 percent from 15 percent, their federal income tax bill would drop to less than $500, a savings of about $1,600. The Bechacs said they were saving for both college and retirement. Under Mr. Gore's plan, they could put up to $2,000 a year into approved savings accounts for those purposes -- which the Gore campaign has likened to 401(k) or Roth individual retirement account plans -- and save up to $2,300 on their tax bills.
 Laura Louison letter disputes Nora Roberts's August 23 Op-Ed article on Vice Pres Al Gore's kiss of wife Tipper at Democratic National Convention; says action was shrewd political move I am aware that Ms. Roberts's books sell millions more copies than any book by Simone de Beauvoir. Yet I cannot but hope that women across America are not being drawn to Al Gore because he kissed his wife at the Democratic National Convention in what was clearly a shrewd political move. I am aware that Ms. Roberts's books sell millions more copies than any book by Simone de Beauvoir. Yet I cannot but hope that women across America are not being drawn to Al Gore because he kissed his wife at the Democratic National Convention in what was clearly a shrewd political move. By suggesting that ''a lot of us may pay more attention to Mr. Gore's words because of that quick, endearing and romantic impulse,'' Ms. Roberts does both men and women a great disservice.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column on the two distinctive brands of inauthenticity offered at national conventions of Republican and Democratic Parties: the faux rainbow coalition that George W Bush showcased in Philadelphia under the brand Compassionate Conservatism and, at Democratic convention in Los Angeles, Al Gore's brand of populism lite marketed as Fighting for Working Families; cartoon (M) The audience that cast its vote by Nielsen isn't stupid. It does prize authenticity over canned showmanship. And with John McCain long out of the race, authenticity isn't on the ballot. As that minority of Americans paying attention knows, the choice this year is between two distinctive brands of inauthenticity: the faux rainbow coalition that George W. Bush showcased under the brand Compassionate Conservatism in Philadelphia vs. the populism lite that Al Gore marketed as Fighting for Working Families last week in L.A. You've got to give the Democrats credit. Mr. Gore has pulled ahead, at least for now, because he did a much cleverer job than his rival of giving his inauthenticity the gloss of credibility. The media that repetitively noted the ''scripted'' quality of the G.O.P. convention, and the gap between the dense minority population on stage and the restricted-country-club demographics in the hall, didn't harp as relentlessly on the discrepancy between Mr. Gore's message (''They're for the powerful -- we're for the people'') and the reality at the Staples Center. Sex, as always, is a fatal distraction for the Washington press pack, and so the Al-Tipper kiss (''disgusting,'' according to Robert Novak) and the tiff over the Playboy mansion (arguably one of the week's classier venues) easily upstaged the more telling story. The Democratic convention was showered with an avalanche of big money, much of it coughed up by the same powerful interests (big oil, Hollywood, polluters, even tobacco) that were attacked by the nominees from the podium. The parties at Spago and Armani in Beverly Hills, like Tom DeLay's fat-cat golf outings in Philadelphia, were usually kept out of camera view. So was the celebration in the skybox of Terry McAuliffe, the Clinton-era Democratic money siphon who has been praised by Mr. Gore as ''the greatest fund-raiser in the history of the universe.'' As reported by Holly Bailey of the Center for Responsive Politics, Mr. McAuliffe and movie-industry potentates ''dined on cake iced with an illustration of President Clinton's face.'' Here is a power-to-the-people movement that even Marie Antoinette could love. Instead of these Gilded Age images we got a very shrewdly packaged portrait of fightin' Al and Joe. In his acceptance speech, the vice president talked about growing up in Tennessee but not of his childhood residence at the Fairfax Hotel in Washington; he mentioned his brief stint studying religion at Vanderbilt but not his four years at Harvard; he recounted in detail his parents' working-class backgrounds as a rhetorical bait-and-switch to camouflage his St. Albans pedigree. A particularly brilliant touch was the just-folks video about Mr. Gore made by Spike Jonze, the gifted director of ''Being John Malkovich.'' This filmmaker was the perfect choice for the assignment of transforming an American prince into an Everyman, since he has already performed the same identity transplant on himself; the spiky Mr. Jonze was born Adam Spiegel, heir to the clothing-catalog fortune. Mr. Bush is no less inauthentic than his Democratic opponents, of course. In his acceptance speech, he paid tribute to his hometown of Midland, Tex., and its motto of ''the sky's the limit.'' Somehow he failed to mention the decade he spent at Andover, Yale and Harvard, where the mottos ranged from ''Finis origine pendet'' and ''Lux et veritas'' to the charmingly soigne ''Veritas.'' In truth, he has enjoyed far more inherited wealth and privilege than Mr. Gore has; he leads a party that opposes affirmative action even as he benefited from the affirmative action given to ''legacies'' (the children of alumni) at Ivy League schools. But it's a measure of how much Mr. Gore has outwitted Mr. Bush that the vice president was able to tar the Texas governor as a lightweight frat boy with the line ''the presidency is more than a popularity contest,'' while simultaneously stopping at nothing to best him in that popularity contest. Mr. Gore's wife, daughters and least Harvard-esque college roommate, Tommy Lee Jones, were all milked to imbue Mr. Gore with the popular traits (warmth and testosterone) he was thought to lack. Let Mr. Bush brag incessantly about his ''heart'' -- Mr. Gore one-upped him by clasping his own heart Sammy Sosa-style. Even Bill Clinton hadn't thought of that one. The measure of the Democrats' success last week can be seen in Mr. Bush's angry cries that Mr. Gore is stirring up ''class warfare.'' Again, the vice president has faked him out. Mr. Gore is not an authentic populist preaching class warfare -- he's an inauthentic populist supported by corporate interests who hijacks populist sloganeering to vilify a few focus-group-chosen industries that most middle-class Americans understandably regard as ripoffs. And he knows that Mr. Bush can't fight back on that turf. While Democrats are indeed awash in insurance company money, drug company money and even oil money (the Gore family portfolio holds a fat chunk of Occidental Petroleum), the Bush-Cheney ticket and G.O.P. Congressional leadership have taken in far more loot still from all these sources, with worse prescription-drug plans, patients' bills of rights and environmental records to show for it. If the Democrats are inauthentic fighters for the little man, they are at least less inauthentic than the Republicans. This year that's what makes a horse race, unless you're besotted by the idea of casting a protest vote for Ralph Nader.
 Latin America Would Have Priority, Bush Says in Miami  Gov. George W. Bush accused the Clinton administration of neglecting Latin American and he pledged to put those countries at the center of his foreign policy agenda. Mr. Bush outlined a way of thinking about the region that put it on a par with American interests in Europe and Asia. The Republican National Committee released a 30-second television advertisement that sharply criticizes Vice President Al Gore's plan for providing a prescription drug benefit for seniors. It is the first attack commercial of the postconvention presidential campaign. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, making his first solo campaign foray as Mr. Gore's running mate, accused Governor Bush of distorting the Democrats' tax cut proposal, saying it was time for ''an honest debate'' on the subject.
