 Candidates Plan Ad Blitzes As Drive to Election Begins  The presidential contenders plan next week to open the biggest television advertising blitzes of their campaigns, Gov. George W. Bush will emphasize education and Vice President Al Gore will trumpet himself as a champion of working families. Mr. Bush traveled to New Mexico to announce a proposal to repair schools on Indian reservations. Mr. Gore assailed Mr. Bush as a man who embraces the interests of corporations at the expense of the middle class.
 A few winters ago, in a vertiginous instance of life imitating art, Albert made me a costume for a ''Breakfast at Tiffany's'' party thrown at a midtown concert hall. The costume evoked rather than copied Holly's look: it was a simple black sheath and black gloves with a two-foot feathered hat that won a prize. I was too vain to wear my glasses (they didn't work with the hat) and I ended up dancing most of the night with a Southern stranger who was the best dancer I have ever met and who managed to heed my warnings of ''Watch the hat!'' while putting Fred Astaire in ''Holiday Inn'' to shame. (All I remember about the guy is that he wasn't particularly tall and that he said he was working on the Jeb Bush campaign.) I went home alone, but at least I was warm: Albert had lent me one of his embroidered wool shawls -- a garment to make you feel like a queen, if ever there was one.
 Pres Clinton says even though five months remain in his presidency, things have changed now that Vice Pres Al Gore has been tapped as Democratic presidential nominee; says he, Clinton, is no longer party leader; plan is for Clinton to lie low and allow Gore and his running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, to take center stage for while; Clinton is on vacation in Adirondacks, celebrating his 54th birthday with his wife and daughter, outside view of media; photo (M) He has been hiking in the woods and celebrating his 54th birthday with his wife and daughter -- all outside the view of the media. The plan is to lie low and allow Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, to take center stage for a while. Mr. Clinton said that even though five months remain in his presidency, things have changed now that Mr. Gore has been tapped as the Democratic presidential nominee. Mr. Clinton said he was no longer the party leader -- as of Thursday night, when Mr. Gore delivered what the president praised as an ''extraordinary speech and a great road map for the country's future.''
 Gov George W Bush travels to New Mexico to campaign; meets with representatives from Indian pueblos and tribes and tells them that as president, he would pressure Congress to spend $802 million to repair 185 schools on tribal lands, most of them managed by federal Bureau of Indian Affairs; says he will also call for spending additional $126 million to replace six most decrepit schools in system; education issue, more traditionally associated with Democrats, is one Bush says he will focus on in next two weeks; his campaign will air two television commercials about education in 21 states, many of which have voted Democratic in past; photo (M) After staging a rally today in his home state of Texas to underscore the strength of his political base, Gov. George W. Bush traveled to New Mexico, a state President Clinton won twice, to announce a proposal to repair crumbling schools on the nation's Indian reservations. Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, met here with representatives from Indian pueblos and tribes and told them that as president, he would pressure Congress to spend $802 million to repair the 185 schools on tribal lands, most of which are managed by the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs. He also called for spending an additional $126 million to replace the six most decrepit schools in the system. After staging a rally today in his home state of Texas to underscore the strength of his political base, Gov. George W. Bush traveled to New Mexico, a state President Clinton won twice, to announce a proposal to repair crumbling schools on the nation's Indian reservations. Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, met here with representatives from Indian pueblos and tribes and told them that as president, he would pressure Congress to spend $802 million to repair the 185 schools on tribal lands, most of which are managed by the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs. He also called for spending an additional $126 million to replace the six most decrepit schools in the system. ''Throughout our history, Native Americans have seen many promises broken and many promises forgotten,'' he said. ''The latest promises unfulfilled are in the schools on the reservations. In a Bush administration, the federal government will meet its responsibilities to Native American children.'' The amount of money involved is relatively small compared with other education initiatives that Mr. Bush and his rival, Vice President Al Gore, have made. But it allowed Mr. Bush to sustain his focus on education. The issue, more traditionally associated with Democrats, was one that Mr. Bush had said he would focus on in the next two weeks. His aides announced today that on Monday the campaign would begin airing two television commercials about education in 21 states, many of which have voted Democratic in the past. It is largely through education proposals that Mr. Bush has styled himself as a compassionate conservative and staked his claim to being at the center of the political spectrum. The issue is one on which the candidates disagree sharply. Mr. Bush supports vouchers that poor families can use for private-school tuition, saying it will force public schools to improve. Mr. Gore says vouchers will drain needed resources away from public schools. As Mr. Bush participated in three public events in two states over the course of a day that kept him on go for about 12 hours, one aide presented reporters with statistics meant to show that Mr. Bush had been covering more ground and connecting with more voters than Mr. Gore. The aide, Scott McClellan, was clearly trying to rebut suggestions that Mr. Gore was a brisker, more energetic campaigner than Mr. Bush, who had an abbreviated public schedule on Friday, his first day back on the stump after the Democratic National Convention. The statistics set off a bizarre, sometimes comical tit-for-tat between the Bush and Gore camps about methodology and what should and should not be counted as a campaign event; what were and were not analogous periods of time; and the relative merits of travel by train (Mr. Bush's mode of transportation after the Republican convention) and by boat (Mr. Gore's vehicle out of the Democratic gathering). Mr. McClellan said Mr. Bush had been able to stop in more cities and towns in the days after the convention because of ''a top speed of 75 miles per hour compared with 7 miles per hour.'' Mr. Bush's post-convention train trip, Mr. McClellan said, brought the governor to five states, representing 138 electoral votes, and included 22 rallies or other events, while Mr. Gore's boat trip would bring him to four states, representing 51 electoral votes, and would include 8 rallies or similar events. Mr. McClellan said the comparison demonstrated ''how hard the candidates are working coming out of their conventions'' and said that Mr. Bush and his running mate. Dick Cheney, would visit 19 states in the second half of August. ''If Al Gore thinks that playing follow the leader has been difficult up until now, he ain't seen nothing yet,'' he said. But the estimate that the Bush campaign provided for their own candidate was over seven days, while the estimate it provided for Mr. Gore was over four days. Mr. Gore's aides said that over the seven days following the Democratic convention, the vice president would visit six states, representing 87 electoral votes, and conducting 20 events. A spokesman for the vice president, Chris Lehane, said: ''Al Gore has been literally campaigning 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for a year. We do not take time out of our days so we we can play computer games or sleep with our own pillows, as Governor Bush seems to do.'' The rally this morning in Dallas, at Southern Methodist University, the alma mater of Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, was the second part of a two-day campaign trip in which Mr. Bush is seeking to temper any momentum Mr. Gore gained at the Democratic National Convention. In a poll of 806 registered voters that was taken on Aug. 17 and Aug. 18 and commissioned by Newsweek magazine, Mr. Gore led Mr. Bush in a four-way race by six percentage points, with 48 percent to Mr. Bush's 42. The poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. The itinerary itself was a dig at Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush traveled to Tennessee on Friday to highlight that some polls show him leading Mr. Gore in his home state. Today's rally in Dallas was meant to draw a contrast by showing the strength of Mr. Bush's support in his home base.
 More than two and a half years after an independent counsel began investigating President Clinton's relationship with a White House intern, a new grand jury has been impaneled to review the case again, government officials said. The independent counsel, Robert W. Ray, convened the panel last month after saying he would consider whether Mr. Clinton could be charged with wrongdoing in the Monica Lewinsky matter once he leaves office. Democrats and Republicans piled criticism on the anonymous leak about the grand jury, disclosed just hours before Vice President Al Gore accepted the Democratic Presidential nomination. More than two and a half years after an independent counsel began investigating President Clinton's relationship with a White House intern, a new grand jury has been impaneled to review the case again, government officials said. The independent counsel, Robert W. Ray, convened the panel last month after saying he would consider whether Mr. Clinton could be charged with wrongdoing in the Monica Lewinsky matter once he leaves office. Democrats and Republicans piled criticism on the anonymous leak about the grand jury, disclosed just hours before Vice President Al Gore accepted the Democratic Presidential nomination.
 Vice Pres Al Gore delivers fiery speech in Dubuque, Iowa, assailing Gov George W Bush as man who has embraced interests of corporations at expense of middle class; until now, Gore has left it to others to tear into Bush's record; with some polls showing him pulling even, Gore appears emboldened to challenge Bush with renewed directness and vigor; Bush has accused Gore of engaging in class warfare, saying Gore--son of senator, product of elite private schools--hardly fits role of working-class hero; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore assailed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas today as a man who has embraced the interests of corporations at the expense of the middle class. In a fiery speech he delivered here on the banks of the Mississippi River, Mr. Gore placed Mr. Bush squarely on the side of pharmaceutical companies that he said gouge the elderly with high drug prices, insurance company ''bean counters'' who overrule doctors and major polluters who cut corners on environmental protection measures for the sake of profits. Vice President Al Gore assailed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas today as a man who has embraced the interests of corporations at the expense of the middle class. In a fiery speech he delivered here on the banks of the Mississippi River, Mr. Gore placed Mr. Bush squarely on the side of pharmaceutical companies that he said gouge the elderly with high drug prices, insurance company ''bean counters'' who overrule doctors and major polluters who cut corners on environmental protection measures for the sake of profits. ''They're for the powerful, we're for the people,'' Mr. Gore said before embarking on the second day of a journey down the Mississippi aboard the Mark Twain riverboat. Positioning himself as a populist champion, Mr. Gore promised the elderly new Medicare benefits to help pay for prescription drugs. ''My opponent won't,'' he shouted. ''They give in to the big drug companies; I fight for families.'' Mr. Gore promised to give doctors more authority over medical decisions. ''My opponent won't,'' he said. ''They give in to the big insurance companies that don't want that.'' He also said he would take on  polluters who ''cut corners'' for profits. ''My opponent does not reflect that commitment in what's been going on in his home state,'' Mr. Gore said, a reference to Texas' low ranking in air and water quality. The Bush campaign was quick to respond. ''It seems like a lot of finger-pointing from an administration that has failed to act on these issues,'' said Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush. ''In contrast, Governor Bush has signed into law a patients' bill of rights for Texans. He has reduced toxic releases more than all other 49 states combined and he supports reforming Medicare to include a prescription drug benefit for seniors.'' Today, Mr. Gore delivered one of his clearest and most concise critiques of Mr. Bush. For weeks, Mr. Gore had been somewhat circumspect in his criticism of Mr. Bush. At an event in Cleveland before the Democratic convention, for example, Mr. Gore passed up the invitation to criticize Mr. Bush's record on health care. He has left it to others to tear into Mr. Bush's record, perhaps mindful that many voters are turned off by harsh attacks. But with some polls showing him at last pulling even, or nudging ahead of Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore appeared emboldened today to challenge Mr. Bush with renewed directness and vigor. And many in today's crowd of several thousand, dominated by teachers and union workers, delighted in the attacks, waving signs and chanting ''Go, Al, go.'' On Friday, Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of engaging in class warfare, and the Bush campaign has argued that Mr. Gore -- the son of a senator, the product of elite private schools and ferociously good at raising money from corporations -- hardly fits the role of working-class hero. Much of the Gore family's wealth comes from holdings in the Occidental Petroleum Corporation, whose founder, Armand Hammer, was a close friend of Mr. Gore's father. Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, is a baker's son, but some of his most reliable contributors have worked in  the insurance and pharmaceutical industries. In this year's Senate campaign, Mr. Lieberman, who according to Connecticut law is allowed to campaign to keep his Senate seat while also running as the vice presidential nominee, has collected more money from the insurance industry -- $197,419 -- than any other senator, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. He has raised $91,150 from the pharmaceutical industry, second only to Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah. Mr. Lieberman's wife, Hadassah, was once director of policy planning and communications for Pfizer Inc., one of the nation's largest drug companies. Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane, played down the importance of those contributions and Mr. Lieberman's efforts on behalf of both industries. ''Who's running for president?'' Mr. Lehane asked. ''Al Gore's at the top of the ticket.'' Indeed, Mr. Gore and his aides have only stepped up their populist rhetoric. ''It's really clear what's going on,'' Mr. Lehane said. ''George W. Bush is in the hip pocket of big oil, the prescription drug companies and the big insurance companies.''
 Graph ranking most joked-about politicians in late-night television monologues in last week; Al Gore leads
 Presidential contenders plan to open biggest television advertising blitzes of their campaigns, hoping to capitalize on afterglow from their conventions; Gov George W Bush will emphasize education and Vice Pres Al Gore will trumpet himself as champion of 'working families'; both sides begin making critical decisions about where to campaign and where to funnel resources, including infusion of $68 million in federal subsidies each; Bush plans to advertise and campaign in historically Democratic states, including West Virginia, and swing states of Pennsylvania, Michigan, Ohio and Missouri; Gore officials say they will focus largely on battleground states of Midwest and make particular appeals to women; say they will continue to cite Bush's record in Texas as failure; photo (M) Moving on several fronts to capitalize on the afterglow from their conventions, the presidential contenders plan next week to open the biggest television advertising blitzes of their campaigns, in which Gov. George W. Bush will emphasize education and Vice President Al Gore will trumpet himself as a champion of ''working families.'' Moving on several fronts to capitalize on the afterglow from their conventions, the presidential contenders plan next week to open the biggest television advertising blitzes of their campaigns, in which Gov. George W. Bush will emphasize education and Vice President Al Gore will trumpet himself as a champion of ''working families.'' Mr. Bush is seizing the offensive and plans to advertise and campaign in historically Democratic states. Among the 21 states chosen for an advertising drive that begins on Monday is West Virginia, which Republicans have not carried since 1984. The commercials will also appear in the swing states of Pennsylvania, Michigan, Ohio and Missouri,  and states like Oregon, Washington and New Mexico, where President Clinton prevailed in 1992 and 1996 but where Mr. Bush thinks his chances are good. ''This is the point at which the campaign pivots,'' said Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist. ''Our focus has been preparing for the conventions. Now we're making major forays onto the turf that the other guy considers his own.'' The commercials lay out Mr. Bush's broad goals for education, including greater local control of schools, stricter standards and increased federal spending to promote reading and strengthen teacher training and math and science. Gore officials said they would focus largely on the battleground states of the Midwest and make particular appeals to women who seemed enticed by the Republicans. They also said they would continue to cite Mr. Bush's record in Texas as demonstrating his failure to tackle health care for children, improving the environment, gun control and other issues. ''The battle lines are drawn,'' said Robert Shrum, one of Mr. Gore's leading strategists. ''Al Gore comes out of the convention much more clearly defined to people. There's a choice on a thematic dimension: Who's going to stand up and fight for middle-class families on prescription drugs, a patients' bill of rights and education?'' Starting Monday, the two 30-second Bush commercials will run in rotation for several days in more than 40 media markets across the 21 states. Described by one aide as a ''heavy, multimillion-dollar'' advertising buy, it is the largest for a single period that the Bush campaign has made to date. ''We've expanded the battlefield,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign. ''The fact that we're running ads in states that are traditionally Democratic while the vice president is still trying to shore up his base is an interesting reflection of where this election is.'' Bush campaign officials said they were working with state Republican Party organizations to develop programs to identify potential supporters and encourage them to vote. The Gore campaign is making such efforts as well, but is more reliant on unions to help drive turnout. Before the Democratic convention, polls showed that Mr. Bush was ahead of Mr. Gore. The Gore campaign's objective has been to build on the publicity and good feeling from the convention to help Mr. Gore pull even with Mr. Bush by the end of the month. Speaking of Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Mr. Cole added, ''They're not going to go gently into that good night.'' Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, a Republican, said the best evidence of the competitiveness was in his state, which was Clinton-Gore territory in the last two elections but now appears to be a tossup. ''George W. Bush has every opportunity to win this election,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''To give you an idea, George Bush has already been here three times and Al Gore has been here four or five times. And both of them are going to be in Milwaukee next week.'' Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the Democratic leader, said now that the public might be beginning to pay attention to the contest, Mr. Gore should hammer away at a theme he introduced at the convention: how the policies of a president can touch the lives of ordinary Americans. ''A lot of people weren't watching this -- they were watching 'Survivor' or something else,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''Al Gore should articulate the stakes in this election and in people's everyday lives.'' Public opinion needs to settle for at least several days before polls can give an accurate picture of how the relative standing of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush might have shifted from the two biggest political events of the summer: the conventions and selection of running mates. Gov. Tom Vilsack of Iowa, a Democrat, said his initial fears that Mr. Clinton's appearance would siphon attention from Mr. Gore had been allayed. ''This whole issue of contrasting Clinton and Gore -- I wasn't sure how this would all work out,'' Mr. Vilsack said. Then, referring to Mr. Gore's speech, he added, ''But I will tell you -- with no disrespect at all to the president -- I thought halfway through the speech, 'Bill who?' '' Though both conventions seemed to be helpful to the nominees, strategists in both parties agreed that Mr. Bush put on a slightly better convention than Mr. Gore. Several experts said that was because the Republicans appeared more harmonious and laid out a broader message of inclusion. By contrast, many strategists said, the vice president's convention was a bit more uneven and seemed less successful in reaching beyond the party's core voters. ''Bush had a better convention week, but not a better speech,'' said David Axelrod, a Democratic strategist in Chicago. Gore campaign officials said they were pleased that during their convention they had made significant inroads in presenting Mr. Gore as more than a vice president but as a nominee with a populist streak who will energetically fight for ''working families'' -- a favorite Gore phrase -- on issues ranging from health care to Social Security. But even loyal Democrats here expressed some distress about Mr. Gore and his difficulty in winning clusters of voters -- like women -- who are historically inclined to vote Democratic. And they cited the ball and chain of Mr. Clinton. Mr. Rove, Mr. Bush's strategist, noted that Mr. Bush had already succeeded in staking out issues that Bob Dole, the nominee four years ago, did not dare discuss. ''Can you imagine if Bob Dole had stood up and said, 'I want to reform Social Security,' '' he asked. ''The race would be over. Can you imagine a Republican candidate saying, 'We've got to get rid of so many nuclear bombs?' We did it and got away with it.'' Despite the slightly better reviews for the Republican production, people in both parties said Mr. Gore's choice of Senator Lieberman seemed, at least in the short term, to be a better pick than Dick Cheney, the former secretary of defense, on the Republican side. That is because Mr. Lieberman, the first Jew on a major party ticket, was greeted with euphoria among many Democrats  and caused people to take more notice of Mr. Gore. The choice of Mr. Cheney underscored Mr. Bush's determination to pick a competent No. 2 who would know how to govern. Yet it stirred little excitement. ''It was a good pick for him,''  Senator Sam Brownback, a Kansas Republican, said of Mr. Lieberman.  ''It generated some excitement and interest that wasn't there. Cheney solidified Bush but I couldn't really measure what he's done broader.'' Mr. Brownback warned, however, that the Lieberman pick could come back to haunt Mr. Gore. If the Democrats attack Mr. Bush for their positions on Social Security privatization and education reform, he said, Republicans can simply invoke Mr. Lieberman's record on those issues, which is not too far from Mr. Bush's. Mike Sturla, a Democratic state representative in Pennsylvania who was a delegate here, said the debates would be critical. But in the next breath he wondered aloud whether the build-up of Mr. Gore as an accomplished debater -- and criticism of Mr. Bush as lackluster -- could play right into the Bush strategy. ''The Republicans, knowing they will get crushed, have lowered expectations so much that Bush would have to wilt and slither off the stage,'' Mr. Sturla said, ''for his performance to be judged a surprise and a failure.'' Bush campaign advisers and supporters seem almost preoccupied over the possibility that the Democrats will begin broadcasting harsh commercials that try to scare voters away from their candidate -- all in a drive to gain an edge over Bush. The Democrats, preferring not to portray the commercials as negative, say they will not shrink from what they call issue comparisons. Some Democratic operatives say it seems that the Republicans want to goad Mr. Gore into a slash-and-burn posture so they can turn around and paint him as mean-spirited, and then attack him right back. Mr. Gore's advisers said their hope was that in the speech on Thursday, the vice president diffused some of the concern that he was not sufficiently likable, leaving voters more inclined to warm up to Mr. Bush.
 Earlier this summer, I went for a swim at Barton Springs, a freshwater pool that lies at the geographical and spiritual center of Austin. Under an oak tree, I found Stuart Stevens of the Bush campaign, typing on a Dell laptop. He was writing the script for the video that would be shown at the Republican National Convention. All around him, half-naked kids with ornate tattoos lolled on the grass, working on nothing except their tans. Earlier this summer, I went for a swim at Barton Springs, a freshwater pool that lies at the geographical and spiritual center of Austin. Under an oak tree, I found Stuart Stevens of the Bush campaign, typing on a Dell laptop. He was writing the script for the video that would be shown at the Republican National Convention. All around him, half-naked kids with ornate tattoos lolled on the grass, working on nothing except their tans. National politics has a certain luster to it, and many of Austin's tech lords have gotten swept up in George W. Bush's bid for the White House. Two local tech stars, the hardware king Michael Dell and the software guru Steve Papermaster, have formed a team of high-tech executives to advise the campaign; I spotted both of them at a recent gathering of the team at the Dell Jewish Community Center. Back in 1998, Papermaster gave a party for 500 at his mansion in Rob Roy to introduce Bush to the local tech crowd. Later, Papermaster squired Bush around Silicon Valley, helping make connections and raise money. ''Directly and indirectly, it's certainly been in the millions -- many millions,'' said Papermaster of the sums he has delivered to the Bush campaign. Papermaster went to U.T. and used to hang out at the Armadillo World Headquarters. Doesn't he think it's weird that this liberal enclave should become the launching pad for a possible Republican presidency? ''Austin has changed from being a purely liberal city into being more centered, though still with a liberal bent,'' asserted Papermaster. ''It's a place that has aggressively embraced growth. And that reasonably approximates the governor's philosophy. It's not a clash. It's closer to a parallel, and perhaps even a convergence.'' Stuart Stevens agrees that the mellow gestalt of Austin has influenced the Bush camp. ''Being in Austin creates a nonhierarchical campaign,'' he said. ''There's a certain lack of self-importance. Nobody at the Bush campaign cares about wearing ties. Nobody worries about getting in the gossip columns, because there aren't any gossip columns.''
 Article notes prevalance of blue outfits worn by women, including Hillary Rodham Clinton and Tipper Gore, during Democratic National Convention; photo (M) IT looked like an instance of fashion by fiat. When she strolled out in front of the cameras at the Democratic National Convention on Thursday night, Tipper Gore was sheathed in blue, her lustrous coat by Ellen Tracy lending her an aura of beatitude. Mrs. Gore was just the last of the candidates' wives who arrived for their respective spotlight moments decked out in tints of blue like so many blossoms in a Victorian nosegay. IT looked like an instance of fashion by fiat. When she strolled out in front of the cameras at the Democratic National Convention on Thursday night, Tipper Gore was sheathed in blue, her lustrous coat by Ellen Tracy lending her an aura of beatitude. Mrs. Gore was just the last of the candidates' wives who arrived for their respective spotlight moments decked out in tints of blue like so many blossoms in a Victorian nosegay. By the time Mrs. Gore took center stage, embracing her blue-clad daughter Karenna, one could not help but wonder. In politics, where no gesture can be counted as spontaneous, this ubiquitous blue suit looked contrived, a result of canny image coaching. ''Blue, I can't imagine a better choice,'' mused Bonnie McNies, an image consultant, who used to advise Mrs. Gore as a senator's wife. Mrs. McNies trilled a hymn to the Democratic ladies' color of choice. ''Blue is soothing but powerful,'' she said. ''It's smart, but not trendy like black. It suggests harmony among team players. It suggests unity.'' In the collective consciousness, blue is often the color of clarity, piety and goodness (think of a Swiss mountain lake or a Raphael Madonna). To some minds, blue also conveys true love and fidelity. And sure enough, Mrs. Gore treated audiences on Thursday night to a vintage snapshot of herself hanging laundry in front of her trailer home, garbed in -- what else? -- a housedress of faded blue. Mrs. Gore underscored the meaning of true blue by introducing her husband simply as ''the man I love and have loved for 30 years.'' ''Not at all,'' said Camille Johnston, Mrs. Gore's press secretary. ''There is no consensus-building around wardrobe here.'' So, as fashion people are so fond of saying, maybe it's just something in the air.
 William Safire (''Gore's Audible in Bishkek,'' column, Aug. 17) praises Al Gore for rejecting ''false machismo'' in deciding not to attempt a landing ''in befogged Almaty, Kazakhstan.'' This old reporter recalls a similar incident, with a different outcome, involving another vice president making a run for the top job. William Safire (''Gore's Audible in Bishkek,'' column, Aug. 17) praises Al Gore for rejecting ''false machismo'' in deciding not to attempt a landing ''in befogged Almaty, Kazakhstan.'' This old reporter recalls a similar incident, with a different outcome, involving another vice president making a run for the top job.
 Elizabeth Kendall Holahan, the press secretary in Washington to Senator Pat Roberts, Republican of Kansas, was married yesterday to Eric Dale Schmutz, an assistant in the accounting department for the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, in Austin, Tex. The Rev. Dr. Bennett A. Brockman performed the ceremony at St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Fairfield, Conn. Elizabeth Kendall Holahan, the press secretary in Washington to Senator Pat Roberts, Republican of Kansas, was married yesterday to Eric Dale Schmutz, an assistant in the accounting department for the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, in Austin, Tex. The Rev. Dr. Bennett A. Brockman performed the ceremony at St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Fairfield, Conn.
 ''It's not only what you're going through, but what everybody else is going through,'' says Urcelina Ortiz, a mother from Bushwick who was there to try to prevent her son, accused of selling drugs, from being  locked up. (Family Court handles most criminal charges against children under 16.) She watched another mother, whose son was released from custody, burst into tears. She stared at a woman covered with bruises. It was a painful reminder for Ms. Ortiz, 41, who years ago had come into this very courthouse seeking an order of protection from her ex-husband.
 But political commentators seemed unimpressed. Representative Raul Gonzales recalled the boost former President George Bush enjoyed after the Persian Gulf war in 1991 -- only to be undercut by his perceived failure to manage the economy. Even that comparison is on the rosy side, said Amando Doronila, a columnist for The Philippine Daily Inquirer. Mr. Bush had just won a war; Mr. Estrada does not even have a workable strategy for victory.
 John B Judis Op-Ed article on Al Gore's acceptance speech at Democratic convention, in which he defines difference between parties in strict populist terms; suggests that this appeal, harkening back to Franklin Roosevelt, can be effective even when people are doing well economically; adds that Pres Clinton's political achievement has been to revive perception that Democrats represent the people, Republicans the wealthy and special interests (M) Does a populist appeal have resonance in prosperous times? In his acceptance speech at the Democratic convention, Al Gore defined the difference between Republicans and Democrats in strict populist terms. ''They're for the powerful, we're for the people,'' he declared. This appeal, if updated, can be effective, even when people are doing well economically. One commentator compared Mr. Gore to William Jennings Bryan, the firebrand of 1896, but the proper comparison is with Franklin Roosevelt. Bryan's populism was the politics of an embattled minority, the last cry of Western small farmers. Does a populist appeal have resonance in prosperous times? In his acceptance speech at the Democratic convention, Al Gore defined the difference between Republicans and Democrats in strict populist terms. ''They're for the powerful, we're for the people,'' he declared. This appeal, if updated, can be effective, even when people are doing well economically. One commentator compared Mr. Gore to William Jennings Bryan, the firebrand of 1896, but the proper comparison is with Franklin Roosevelt. Bryan's populism was the politics of an embattled minority, the last cry of Western small farmers. Al Gore now has an opportunity to build on what Mr. Clinton has achieved -- to restore in full the older populist majority, but not on exactly the same terms as Roosevelt did. What they fear is that government will become more responsive to the powerful rather than to them -- a fear evidenced in the popularity of maverick politicians like Ross Perot and John McCain and in the continuing support for campaign finance reform. Mr. Gore seems to understand this. His acceptance speech was long on defending his own modest initiatives against the threat of ''big tobacco, big oil, the big polluters, the pharmaceutical companies, the H.M.O.'s.'' For instance, in the Lorain County district now represented by the Democrat Sherrod Brown, Mr. Reagan won by 19 percent in 1984. But in 1992, Mr. Clinton won 38 percent of the vote; Mr. Bush, 35 percent; and Mr. Perot, 27 percent. In 1996, Mr. Clinton won 46 percent; Bob Dole, 39 percent; and Mr. Perot, 14 percent. Mr. Gore begins at a certain disadvantage with these voters, who may be put off by his sometimes aloof manner. But a populist approach could help him overcome his lack of personal appeal. He might not convince these voters that he is a more relaxed guy than his opponent, but if he can convince them that he is on their side and that Mr. Bush is not, he may well be the next president.
 Editorial compares and contrasts ideological differences between platforms of Al Gore and George W Bush Ralph Nader sees no meaningful difference between the Democratic and Republican parties this year, and at least on a cosmetic level he has a point. Both parties have tried hard to project a centrist image while tranquilizing their activists. In Philadelphia, George W. Bush's inclusiveness pitch required keeping the Republican right wing offstage while throwing it a bone or two in the platform. The Democrats in Los Angeles reversed the process, giving the Kennedy-Jackson wing of the party plenty of air time but little consolation in the platform. Nevertheless, it is clear that there are measurable differences between the two candidates on domestic policy, and that on issue after issue the Democrats would still urge a more vigorous deployment of federal resources to solve national problems. These differences may not be enough to satisfy Mr. Nader's aggressively populist inclinations, but if the election were held now, they would give the voters a real choice. The biggest difference, perhaps the defining difference, lies in how the two men would distribute the lion's share of a projected budget surplus of $4.6 trillion over the next 10 years. Mr. Bush, warning that this money should not be hijacked by federal programs, would use about $1.3 trillion to cut taxes, mainly for affluent families. Al Gore would cut taxes by only $500 billion, mostly subsidies of one sort or another for middle-income families. He would also use every penny of the surplus generated by Social Security, about $2.5 trillion, to reduce the national debt. Mr. Bush would use the same money partly to reduce the debt and partly to finance a new system of personal retirement accounts. When all is said and done, Mr. Gore would have about $1 trillion  for new spending, Mr. Bush about $300 billion. Ralph Nader sees no meaningful difference between the Democratic and Republican parties this year, and at least on a cosmetic level he has a point. Both parties have tried hard to project a centrist image while tranquilizing their activists. In Philadelphia, George W. Bush's inclusiveness pitch required keeping the Republican right wing offstage while throwing it a bone or two in the platform. The Democrats in Los Angeles reversed the process, giving the Kennedy-Jackson wing of the party plenty of air time but little consolation in the platform. Nevertheless, it is clear that there are measurable differences between the two candidates on domestic policy, and that on issue after issue the Democrats would still urge a more vigorous deployment of federal resources to solve national problems. These differences may not be enough to satisfy Mr. Nader's aggressively populist inclinations, but if the election were held now, they would give the voters a real choice. The biggest difference, perhaps the defining difference, lies in how the two men would distribute the lion's share of a projected budget surplus of $4.6 trillion over the next 10 years. Mr. Bush, warning that this money should not be hijacked by federal programs, would use about $1.3 trillion to cut taxes, mainly for affluent families. Al Gore would cut taxes by only $500 billion, mostly subsidies of one sort or another for middle-income families. He would also use every penny of the surplus generated by Social Security, about $2.5 trillion, to reduce the national debt. Mr. Bush would use the same money partly to reduce the debt and partly to finance a new system of personal retirement accounts. When all is said and done, Mr. Gore would have about $1 trillion  for new spending, Mr. Bush about $300 billion. These numbers imply important differences in philosophy. Perhaps oddly, they cast Mr. Gore as the conservative custodian of President Clinton's policies of securing growth by chipping away at the burdensome national debt, and Mr. Bush as the risk-taker who would reverse course on tax policy and divert part of the Social Security payroll tax to private retirement accounts at a time when Social Security's long-term solvency is still very much in doubt. They also reflect Mr. Gore's stronger faith in the remedial powers of the federal government. There are also important differences in emphasis when it comes to new spending. Both would use about the same amount, $100 billion, for education, Mr. Bush's signature issue. Mr. Gore, however, would spend $400 billion on health care, mainly to expand insurance coverage and underwrite a prescription drug program under Medicare, while Mr. Bush would spend only $100 billion on health. And Mr. Gore would put as much into environmental programs -- at least $125 billion -- as Mr. Bush would into all other programs combined, defense included. These figures must be treated with caution, since the projected surpluses are iffy. But they do give some indication of priorities. Numbers aside, on some issues there are telling ideological differences. The environment is a case in point. Mr. Gore would spend billions to make industry more energy-efficient, thus counteracting global warming. But even more important to conservationists is his gut commitment to preserving the federal government's central role in protecting the environment. Among other things, that means resisting Congressional efforts to destroy the government's regulatory machinery, as the Gingrich Republicans tried to do in 1995, and building on Mr. Clinton's surprisingly strong record of enlarging America's protected wilderness. To the extent that Mr. Bush has thought about the issue at all, he has greatly alarmed even moderate Republicans in Congress by suggesting that he would roll back protections of the national forests, open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for oil exploration and cede greater authority on environmental matters to state and local interests, usually a recipe for disaster. Important differences on social issues like gun control and abortion are by now fairly well known. Mr. Gore's proposals for keeping guns out of the wrong hands are stronger, and he unequivocally supports Roe v. Wade, whereas Mr. Bush is generally pro-life. There is also a major difference on a central issue of governance, campaign finance reform. Having engaged in profligate fund-raising himself, Mr. Gore now supports the McCain-Feingold bill eliminating soft money from the American political system, and indeed says he will make it his first order of legislative business. Mr. Bush would abolish corporate and labor soft money but allow unlimited individual contributions to continue, which means that the corrupting flow of soft money that has been so much in evidence at both conventions this year would also continue.
 Party attachment is still considered one of the best predictors of how people will vote -- if they vote. But appealing to those loyalties, while still wooing the Independents who decide elections, is a complicated challenge these days. Particularly for Vice President Al Gore, many analysts say. But until last week, Democratic voters have not embraced Mr. Gore's candidacy with the enthusiasm Republicans have brought to Gov. George W. Bush; the last pre-convention Times/CBS poll showed Mr. Gore drawing 75 percent of the Democrats, while Mr. Bush got 86 percent of the Republicans. ''I think they wasted half their convention just trying to get strong Democrats and soft Democrats home,'' said Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster. (Post-convention polls will tell how successful they were.) There are obvious reasons why Mr. Gore has had to work harder for voters who should be rightfully his: The Democratic Party has held the presidency for eight years. The strains are showing between liberals and ''New Democrats'' who want to keep the party in the center. And the Gore candidacy has had its fits and starts. This was the landscape for Mr. Gore's acceptance speech Thursday night: He needed to energize his base, but he was also keenly aware of the swing voters turned off by partisan appeals. On one level, his speech was profoundly Democratic. He offered himself as a populist crusader willing to fight ''powerful forces'' -- like big H.M.O.'s and profit-hungry pharmaceutical companies -- on behalf of ''working families.'' But in sharp contrast to convention speeches of yesteryear, Mr. Gore's never mentioned the words Democrat or Republican, noted Martin Wattenberg, a political scientist at the University of California-Irvine. ''It's populist, but it's a broad populism,'' said Stan Greenberg, Mr. Gore's pollster. ''It's saying, let's make sure the whole society is able to do well.'' To galvanize his party, and to pull back many of the Independents who lean their way, Mr. Gore needs to draw sharp contrasts with the Republicans, many Democratic strategists agree, particularly on basic issues like tax cuts and health care. Frustrated Democrats say Mr. Bush is preaching a message -- that he is a different kind of Republican, more sensitive and moderate -- that is distinctly at odds with his basic conservatism. ''Part of the task that Gore and the Democrats face in the fall is to tell voters that George W. Bush really is an old-style Republican,'' said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster. In other words, to block Mr. Bush's move to the center, now that he has consolidated his own party. Many Democrats are eager to make that case and highlight the stakes: What kind of Supreme Court justices would a Bush administration, operating with a Republican Senate, appoint? How does Mr. Bush's health care record in Texas, which ranks high among states in the percentage of uninsured, gibe with his promise to provide health coverage nationwide? But the Gore campaign is in something of a strategic box, one Republican strategist argued, speaking on condition that he not be identified. While the Democrats need to highlight the differences between the parties, overt partisanship gives the Bush campaign the higher moral ground. Day after day, the Bush campaign chastised the Democrats for any hint of partisan attacks at their convention. In fact, party strategists say, Mr. Bush is convinced that the voters are weary of such fights. ''Bush has seriously studied what has happened since Republicans gained control of Congress in 1994,'' said Linda DiVall, a Republican poll taker. ''Frankly, Republicans don't do well when we get into a fight with Clinton or a fight among ourselves.'' Mr. Bush, of course, has the luxury of denouncing partisanship and muting the differences. Eight years in the wilderness, and a profound disdain for the Clinton administration, go a long way toward keeping Republican voters unified and motivated. Moreover, Mr. Bush has ably capitalized on his party's traditional strengths -- most notably, in the aftermath of the Clinton scandals, the notion that Republicans have stronger moral values. And he has dealt with his party's vulnerabilities, presenting a multi-ethnic, family-friendly convention program. All of which suggests the complicated politics that awaits the voters this fall: a fierce, nonpartisan partisan struggle. For Mr. Gore, the campaign will be about ''fighting for working families,'' and for Mr. Bush, ''compassionate conservatism.'' In other words, the parties are dead, long live the parties.
 The question of the week at the Democratic national convention may have been whether the hopelessly impassive Al Gore could show television viewers a looser, emotional inner self -- that he feels even his own pain, to put it one way. The question of the week at the Democratic national convention may have been whether the hopelessly impassive Al Gore could show television viewers a looser, emotional inner self -- that he feels even his own pain, to put it one way.
 Dozens of Democratic candidates from around country file into headquarters of party-run Democratic News Service during four days of Democratic National Convention to submit to interviews with television and radio stations back home; Republicans used their four days of media exposure to focus singly on Gov George W Bush, but Democrats chose to fragment their television moment; Dr Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of Annenberg School for Communication at University of Pennsylvania, says Gore campaign wants to keep local officials and candidates happy by giving them exposure they crave, perhaps even creating reverse coattail effect in process; photos (M) Unlike the Republicans, who used their four days of media exposure in Philadelphia as an unabashed promotional vehicle with a single focus, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Democrats chose to fragment their television moment into a thousand points of spotlight. The idea Vice President Al Gore's campaign latched onto, she said, was to keep local officials and candidates happy by giving them the exposure they craved, and perhaps even creating a reverse coattail effect in the process. ''You take care of everyone who's running, because you want everyone who votes for that person to not split their ticket,'' Dr. Jamieson said. A governor sought, a governor delivered. ''When people start talking about issues, they're going to love this Gore-Lieberman team'' is the message Mr. Patton gave Ms. Sutton across the microwaves in the news service's Studio 2 on Thursday afternoon. ''We represent working-class Kentuckians, and that's going to come across very strongly in the next 10 weeks.'' National party officials, convinced that the election will be decided in swing states like Kentucky -- which has voted for the winner in every presidential race since 1960 -- are hoping that what came across last week was an impression of Mr. Gore as his own man, and as the more able manager of the budget surplus. Indeed, the Republicans concentrated almost obsessively on Mr. Bush. On the nights he could not be in the First Union Center, his image was beamed onto three jumbo screens that dominated the podium, and the ''talking points'' memorandums given to the delegates summarizing his proposals were nine pages long. Mr. Gore, in contrast, was barely a presence at the Staples Center until the convention's third night, when he walked onstage to give his daughter a hug, and the talking points left on delegates' seats were a mere page. On television, the convention was rarely the lead story: in Memphis, which is in Mr. Gore's home state, and in Houston, which is in Mr. Bush's, the weather, in the form of heat and hurricanes, tended to get better play. Even on the night of Mr. Gore's speech, WCVB in Boston led its 11 p.m. newscast with a report about the impending murder trial of Michael Skakel, nephew of Ethel Kennedy. In Atlanta, for instance, the top-rated radio station, WSB, carried only one live speech, Mr. Gore's. ''We did not play up this convention,'' said Chris Camp, the station's news director. ''Basically it comes down to the fact that conventions are more scripted. There was no suspense, no mystery; everybody knew who the nominee was going to be.'' ''Everyone here is extremely jazzed,'' Phil Keating, a reporter for WSVN, the Fox affiliate in Denver, observed from the Staples Center after Mr. Gore spoke. ''He set himself apart, he didn't seem stiff and he came across as a well-connecting speaker tonight.''
 Independent United Nations watchdog organization, Campaign for United Nations Reform, says Vice Pres Al Gore would give more unqualified support to UN and be more willing to sign international treaties than Gov George W Bush; group had sent questionnaire to both men; Bush said he would never place American troops under UN command and would not pay United States debts to UN until its bureaucracy was reformed and American dues lowered; Gore said US should pay dues 'in full, on time and without condition' but he declined to endorse International Criminal Court, saying its treaty had significant flaws (M) Vice President Al Gore would give more unqualified support to the United Nations and be more willing to sign international treaties than his Republican opponent, George W. Bush, an independent United Nations watchdog organization said this week. But Mr. Gore is still hedging his support for some important international initiatives, as President Clinton did when he met stiff resistance from Republicans in Congress. Vice President Al Gore would give more unqualified support to the United Nations and be more willing to sign international treaties than his Republican opponent, George W. Bush, an independent United Nations watchdog organization said this week. But Mr. Gore is still hedging his support for some important international initiatives, as President Clinton did when he met stiff resistance from Republicans in Congress. Mr. Bush replied in a brief letter to Don Kraus, executive director of the Campaign for United Nations Reform, saying that while he believed that international organizations can serve the cause of peace, he would never place American troops under United Nations command. He would pay United States debts to the organization, he said, only when its bureaucracy has been reformed and American dues lowered. He also said that he wanted reforms at the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, but he did not elaborate. Mr. Gore responded to more than a dozen questions, often at some length. He said that it was time the United States paid its dues to the United Nations ''in full, on time and without conditions.'' He added that there had already been substantial reforms in the United Nations system. He said that agencies of the United Nations ''offer the U.S. an effective means of doing our fair share to alleviate suffering in some of the most miserable corners of the globe.'' On outstanding treaties not signed by the United States, Mr. Gore gave unequivocal support to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Law of the Sea Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty to stop the testing of nuclear arms. But Mr. Gore continued to call for changes in an international agreement banning land mines, reflecting longstanding objections from the Pentagon. And he declined to endorse the International Criminal Court, now taking shape without American support. His said in his reply that the court's treaty still had ''significant flaws.''
 Frida bolted to London, where she somehow managed to set herself up as an art dealer. Before long, she was toting her gun again, stalking the painter Augustus John. At the same time, she opened a German-style cabaret theater, the Cave of the Golden Calf, decorated by Wyndham Lewis, Spencer Gore and Charles Ginner. Ezra Pound dropped by and complimented the enterprising Mrs. Strindberg: ''More brains than Gertie or Amy put together.''
 Photo of Al and Tipper Gore during their much-publicized kiss at Democratic national convention IN Vice President Al Gore's campaign to change his robotic image, nothing may have helped more than the big smooch. Mr. Gore stepped on stage at the Democratic Convention on Thursday and greeted his wife, Tipper, with a quick embrace and a kiss on the lips. But instead of letting go, as nice politicians are supposed to, he wrapped her tighter in his arms, closed his eyes and gave her a full-mouthed kiss that lasted a exceptionally long time. (Actually three seconds; we have tapes; we've counted.) IN Vice President Al Gore's campaign to change his robotic image, nothing may have helped more than the big smooch. Mr. Gore stepped on stage at the Democratic Convention on Thursday and greeted his wife, Tipper, with a quick embrace and a kiss on the lips. But instead of letting go, as nice politicians are supposed to, he wrapped her tighter in his arms, closed his eyes and gave her a full-mouthed kiss that lasted a exceptionally long time. (Actually three seconds; we have tapes; we've counted.) Of course, he could not really have forgotten the cameras for a second, and soon commentators were speculating about how calculated the kiss was. Mrs. Gore had spent days on the talk show circuit trying to humanize her husband's image, after all. And here was the living proof of his humanity, and a photograph the papers couldn't resist. The next day MSNBC had two people on the case. Chip Reid reported that he had interviewed the Gores' daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, who told him that kind of kissing goes on around the house all the time. He did not report whether the Gore children had spent much of their youth saying, ''Yuck! Mom! Dad!'' More substantively, Claire Shipman of NBC speculated to Don Imus that the kiss sent a message. It signaled that Al Gore (unlike some presidents we know) is a faithful husband. Excellent point; imagine what would have happened if the Clintons had dared such a scene. Though some viewers were charmed by the Gore kiss and others squirmed, no one doubted that it was based on reality. There you have what really makes it seem odd. The kiss struck everyone as a political gesture based on truth, and nothing is rarer than that. In itself, the kiss had an old-fashioned, romantic innocence. It resembled the moment at a wedding when the groom is asked to kiss the bride and the guests can only wonder: will he give her a chaste little peck or go for it? In an earlier era, the full-mouthed bridal kiss said, ''We can have sex now, we're married.'' Among the list of promises Mr. Gore made in his speech, the ultimate promise may have been the one he sent with body language: to restore All-American marital sex to the White House.
 Article on campaign twist involving Mayor Philip Giordano of Waterbury, Conn, Republican who is running against two-term incumbent US Sen Joseph Lieberman; Giordano raises question of why Lieberman, Vice Pres Al Gore's vice presidential running mate, has not bowed out of Senate race; photo (M) And that was before Vice President Al Gore picked Mr. Lieberman as his running mate for the November presidential election. ''I'll tell you what kind of message it sends: by running in both races he's making Connecticut a consolation prize and telling voters how little confidence he has in the Gore-Lieberman ticket,'' said Mr. Giordano, a 37-year-old lawyer serving his third two-year term as mayor of Waterbury, a city of 104,000 that is the fourth largest in the state. Addressing the question of why Mr. Lieberman was running two races, Mr. Gerstein said: ''To withdraw from the Senate race at this late juncture would create tremendous chaos in the party and lead to an un-democratic democratic process of selecting another candidate. We believe very much that the Gore-Lieberman ticket will win in November, and then a special election can be scheduled for selection of a permanent replacement in the Senate.'' Governor Rowland has refused to speculate on who he would appoint to replace Mr. Lieberman, insisting it will be a ''non-issue'' because he expects George W. Bush to win the November election. Connecticut Democratic party leaders, including the state chairman, Edward L. Marcus, and Senator Christopher J. Dodd, have encouraged Mr. Lieberman to run in both races for two reasons: if he and Mr. Gore lose he obviously still provides the Democrats their best chance at retaining the Senate seat, and if he wins he gives his party more time to find a suitable candidate.
 In Philadelphia, W. was the anti-Clinton, missing no chance to convey his faithfulness as a husband and father. Laura Bush, a.k.a. the Best Decision He Ever Made, opened the convention with a speech stuffed with allusions to her happy marriage and W.'s homebody ways. When Mr. Bush signaled he'd restore ''dignity and honor'' to the White House, the closed captioning could have read: ''You won't catch me messin' with a filly in the Oval Office.'' After Philadelphia's ''Scenes From a Marriage,'' Al Gore felt compelled to one-up his rival with ''Love Story, the Convention.'' The vice president, who once claimed he and Tipper were the models for the Erich Segal novel, even brought in Tommy Lee Jones, his old Harvard roommate who appeared in the 1970 movie of ''Love Story,'' to reprise his role as a pal who hangs out with the besotted lovers. Mr. Gore's acceptance speech began with an ode to marital devotion.  He then rhapsodized about his parents' close marriage, offering marital fidelity as part of his genetic coding. But we did not know how profoundly this would shape the race, from Mr. Gore's choice of Joe Lieberman, who had excoriated Mr. Clinton as ''immoral,'' to the kissy-face conventions. It was a measure of how exhibitionist the race had become when the tabloid TV show ''Extra'' did a segment on The Kiss, calling it ''Al's Big Mouth Move,'' and advising the Gores to ''Get a Room!''
 But those contributions have been significant. Mr. Cheney and Mr. Lieberman were serious choices, men voters can imagine as president, and displayed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore in a ''presidential'' manner, making a critical big decision in a serious way. Neither man was a crassly political choice, someone selected simply to carry a big state, as Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania would have been for Mr. Bush, or Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois for Mr. Gore. Wyoming's three electoral votes were safe for Mr. Bush before he picked its former congressman; Connecticut's eight were almost as solidly secure for Mr. Gore before he chose its junior senator. Mr. Bush's choice of his father's secretary of defense for a running mate was ''safe and responsible,'' said Stephen Wayne, a Georgetown University political scientist. ''It basically gave us an indication that if George W. Bush is elected, he will be a president who uses advisers in making decisions.'' Or, as a more caustic academic student of presidential elections, Nelson W. Polsby of the University of California at Berkeley, put it, ''Cheney was picked to indemnify Bush against the charge that he was ignorant.'' The selection of Senator Lieberman, the first Jew on a national ticket, was more dramatic. As Professor Wayne put it, ''the choice was unexpected and courageous'' -- words not usually associated with Mr. Gore. Bob Shrum, a key Gore strategist, said, ''People began taking a fresh look at Al Gore through his choice of Joe Lieberman.'' And he brought something else through his aura of incorruptibility and moral outrage against President Clinton's dalliance with a White House intern. As Professor Polsby observed, ''Lieberman was picked to indemnify Gore against the charge that he was sleazy.'' That was especially important for Mr. Gore, whose staff leaked the Lieberman choice on the Monday after the Republican convention -- stopping Mr. Bush's momentum cold. ''The Gore campaign had been in the doldrums,'' Professor Wayne said. ''If Gore wins the election, we'll say this was the beginning, the jump start.'' The attention focused on Mr. Lieberman was even more upbeat. No one attacked him -- perhaps for fear of sounding anti-Semitic -- except for a few blacks who were largely silenced by reminders from Representative John Lewis and the Rev. Jesse Jackson that Mr. Lieberman had marched with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Some of his more conservative votes, like experiments with school vouchers, were instantly and publicly forgiven on the assurance that Mr. Gore, not Mr. Lieberman, would make policy. That was not always true. Geographic balance meant more when the country's regions were more distinct, and plainly Lyndon B. Johnson carried Texas for John F. Kennedy in 1960. Mr. Shrum thinks Bill Clinton's choice of Mr. Gore in 1992 had a lasting effect, helping eke out some narrow victories in Southern states and reinforcing a message of youth and change.
 Thomas J Dowd letter questions Al Gore's legislative record and campaign promises (S) Re ''In Congress, Gore Selected Issues Ready for Prime Time'' (front page, Aug. 13): Two questions come to mind. If it was clear that as a legislator, Al Gore was ''playing at a very high level of the game'' on arms control, why was there such a dearth of arms reduction deals during this active vice president's eight-year tenure? Re ''In Congress, Gore Selected Issues Ready for Prime Time'' (front page, Aug. 13): Two questions come to mind. If it was clear that as a legislator, Al Gore was ''playing at a very high level of the game'' on arms control, why was there such a dearth of arms reduction deals during this active vice president's eight-year tenure? If Mr. Gore is true to his quote about the message of his Congressional career -- ''I will not hesitate to take on any special interest that is operating to the disadvantage of the American people'' -- one wonders how he squares this with the fact that he used to grow tobacco and supported the tobacco industry through much of his Congressional career.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column says Al Gore is correct to accuse Republican George W Bush of offering tax cuts that benefit only the rich, 'in awesome proportions' (M) There was a word missing from Al Gore's acceptance speech on Thursday. Not once did he describe his opponent's plans as ''risky.'' He still warned about the size of George W. Bush's proposed tax cuts -- about $1 trillion larger than his own over the next 10 years. But Mr. Gore has apparently decided to emphasize his populism more than his prudence, accusing the Republicans of offering tax cuts that benefit only the rich. Is he telling the truth? In a word: yes. Mr. Bush's proposed tax cuts aren't just tilted toward high-income families; they target them with awesome precision. Mr. Gore's own proposals are characteristically complex -- frankly, too complex for my tastes -- but their benefits would be much more widely spread. There was a word missing from Al Gore's acceptance speech on Thursday. Not once did he describe his opponent's plans as ''risky.'' He still warned about the size of George W. Bush's proposed tax cuts -- about $1 trillion larger than his own over the next 10 years. But Mr. Gore has apparently decided to emphasize his populism more than his prudence, accusing the Republicans of offering tax cuts that benefit only the rich. Is he telling the truth? In a word: yes. Mr. Bush's proposed tax cuts aren't just tilted toward high-income families; they target them with awesome precision. Mr. Gore's own proposals are characteristically complex -- frankly, too complex for my tastes -- but their benefits would be much more widely spread. Citizens for Tax Justice, a watchdog group, has produced some numbers that illustrate just how much Mr. Bush's plan would give unto those who already have. Around half the benefits would go to families with incomes of more than $250,000 per year; the average tax break for families in the top 1 percent of  the income distribution would be  100 times that for families in the middle. Even a family making $80,000 a year would get less than $20 per week off its taxes once the plan was fully phased in; a family making $1 million would get $1,000 per week. Mr. Gore's plan is much harder  to figure out because it consists mainly of tax credits that depend on what you do, not on how much you make. Some of the tax credits, like those for college education, would still be related to income. But  the dollar benefits would in general be no more for families making a million dollars than for those making a tenth as much, and the biggest proportional benefits would probably go to families at or below the middle. So whatever you think about the details of Mr. Gore's plan (and boy, are there a lot of details!), his characterization of the difference between the plans seems fair. How, then, can the Republicans -- who do, after all, need at least a few votes from the bottom 95 percent of the income distribution to win this election -- answer the charge that they only care about the rich? The reality -- documented by a number of other studies that The Journal for some reason chose not to mention -- is that while most Americans will move up or down the income distribution over the course of a decade, most won't move very far. In fact, even in America your parents' social class, though it doesn't determine your own, affects it strongly. (Is this news to Mr. Bush?) If a tax plan won't help you much today, it probably won't help you much 10 years from now.
 Saturday is Free Your Art Day at Bushnell Park in Hartford from noon to 8 p.m.
 Administration officials said they saw publication of the rules as a significant achievement that could help Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic candidate for president. Mr. Gore has called for an ''electronic bill of rights'' to protect people against the misuse of computerized personal information of all types. The Republican Party platform promises new rules to protect the privacy of medical information, but gives no details. If Gov. George W. Bush of Texas wins the presidential election, his advisers said, he would probably want to re-examine the rules, rather than rely on the policy judgments of the Clinton administration.
 David A. Bositis (Op-Ed, Aug. 17) is poorly served by the ethnic solipsism that he attributes generally to black Democrats. Al Gore's choice of a running mate cannot credibly be construed as, of all things, a repudiation of President Clinton's warm bond with African-Americans. David A. Bositis (Op-Ed, Aug. 17) is poorly served by the ethnic solipsism that he attributes generally to black Democrats. Al Gore's choice of a running mate cannot credibly be construed as, of all things, a repudiation of President Clinton's warm bond with African-Americans.
 WHAT'S an election year without a moral panic? Popular music, and pop culture in general, are set up to be prime targets this year, stuck in the crossfire of a battle for the righteous high ground. Republicans and Democrats are both positioning themselves as guardians of what George W. Bush, in his speech accepting the Republican nomination, called ''essential values.'' Al Gore, as everyone remembers, is married to Tipper Gore, a founder of the Parents' Music Resource Center, which pressured recording companies to place quasi-voluntary warning labels on potentially offensive albums. His vice-presidential choice, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, sponsored legislation to require labeling for recordings, movies and video games, with penalties for selling taboo material to children. (The bill was defeated.) Both major parties seem poised to offer cultural clean-up plans. WHAT'S an election year without a moral panic? Popular music, and pop culture in general, are set up to be prime targets this year, stuck in the crossfire of a battle for the righteous high ground. Republicans and Democrats are both positioning themselves as guardians of what George W. Bush, in his speech accepting the Republican nomination, called ''essential values.'' Al Gore, as everyone remembers, is married to Tipper Gore, a founder of the Parents' Music Resource Center, which pressured recording companies to place quasi-voluntary warning labels on potentially offensive albums. His vice-presidential choice, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, sponsored legislation to require labeling for recordings, movies and video games, with penalties for selling taboo material to children. (The bill was defeated.) Both major parties seem poised to offer cultural clean-up plans.
 Thus it was surprising to read in several articles that an iron fist was in control of the Republican convention in Philadelphia early this month. The attribution, though not in direct quotation of a full sentence, was to George W. Bush himself in the week before he became his party's nominee. In The New York Times, the prescient R.W. Apple Jr. wrote, ''If there are abortion rights supporters at the podium this week, for example, they will talk about something else, thanks to what Mr. Bush calls his 'iron fist' control of the proceedings.'' Strange that Bush should adopt that phrase; perhaps it was a slip under stress. Political figures from Austin are sensitive to the political meanings of words. For example, Karl Rove (invariably described as ''Bush's chief strategist''; there is apparently nobody with the title ''deputy strategist'') demonstrated a grasp of nuance in an interview on The New York Times/ABC News Webcast at the G.O.P. convention. His questioner had asked about the gap between the convention's ''moderate, inclusive message'' of those chosen to speak and the notably conservative views of the delegates shown in polls. That's why the iron-fisted Bush chief strategist Karl Rove accepted inclusive and rejected moderate. Gen. Colin Powell followed up with a convention speech hailing George W. Bush's ''passion for inclusion.'' In his acceptance speech to the G.O.P. convention in Philadelphia, Governor Bush repeated compassionate conservatism, defining it in a plain sentence: ''It is to put conservative values and conservative ideas into the thick of the fight for justice and opportunity.'' Where and when did the phrase (akin to Jack Kemp's bleeding-heart conservative) originate? In his recent book, ''Compassionate Conservatism,'' Marvin Olasky, professor of journalism at the University of Texas at Austin (and the Bush adviser who suggested the phrase to the Bush campaign), provides a lead. Olasky suggests coinage by Vernon Jordan, then head of the National Urban League, who said on July 22, 1981, in criticism of the Reagan administration, ''I do challenge its failure to exhibit a compassionate conservatism.''
