 Defense Sec William S Cohen, only Republican in Pres Clinton's Cabinet, is being drawn reluctantly into presidential campaign debate over state of US military, putting him in position of defending administration while at least indirectly underscoring some of George W Bush's campaign criticisms; Cohen reminds VFW convention of Clinton's military budget increases, including biggest increase in pay for service members in generation, and fact, rarely mentioned by Bush campaign, that defense budgets started falling rapidly as cold war ended, when Bush's father was president and Bush's running-mate Dick Cheney ran Pentagon; Cohen recalls that voters were demanding 'peace dividend'; Al Gore, also at convention, defends military preparedness and says Bush's attacks undercut American credibility overseas; photo; budget chart; Cohen does leave open need for more money to meet international commitments (M) On Monday, Mr. Cohen, who represented Maine in the Senate, launched what amounted to a pre-emptive strike against criticisms by Gov. George W. Bush that the Clinton administration was responsible for a weakened, overextended military. Appearing only hours before Mr. Bush at the annual convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Milwaukee, Mr. Cohen noted not only the budget increases approved by Mr. Clinton, including the biggest pay increases for service members in a generation, but also the fact, rarely mentioned by the Bush campaign, that defense budgets started falling rapidly as the cold war ended. That was when another Bush was president and the governor's running mate, Dick Cheney, was secretary of defense. Vice President Al Gore, who appeared before the group today, offered his own, more partisan defense of the country's military preparedness. Thrusting defense issues to center stage in the presidential campaign for a second day, Mr. Gore went so far as to say that Mr. Bush's repeated attacks on the state of the military ''for political advantage'' threatened to undercut American credibility in the world. [Page A18.] Mr. Cohen had offered a rebuttal,  of a sort, to the criticisms that Mr. Bush has repeated throughout his presidential campaign and accentuated since the Republican convention three weeks ago. Without mentioning Mr. Bush by name -- or for that matter Mr. Clinton or Mr. Gore -- Mr. Cohen launched a lengthy, detailed defense of the nation's armed services, contending that they remained strong and ready and proved it in last year's war against Yugoslavia. At the same time, however, Mr. Cohen left open the need for improvement, suggesting that more work, and money, was needed to meet the pressures on an ever busier military engaged in operations from the Persian Gulf to the Balkans -- something Mr. Bush said he intended to rethink, if elected. Mr. Gore, in his appearance today, made that point in a more overt, more partisan, more full-throated way. ''That's not only wrong in fact,'' Mr. Gore said of Mr. Bush's contentions, ''it's the wrong message to send to our allies and adversaries across the world.'' While his remarks defending the armed services have sought to counter some of Mr. Bush's criticisms, they have also highlighted shortcomings in spending and readiness that have long been the subject of complaints from Republicans in Congress and even some uniformed leaders. In May, Mr. Cohen invited Mr. Bush to the Pentagon for a briefing on the state of the nation's strategic nuclear arsenal after Mr. Bush pledged to reduce the number of American nuclear warheads. The invitation was curtly rebuffed. He winced when asked at a news conference at the Pentagon on Friday to respond to Mr. Bush's criticism that morale in the ranks was low. When reporters cornered him on Monday to ask about Mr. Bush's remarks, he began by saying, ''Well, I want to keep my comments strictly on the facts and the record and to stay out of the politics as much as possible.'' A White House official insisted that no one had asked Mr. Cohen to respond to Mr. Bush's criticisms, although Mr. Cohen's remarks clearly indicated that he had the criticisms in mind. As for the Gore campaign, ''when we think of somebody who can speak for the vice president or the Democratic Party on military issues, Bill Cohen is not the first name that pops in our head,'' a Gore aide said today. In fact, when Mr. Gore's campaign aides sought a defense expert to brief reporters on the issues the vice president raised today, they had to reach back to Mr. Cohen's predecessor as defense secretary, William J. Perry. ''They can't assail Cohen,'' one person in Mr. Gore's campaign said. ''He's a great surrogate for us. No one can accuse him of politicizing the debate.'' When Mr. Cohen says that more can be done -- and spent -- his words support arguments made by Mr. Bush's supporters. The same thing happened when the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Henry H. Shelton, rebutted Mr. Bush's assertion in his  speech in Philadelphia accepting the Republican presidential nomination  that 2 of the Army's 10 divisions were not ready to fight a major war.
 LET'S TALK  In a telephone call on Monday, the chairmen of the Bush and Gore campaigns began tentative negotiations on debates. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Al Gore, said the vice president's chairman, William M. Daley, former commerce secretary, had spoken with Donald L. Evans, an oil entrepreneur and friend of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Bush has said he is willing to debate Mr. Gore three times, but has not accepted the dates, sites or formats of the October events proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. Mr. Gore's aides have said he will accept those debate invitations as well as others. Mr. Daley has asked Alexis M. Herman, the labor secretary, and James A. Johnson, the chairman of Fannie Mae, to help him in negotiations with the Bush campaign, Mr. Lehane said. LET'S TALK  In a telephone call on Monday, the chairmen of the Bush and Gore campaigns began tentative negotiations on debates. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Al Gore, said the vice president's chairman, William M. Daley, former commerce secretary, had spoken with Donald L. Evans, an oil entrepreneur and friend of Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Bush has said he is willing to debate Mr. Gore three times, but has not accepted the dates, sites or formats of the October events proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. Mr. Gore's aides have said he will accept those debate invitations as well as others. Mr. Daley has asked Alexis M. Herman, the labor secretary, and James A. Johnson, the chairman of Fannie Mae, to help him in negotiations with the Bush campaign, Mr. Lehane said. BUSH BLOOPERS  Sooner or later, it happens to just about every candidate, especially after long hours on the campaign trail. And Monday night, during a stop in Des Moines, it happened to George W. Bush. Just about every other sentence he uttered in a 15-minute speech at a fund-raiser seemed to have a blooper in it. His first slip of the lip came when said, ''When we carry Iowa in November, it'll mean the end of four years of Clinton-Gore.'' (He meant eight years.) Next, outlining his trade policy, he promised, ''I will work to end terrors,'' only to catch himself and make it ''tariffs and barriers.'' His policy on national security: ''We cannot let terrorists and rogue nations hold this nation hostile or hold our allies hostile.'' But Mr. Bush's audience seemed not to mind. He was cheered again and again.
 Bernice Sisson letter disputes Bruce Bartlett's August 22 Op-Ed article on campaign promises of Vice Pres Al Gore Re ''The Cost of Keeping Gore's Promises,'' by Bruce Bartlett (Op-Ed, Aug. 22): Re ''The Cost of Keeping Gore's Promises,'' by Bruce Bartlett (Op-Ed, Aug. 22): Now that we have read about the cost of keeping Al Gore's promises, can we read about the cost of not keeping them?
 Josh Green letter disputes Bruce Bartlett's August 22 Op-Ed column on campaign promises of Vice Pres Al Gore Re ''The Cost of Keeping Gore's Promises,'' by Bruce Bartlett (Op-Ed, Aug. 22): Re ''The Cost of Keeping Gore's Promises,'' by Bruce Bartlett (Op-Ed, Aug. 22): Mr. Bartlett, like many in the Bush camp, argues that this election is about determining who will decide how to spend the budget surplus: the government or the people.
 There are indeed obvious differences between the stated positions of George W. Bush and Al Gore. But there is also an unmistakable narrowing of the national debate on issues of social spending, defense and infrastructure investment, which might be related to the high rate of return of incumbents to office, campaign finance laws that facilitate interest-group politics and constantly falling electoral participation.
 Howell Raines Editorial Observer says Vice Pres Al Gore's frequent use of word 'fight' in his nomination acceptance speech reflects his need to play the pugnacious populist and to be seen as politician with conviction; says slashing debate is Gore's instinctive response to virtually every competitive political situation; warns that public may grow weary of Gore's continual announcements that it is fight time in America (M) In yesterday's Times, Katharine  Seelye documented the use of ''working families'' as a thematic catch phrase in speeches by Vice President Al Gore and his surrogates. This technique of disciplined repetition is similar to that used by Gov. George W. Bush to give brand-name status to ''compassionate conservatism.'' In either party, it is all part of a process that Stuart Stevens, a Bush strategist, calls ''finding a language'' for a candidacy. To my ear, an especially striking part of the language of this year's presidential contest has been Mr. Gore's use of the word ''fight.'' It is hard to recall an acceptance speech with more pugilistic imagery than that delivered by Mr. Gore in Los Angeles last Thursday. The indisputably bellicose Richard Nixon had only one ''fight'' in his 1972 acceptance speech. Mr. Gore used ''fight,'' or derivative verb and noun forms, 23 times. Often, of course, the construction was about ''fighting for working families,'' a combination designed, as Ms. Seelye reported, to underscore the message of economic populism that dominated the Democratic convention. In yesterday's Times, Katharine  Seelye documented the use of ''working families'' as a thematic catch phrase in speeches by Vice President Al Gore and his surrogates. This technique of disciplined repetition is similar to that used by Gov. George W. Bush to give brand-name status to ''compassionate conservatism.'' In either party, it is all part of a process that Stuart Stevens, a Bush strategist, calls ''finding a language'' for a candidacy. To my ear, an especially striking part of the language of this year's presidential contest has been Mr. Gore's use of the word ''fight.'' It is hard to recall an acceptance speech with more pugilistic imagery than that delivered by Mr. Gore in Los Angeles last Thursday. The indisputably bellicose Richard Nixon had only one ''fight'' in his 1972 acceptance speech. Mr. Gore used ''fight,'' or derivative verb and noun forms, 23 times. Often, of course, the construction was about ''fighting for working families,'' a combination designed, as Ms. Seelye reported, to underscore the message of economic populism that dominated the Democratic convention. But even when it is tactically selected, the language that candidates choose tells us something about their inner lives, personal histories and psychological comfort zones. Mr. Bush, for example, really does come from a three-generation family political tradition that believes that conservatism should be leavened with a paternalistic kind of caring. That is why George Bush the elder had to wriggle so hard to get into Ronald Reagan's ideological suit, and may also provide a clue as to why Governor Bush is always insisting that he will not enter the White House wearing ''borrowed clothes.'' What, then, does the language of combat tell us about Mr. Gore and others who use it on the stump? I thought first of a very different kind of Southern presidential candidate, the late George C. Wallace of Alabama. ''The fighting judge'' never seemed to feel fully alive unless he had a posture of aggression toward a world of entitled power -- the federal government, the Kennedys, the fraternity boys at the University of Alabama -- that he always suspected of looking down on him. Mr. Gore does not seem burdened by feelings of personal or regional inferiority. But he does long to be perceived as a conviction politician. His cleanup chores in the Clinton administration have undermined that image with the public and, one suspects, within Al Gore as well. Fighting words provide a way for Mr. Gore to depict himself as more resolute than President Clinton and more reliable than his attractive but untested opponent. Both thoughts figured in Mr. Gore's observation that ''the presidency is more than a popularity contest. It's a day-by-day fight for people'' in which one must sometimes ''pick the hard right over the easy wrong.'' A reading of ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' by David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima, convinced me that fighting words serve some other purposes for Mr. Gore as well. On one level, they link him to a longstanding Democratic oratorical tradition. As Jimmy Carter noted in his 1980 acceptance speech, Democrats like to see themselves as ''the party of a courageous fighter who knew how to give 'em hell -- Harry Truman.'' Playing the pugnacious populist seems especially important to Mr. Gore, perhaps because it eases an inner anxiety about his privileged background. On a more personal level, verbal warfare connects the vice president to his father, a New Deal Democrat who preferred lunch-pail issues over the austere campaign oriented toward defense policy that Mr. Gore ran in 1988. Mr. Maraniss and Ms. Nakashima write that slashing debate is Mr. Gore's instinctive response to virtually every competitive political situation. The record bears them out. In all his campaigns since 1976, Mr. Gore has felt more secure, more grounded -- and been more successful -- when on the attack. His dismantling of Senator Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries continued the pattern. And in the last few days, Mr. Gore has rocked Mr. Bush, who looked very wobbly on the stump yesterday. The Republicans still insist they can turn Mr. Gore's bellicosity against him with accusations of class warfare. But Mr. Gore may face another more subtle danger. Constant feistiness can wear out political audiences, especially in a time when suburban moderates do not feel particularly threatened by the greedy forces conjured by Mr. Gore. In fact, Mr. Bush's macro bet for the campaign is that voters are sick of what he calls ''bitter arguments.'' At this point, Mr. Gore is drawn by strategy and instinct to the opposite view. His message is not the blurry and Bushian ''I care,'' but an updated version of Harry Truman that could be summed up as ''Let's get ready to rumble.'' The polls make Mr. Gore's bet on smash-mouth politics look smart at the moment. But it is a close question as to whether he could play another game if later opinion surveys showed a public weariness with his continual announcements that it's fight time in America.
 Rejecting the recommendation of a top Justice Department investigator, Attorney General Janet Reno has decided not to name a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising in 1996, government officials said. The head of the department's campaign finance unit, Robert J. Conrad, told Ms. Reno in June that she should appoint a special counsel to investigate whether Mr. Gore had been truthful with investigators. Rejecting the recommendation of a top Justice Department investigator, Attorney General Janet Reno has decided not to name a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising in 1996, government officials said. The head of the department's campaign finance unit, Robert J. Conrad, told Ms. Reno in June that she should appoint a special counsel to investigate whether Mr. Gore had been truthful with investigators. But the officials said that Ms. Reno had apparently sided with others in the department who argued against choosing a special prosecutor, a move that would have given momentum to the criminal inquiry just as Mr. Gore's presidential campaign enters the final months.  Article, Page A19.
 Republican presidential nominee George W Bush aggressively defends his sweeping tax-cut proposal as both responsible and easily affordable in light of federal surplus projections; produces assortment of figures to show that plan would not require cuts in government spending; cites Congressional Budget Office projections of $4.6-trillion surplus over next ten years, including Social Security surplus, and says he needs to make that more clear to voters; photo; defiant declaration responds to Vice Pres Al Gore's repeated charge that Bush would coddle the wealthy at expense of fiscal prudence (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas aggressively defended his sweeping tax-cut proposal today, saying it was both responsible and easily affordable in light of federal surplus projections. Mr. Bush produced an assortment of figures to show that the plan would not require cuts in government spending. ''I've got to do a better job of making it clear,'' Mr. Bush told reporters in a surprising admission aboard his campaign plane. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas aggressively defended his sweeping tax-cut proposal today, saying it was both responsible and easily affordable in light of federal surplus projections. Mr. Bush produced an assortment of figures to show that the plan would not require cuts in government spending. ''I've got to do a better job of making it clear,'' Mr. Bush told reporters in a surprising admission aboard his campaign plane. The remark came just a day after Vice President Al Gore, suddenly resurgent in the polls, held an extensive discussion of his own suggested tax cuts, which are less than half the size of the ones proposed by Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush pointed to projections by the Congressional Budget Office that the federal government would run a surplus of about $4.6 trillion over the next 10 years, a figure that includes the Social Security surplus. He said voters needed to know that the projection represented money left over even after an expected growth in government spending of about $3.3 trillion. He also said that after setting aside the Social Security surplus to shore up that program, he would have roughly $2.3 trillion for tax cuts, new spending and debt reduction. Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut would cost $1.3 trillion over 10 years. Mr. Bush's uncharacteristic decision to revisit calculations that his campaign had previously outlined seemed to be an acknowledgment of a potentially troubling political reality for him. Many public opinion polls show that American voters, by and large, are not hankering for an enormous tax cut. And Mr. Gore, who has proposed only about $500 billion in tax cuts over the next decade, has been hammering the Texas governor on the issue, repeatedly claiming that Mr. Bush's plan unnecessarily coddles wealthy Americans at the expense of fiscal prudence. Mr. Gore said on Monday that Mr. Bush's tax cut would plunge the country into deficits, and today, in a speech in Milwaukee, the vice president added that it would ''wreck our good economy and make it impossible to modernize our armed forces and keep them ready for battle.'' The burden on Mr. Bush to convince voters that his tax cut is affordable was clear not only in his remarks today but also in those of Representative Ray LaHood, Republican of Illinois, who talked with reporters after a Bush rally in Peoria, Ill. Mr. LaHood had introduced Mr. Bush at today's event. Mr. LaHood said that while ''there's some appetite'' among voters for Mr. Bush's suggested tax cuts, ''I think he should also be talking about, 'I want to be able to pay down the debt, too.' I think that is problematic for people.'' When Mr. LaHood was asked if Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut was too large, both politically and practically, he said merely that it was ''an ambitious proposal'' and that ''Congress will have some say about it.'' During 14 months of campaigning, Mr. Bush has repeatedly said that he is committed to paying down the federal debt, but more often, when he talks about tax cuts, he simply tells people that he wants to return their hard-earned dollars to them. It is a pledge that draws roars of approval from his Republican base. While some of the numbers that Mr. Bush and his aides used today for surplus and growth projections had been rounded off, they were essentially valid, in line with estimates from the Congressional Budget Office, and some economists and political analysts consider Mr. Bush's tax cut to be reasonable. Mr. Bush and his advisers, for their part, say Mr. Gore is the candidate who is potentially endangering the economy by outlining significantly more new spending than Mr. Bush has. Today, they cited a report released recently by the National Taxpayers Union, a conservative group, that estimated that Mr. Gore's spending programs over the next 10 years would exceed the surplus, at least if Mr. Gore did not touch the part of that surplus generated by Social Security taxes, as both he and Mr. Bush have promised. The Bush campaign's concern about accusations that the governor's tax cut is too large was evident both today and on Monday in the aggressiveness of its responses to criticism by Mr. Gore. Karen P. Hughes, the communications director for the Bush campaign, said Mr. Gore had gone ''completely overboard'' and grossly distorted the substance and effect of Mr. Bush's proposal. Mr. Gore was ''trying to muddy the waters,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''He doesn't want the American people to know how much money's available.'' She also said that while Mr. Bush was calling for tax cuts for Americans at every income level, Mr. Gore's plan, directed more specifically at less affluent Americans, would leave 50 percent of taxpayers, totaling 50 million people, without any tax relief. Mr. Bush's plan would reduce federal tax rates across the income spectrum, lowering the highest rate to 33 percent from 39.6 percent and the lowest rate to 10 percent from 15 percent. The back-and-forth between the Bush and Gore campaigns about tax cuts, spending and fiscal responsibility reflected a larger aim: each candidate wants to be seen as the more prudent steward of the economy, an issue forever at the top of many voters' concerns. Mr. Bush's advisers have long reveled in how well Mr. Bush did in polls that asked voters which candidate they trusted more on the issue. But some of the recent surveys that showed Mr. Gore getting an enormous -- and possibly temporary -- bounce out of the Democratic convention also indicated that voters had at least temporarily reassessed his ability to manage the economy. In a CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll released on Sunday, 50 percent of adults surveyed said Mr. Gore would better handle the economy, while 40 percent said Mr. Bush would. Before either party's convention, a poll by the same organizations showed Mr. Bush with a 47 percent to 40 percent lead on the issue. The margin of sampling error was four percentage points. On the question of which candidate would better handle the federal surplus, Mr. Gore led Mr. Bush by 48 percent to 41 percent in the recent poll. In the one before the conventions, Mr. Gore trailed Mr. Bush, 38 percent to 49 percent.
 Assuming that discretionary spending does grow with the economy, the Auerbach-Gale paper projects a surplus over the next decade of only around $350 billion -- not even enough to make room for Al Gore's tax cuts, let alone Mr. Bush's.  (Mr. Bush's cuts would produce a trillion-dollar deficit.) And that's assuming that nothing goes wrong -- no recession, no military emergency. The paper goes on to argue that if you take account of the demands on federal funds that will come when baby boomers retire, we are actually in long-term deficit.
 Atty Gen Janet Reno decides not to name special prosecutor to investigate Vice Pres Al Gore's political fund-raising in 1996; rejects recommendation of Justice Department investigator Robert J Conrad Jr, and apparently sides with those in Justice Department who oppose new probe in midst of Gore's presidential campaign (M) Rejecting the recommendation of a top Justice Department investigator, Attorney General Janet Reno has decided not to name a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising activities in 1996, government officials said today. The head of the department's campaign finance unit, Robert J. Conrad Jr., told Ms. Reno in June that she should appoint a special counsel to investigate whether Mr. Gore had been truthful with investigators about his fund-raising activities. Rejecting the recommendation of a top Justice Department investigator, Attorney General Janet Reno has decided not to name a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising activities in 1996, government officials said today. The head of the department's campaign finance unit, Robert J. Conrad Jr., told Ms. Reno in June that she should appoint a special counsel to investigate whether Mr. Gore had been truthful with investigators about his fund-raising activities. But the officials said today that Ms. Reno has apparently sided with others in the department who argued against choosing a special prosecutor, a move that would have given new momentum to the criminal inquiry just as Mr. Gore's presidential campaign enters the final crucial months. The decision by Ms. Reno, which may be announced as early as Wednesday, is the latest chapter in a long-running and often bitter internal debate in the Justice Department over how to deal with Mr. Gore's role in raising money for the Democratic Party and the national ticket in 1996. It would also be the third time that Ms. Reno has rejected a recommendation to seek the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Gore. In 1997 and again in 1998, Ms. Reno declined to ask a special federal judicial panel to appoint an independent counsel to investigate Mr. Gore. Mr. Conrad, a career federal prosecutor from North Carolina who was appointed last December to lead the Justice Department's unit devoted to investigating possible fund-raising improprieties, made his recommendation after a four-hour interview with Mr. Gore conducted on April 18 at the vice president's official residence. It was the fifth time the vice president was questioned under oath about fund-raising issues. Mr. Conrad's recommendation for the appointment of a special prosecutor was based on Mr. Gore's responses in two areas: a fund-raising appearance by Mr. Gore at a Buddhist temple in California in April 1996 and fund-raising coffees for Democratic campaign donors at the White House. The news that the vice president will no longer have to face a criminal inquiry comes at an especially good time for the Gore-Lieberman campaign. Buoyed by his performance at the Democratic convention last week, Mr. Gore leads Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, in several national polls by margins ranging from 1 or 2 points to 5 points, even though none is statistically significant. One day after Mr. Conrad's recommendation was disclosed in June by Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican, Mr. Gore decided to release the transcript of the April interview, saying it demonstrated he had been truthful under oath and had nothing to hide. The transcript showed that Mr. Conrad, who posed most of the questions, was clearly skeptical about some of the responses. And it demonstrated that Mr. Gore bristled at some questions and showed flashes of anger at others. But Mr. Conrad reminded Mr. Gore that an inquiry in 1997 by a Senate panel, led by Senator Fred Thompson, a Tennessee Republican, found that supporters at the coffees  from November 1995 to October 1996 contributed a total of $7.7 million within one month of having attended them. When Mr. Conrad confronted the vice president with that contradictory information, Mr. Gore said, ''That seems inaccurate to me.'' Mr. Conrad, who was assisted in the interview by two F.B.I. agents, devoted most of the time to Mr. Gore's understanding of the principal purpose of the Buddhist temple event, a subject Mr. Gore had not been asked about in four previous interviews with investigators from the campaign finance unit. Mr. Conrad asked Mr. Gore about numerous memorandums from aides suggesting that it was widely known that the April 29, 1996, event at the Hsi Lai Temple in Hacienda  Heights, Calif., was intended to raise money for the Democratic Party. ''Yes,'' Mr. Gore replied. ''I did not know this was a fund-raiser,'' Mr. Gore replied. Mr. Gore seemed to bristle at the line of questioning, snapping at one point, ''I sure as hell don't recall having -- I sure as hell did not have any conversations with anyone saying this is a fund-raising event.'' Later in the interview, Mr. Gore inadvertently referred to the temple luncheon as a ''fund-raiser.'' The vice president's personal lawyer, James F. Neal, quickly advised Mr. Gore that he had misspoken.
 Al Gore stands before fellow VFW members at convention and rebuts Republican charges that readiness and morale of armed forces has declined during Clinton administration; recalls his own enlistment and longtime support in Congress for the military (S) Vice President Al Gore stood before fellow Veterans of Foreign Wars today and rebutted Republican charges that the readiness and morale of the armed forces had declined during the Clinton administration. Mr. Gore, who served as an Army journalist in Vietnam for five months in 1971, told delegates to the Veterans of Foreign Wars national convention here of his own enlistment, his work on the House Intelligence Committee and the Senate Armed Services Committee, his vote for the Persian Gulf war and his support in the White House for increased defense spending. Vice President Al Gore stood before fellow Veterans of Foreign Wars today and rebutted Republican charges that the readiness and morale of the armed forces had declined during the Clinton administration. Mr. Gore, who served as an Army journalist in Vietnam for five months in 1971, told delegates to the Veterans of Foreign Wars national convention here of his own enlistment, his work on the House Intelligence Committee and the Senate Armed Services Committee, his vote for the Persian Gulf war and his support in the White House for increased defense spending. ''It's that year-after-year commitment to a strong American defense,'' Mr. Gore said, ''that makes me so concerned when others try to run down America's military for political advantage in an election year. That's not only wrong in fact, it's the wrong message to send to our allies and adversaries across the world.'' Mr. Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, was referring to his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who preceded him here on Monday. Mr. Bush, who served in the Texas Air National Guard during the Vietnam War, said in his address to the veterans that ''the current administration had inherited a military ready for the dangers and challenges facing our nation'' but that ''the next president will inherit a military in decline.'' Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said today that Mr. Gore was refusing to take responsibility for the military's condition during the Clinton presidency. But Mr. Gore, who wore his own V.F.W. hat, defended the administration's record, saying that all 10 Army divisions were combat ready and that ''our military is the strongest and the best in the entire world.'' As in his speech to the Democratic National Convention last week, and in a television commercial released by the campaign today, Mr. Gore promoted his decision to enlist in the Army in 1969. In his remarks, he did not mention, as he does in the advertisement, that he enlisted despite having doubts about the war. Both Mr. Gore and his late father, Senator Albert Gore Sr., opposed the Vietnam War but the younger Mr. Gore enlisted, he has often said, because he knew that someone else from Tennessee would have to go in his place. Another factor he has mentioned was the potential damage to his father's 1970 re-election campaign if he had tried to avoid service. ''I don't pretend that my own military experience matches in any way what others here have been through,'' Mr. Gore said today. ''I didn't do the most, or run the gravest danger. But I was proud to wear my country's uniform. And my own experiences gave me strong beliefs about America's obligation to keep our national defenses strong.'' The vice president said he would push for a raise for military personnel and for improvements in military housing. He also pledged that ''in a Gore administration, I will make sure that no members of our armed forces ever have to rely on food stamps.'' About 6,000 servicemen and women are eligible for food stamps. Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane, said the vice president had  called for a 10-year, $127 billion increase in spending on military salaries, training and modernization and that those numbers may rise when Mr. Gore adjusts his budget proposals to reflect a growing surplus. Mr. Gore would maintain for 10 years the 3.7 percent annual increase in military pay that Congress passed and President Clinton signed this year, Mr. Lehane said. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, Mr. Gore's running mate, was one of eight senators to vote against a 4.8 percent military pay increase in 1999. He has said he did so because it was part of a Republican Pentagon spending package that he considered too costly. Later that year, he supported a less expensive bill that included a pay increase of the same size. Mr. Bush has said he would add $1 billion for an annual salary increase on top of the increases authorized in recent years. On Monday, he also proposed spending $310 million for construction and repair of public schools that serve the children of military personnel. Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion cut in income tax rates would be so deep that it would make it impossible to invest in the military.
 When Dick Cheney came to an elementary school here today to discuss the education policies of the Bush-Cheney ticket, he brought along a secret campaign weapon: his wife, Lynne V. Cheney. When Dick Cheney came to an elementary school here today to discuss the education policies of the Bush-Cheney ticket, he brought along a secret campaign weapon: his wife, Lynne V. Cheney. Mr. Cheney came to the school today to promote Gov. George W. Bush's ideas on education. He called for maintaining high educational standards and high expectations, keeping control of schools at the local level and more resources for schools. The campaign chose Kingsbury Elementary School as a backdrop because school administrators from there traveled to Mr. Bush's home state, Texas, several years ago to study its education system and, in some respects, to emulate it. Even before he addressed the group, he turned to Mrs. Cheney, who served as the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities in the Reagan and Bush administrations and later became a conservative commentator. ''It was my great good fortune, of course, to marry my high school sweetheart,'' he said, introducing her. Today Mr. Cheney did not address one of the more contentious education issues, Mr. Bush's call for using vouchers to send children in poor public schools to private schools, a move that Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, opposes. The issue was seized upon by a small band of protesters who stood outside the school.
 Op-Ed article by Nora Roberts, author of 135 romance novels, says romantic aspect of Al and Tipper Gore's prolonged kiss and embrace at Democratic National Convention seems to have eluded political commentators but was not missed by nation's women; says Gore's public expression of love and appreciation for life mate at moment he reached pinnacle of his career may gain him votes in November (M) When Al Gore planted a big kiss on his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic Convention, it wasn't the nice, firm and friendly peck it appeared she, and the rest of us, were expecting. It was, to me, sweet, sexy, amusing and romantic all at once. That's a lot of punch from one kiss. When Al Gore planted a big kiss on his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic Convention, it wasn't the nice, firm and friendly peck it appeared she, and the rest of us, were expecting. It was, to me, sweet, sexy, amusing and romantic all at once. That's a lot of punch from one kiss. Despite the endless speculation in the days since that this was all about  Mr. Gore showing the world he wouldn't be involved in any Monica Lewinsky-like scandals, what I saw in the Gores' kiss was a man and woman, married long enough to be grandparents, embracing at one of the high points of their personal and professional lives. If I'd been writing the internal dialogue of Al Gore, so often described as a cardboard man, when he pulled Tipper into that clinch, it would run something like this: ''This is our moment. Look where we are, after all these years. Look what we've achieved. Together. I love you.'' I think Mrs. Gore was, initially, a bit taken aback. But she rallied, put her arms around him and was as much a part of that moment, of that kiss, as he was. The embrace after the kiss was even sweeter, even more intimate, to my mind, than the kiss itself. This made them a team, demonstrated a passion between them and from them that I think women voters will admire and respect. We had a glimpse inside the heart when Mr. Gore embraced his wife before he addressed the world as the Democratic presidential nominee. That heart took one long, public moment to express love for a woman. A lot of us may pay more attention to Mr. Gore's words because of that quick, endearing and romantic impulse.
 Vice Pres Al Gore begins fall advertising campaign with 60-second biographical commercial in 16 states; ad described and assessed for accuracy (S) Vice President Al Gore began his fall advertising campaign yesterday with a 60-second biographical commercial in 16 states; a 30-second version will run in a 17th state, Iowa. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas began showing his fall campaign commercials on Monday in many of the same states, including major contested ones like Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio and Pennsylvania, where the Democrats need to win. Vice President Al Gore began his fall advertising campaign yesterday with a 60-second biographical commercial in 16 states; a 30-second version will run in a 17th state, Iowa. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas began showing his fall campaign commercials on Monday in many of the same states, including major contested ones like Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio and Pennsylvania, where the Democrats need to win. ON THE SCREEN Generic black-and-white film of police officers in helmets using nightsticks to beat demonstrators protesting the Vietnam War in 1969. Several photographs of Mr. Gore in his Army uniform, one with him sitting respectfully at his father's knee. The music swells. A black-and-white picture of Mr. Gore when he first ran for Congress. As the narrator talks of Mr. Gore's support for the war in the Persian Gulf, the film bursts into color and action, with camouflaged soldiers marching. THE SCRIPT Narrator: ''1969. America in turmoil. Al Gore graduates college. His father, a U.S. senator, opposes the Vietnam War. Al Gore has his doubts, but enlists in the Army. When he comes home from Vietnam, the last thing he thinks he'll ever do is enter politics. He starts a family with Tipper, becomes an investigative reporter. Then Al Gore decided that to change what was wrong in America, he had to fight for what was right. ''He ran for Congress. Held some of the first hearings on cleaning up toxic waste. Made the environment his cause. Broke with his own party to support the gulf war. Fought to reform welfare with work requirements and time limits. His fight now is to ensure that prosperity enriches all our families, not just the few. Strengthen Social Security. Take on big drug companies to guarantee prescription drugs for seniors. Hold schools accountable for results. Tax cuts for working families and the middle class. Al Gore. Married 30 years. Father of four. Fighting for us.'' ACCURACY This is essentially a promotional biography. It casts Mr. Gore's life decisions -- to enlist in the Army, for example -- in the most positive light. One of the few assertions that the Bush campaign challenges is the claim that Mr. Gore ''fought to reform welfare with work requirements and time limits,'' saying he stood on the sidelines. Mr. Gore was not a major player in drafting the plan offered by President Clinton or in the long debate. But when the Republicans sent Mr. Clinton a bill in July 1996, Mr. Clinton held a cabinet meeting, in which some officials voiced opposition. Mr. Gore strongly urged Mr. Clinton to sign the bill, which he did. SCORE CARD This feel-good film is an appeal to conservative Democrats in swing states. It emphasizes Mr. Gore's parting with the left wing of his party on important matters, from the Vietnam War to welfare reform, and casts him as a ''fighter.'' Although the narrator states that Mr. Gore had qualms about the war, the numerous pictures of him in uniform and the emphasis on his enlistment send the message that he not only supports the military but was also on active duty in contrast to Mr. Bush's service in the Texas Air National Guard. The commercial shows that Mr. Gore still wants to convey his human side to voters, and as the first commercial of the fall campaign, it sets an important marker for its positive tone.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column imagines being inside Vice Pres Al Gore's head as he feels empowered by polls showing him leading Gov George W Bush and obsesses over who voters want him to be (M) Bush thinks a St. Alban's boy like me can't win on class warfare. He can't even pronounce it! He calls it ''class warfore.'' I can't believe I ever trailed a free-trader who can't even spit out ''tariffs and barriers.'' For awhile he was saying ''terriers and bariffs.'' The other night in Des Moines he abbreviated it to merely ''terrors.''
 Bush Says Data Support His Plan for Tax Cuts  Gov. George W. Bush aggressively defended his sweeping tax cut proposal, saying it was both responsible and easily affordable in light of federal surplus projections, and he produced an assortment of figures to show that the plan would not require cuts in government spending. A Defense of Military Policy  Defense Secretary William S. Cohen, a Republican, has rejected criticism by Gov. George W. Bush that the Clinton administration is responsible for a weakened, overextended military, saying post-cold-war cutbacks, begun during Mr. Bush's father's presidency, reflected a strong, bipartisan demand for a ''peace dividend'' now that the United States no longer faced the Soviet Union. Vice President Al Gore stood before his fellow Veterans of Foreign Wars and rebutted Republican assertions that the readiness and morale of the armed forces had declined during the Clinton administration. No Special Prosecutor for Gore  Attorney General Janet Reno rejected the recommendation of a top Justice Department investigator and will not name a special prosecutor to investigate Vice President Al Gore's political fund-raising activities in 1996, government officials said. Editorials: The Kursk and the Kremlin; bail for Wen Ho Lee; Howell Raines on Al Gore's language.
 Mathew Littman letter disputes William Safire's August 21 Op-Ed article criticizing Vice Pres Al Gore acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention Re ''Parsing Gore's Speech,'' by William Safire (column, Aug. 21), about Al Gore's acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention: Re ''Parsing Gore's Speech,'' by William Safire (column, Aug. 21), about Al Gore's acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention: Mr. Safire is missing the zeitgeist when he says that Mr. Gore could have used some editing to make his words more memorable. What people want, in the age of ''Survivor,'' is authenticity. Mr. Gore read his own words, not prose crafted by professional speechwriters, whose job is to make the inauthentic sound real. We should give Al Gore credit for doing his own work. If his speech did not match the uplifting oratory of John F. Kennedy or Abraham Lincoln, he served himself well with his willingness not to be perfect. It only helped make the speech more endearing and in its own way quite memorable.
