 Vice Pres Al Gore escalates his attacks on pharmaceutical industry, criticizing makers of two prescription drugs by name, calling for greater competition and promoting his plan for a Medicare drug benefit; singles out Claritin, antihistamine made by Schering-Plough Corp, and arthritis drug Lodine, made by Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore today escalated his attacks against the pharmaceutical industry, criticizing the makers of two prescription drugs by name, calling for greater competition and promoting his plan for a Medicare drug benefit. The drug industry has long been one of Mr. Gore's corporate bogeymen, along with oil, tobacco and insurance. But in today's speech to a forum of elderly people at Florida State University, Mr. Gore expanded his criticism, saying he would veto any legislation extending monopoly patents for prescription drugs. ''You elect me president and I'll veto every one of those bills,'' he said. Vice President Al Gore today escalated his attacks against the pharmaceutical industry, criticizing the makers of two prescription drugs by name, calling for greater competition and promoting his plan for a Medicare drug benefit. The drug industry has long been one of Mr. Gore's corporate bogeymen, along with oil, tobacco and insurance. But in today's speech to a forum of elderly people at Florida State University, Mr. Gore expanded his criticism, saying he would veto any legislation extending monopoly patents for prescription drugs. ''You elect me president and I'll veto every one of those bills,'' he said. Mr. Gore singled out two drugs: Claritin, an antihistamine made by the Schering-Plough Corporation,  and the arthritis drug Lodine, made by Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, a subsidiary of the American Home Products Corporation. In the case of Claritin, Mr. Gore said its maker spent more money on advertising than on research. As for Lodine, which is prescribed for people and pets, he said that American Home Products charged pharmacies more than veterinarians. ''I'm all for them making profits and having more research and whatnot,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But I'm not going to stand by if they behave in an unfair way.'' Today's trip was Mr. Gore's second to Florida in less than a week, underscoring the importance his campaign places on the state. The governor here is Jeb Bush, the brother of Mr. Gore's Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Gore's address began a four-day trip devoted to health care. He expects to emphasize plans for a patients' bill of rights, expanded coverage for children, the solvency of Medicare and investments in medical research at stops in New Mexico, Oregon and Washington. The centerpiece of Mr. Gore's health care program is his proposal for a voluntary Medicare benefit that would provide prescription drug coverage for the elderly. About 13 million Medicare beneficiaries have no drug coverage, while many others pay expensive premiums through Medigap plans, Gore aides said. Under Mr. Gore's plan, older Americans with no coverage who have incomes of 135 percent of the poverty level or less -- about $12,000 for an individual and $14,000 for a couple -- would have their drugs covered without charge. Those with higher incomes would pay a premium on a sliding scale and would be reimbursed half the cost of their prescriptions up to $5,000 a year. After Medicare recipients paid $4,000 out of pocket for prescriptions, the government would pay all remaining costs. The Gore campaign estimates the proposal's cost at $253 billion over 10 years. The plan is complicated, and Mr. Gore misstated some details today. But his larger points were clear: He has a detailed plan, while Mr. Bush does not; his plan would be affordable within a balanced budget, while Mr. Bush, he says, cannot afford a comprehensive plan because of the size of his proposed income tax cut, which would consume $1.3 trillion of the federal surplus over 10 years. Mr. Bush has yet to propose a specific prescription drug plan, but his aides say he would build on the proposal of a bipartisan Congressional commission that would seek to spur competition between public and private plans for Medicare recipients, giving consumers a choice of plans, some of which would provide a drug benefit. Mr. Bush has also said he supports granting low-income elderly people a subsidy that they could use to buy prescription-drug insurance, but would leave the details to be determined in negotiations with Congress. Speaking to reporters on Air Force 2 today, Mr. Gore said, ''The time for generalities without specifics I think is just about over. Where specifics are concerned, it's kind of put up or shut up time.'' Mr. Gore's focus on prescription drugs coincided with the imminent release of a television advertisement on the topic by the Democratic National Committee. Both the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee began broadcasting advertisements on prescription drugs today. The Democratic commercial, which will appear in nine states, accuses Mr. Bush of ''siding with the big drug companies.'' And those companies were Mr. Gore's main target today. He described an industry that kept prices artificially high while its patents remained in effect. Speaking of Schering-Plough, Mr. Gore said: ''According to The Wall Street Journal they spend more money every year advertising Claritin and promoting Claritin than Coca-Cola spends to advertise and promote Coca-Cola. So if they're using these profits more for that than for research and if a lot of the most valuable research is being paid for by the taxpayers anyway, then I believe that we need more competition.'' Dan Bartlett, a Bush spokesman,  denounced Mr. Gore's proposals as a ''nationalized drug plan.'' Mr. Gore, speaking of the drug Lodine, and its prices, said, ''While it costs $108 a month for a person, it costs $37.80 for a dog.''
 Gov George W Bush attacks Vice Pres Al Gore on education policy, asserting that Clinton administration has complacently presided over 'a national tragedy'; Bush also responds to criticism from Gore campaign by announcing that he will unveil proposal to have federal government subsidize prescription drug purchases by low-income elderly; photo (M) Seeking to pull the campaign debate back onto what he considers his turf, Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked Vice President Al Gore on education policy today, asserting that the Clinton administration had complacently presided over ''a national tragedy'' in the public schools. But even as he tried to seize the offensive, Mr. Bush for the second straight week found himself responding to criticisms from the Gore campaign, this time, that he lacked a detailed plan for creating a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. Seeking to pull the campaign debate back onto what he considers his turf, Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked Vice President Al Gore on education policy today, asserting that the Clinton administration had complacently presided over ''a national tragedy'' in the public schools. But even as he tried to seize the offensive, Mr. Bush for the second straight week found himself responding to criticisms from the Gore campaign, this time, that he lacked a detailed plan for creating a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. In a sign that Mr. Gore's latest attack may have stung him a bit, Mr. Bush announced in a news conference today that he would spend part of next week unveiling a proposal to have the federal government subsidize prescription drug purchases by the low-income elderly. Mr. Bush's press office also spent much of the day hammering at Mr. Gore's proposal to create a prescription drug benefit under Medicare. Suggesting that the Gore plan reeked of big-government liberalism, the Bush campaign asserted that it would effectively raise taxes for most of the elderly and nationalize prescription drug policies, ''similar to Hillary Clinton's attempt to nationalize health care in 1993.'' ''It's remarkably like Mrs. Clinton's plan,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign. ''It is a government-run, one-size-fits-all plan. And just like her plan, the Democrats thought it was popular and would put Republicans on the defense. But once people look at the details, they will rebel against it.'' For all the discussion of health care, Mr. Bush intended today to kick off a week in which he will travel to New England, Ohio, Kentucky and Pennsylvania to promote his ideas for revamping the nation's public schools. He had also planned to spend last week discussing education, but was knocked off his message when he spent a good chunk of time defending his plan to cut income taxes across the board. The push and pull between the two campaigns to control the debate today made clear the issues they consider to be strongest for their candidates. Aides to Mr. Gore assert that voters trust Democrats more on health care, and they believe that the more Mr. Bush is forced to talk about it, the better the vice president will perform in the polls. ''This is an issue that is on Gore's territory,'' said an adviser to the vice president. ''The Republicans just don't get it. And they don't have a plan. So they fall back on tired old rhetoric.'' But the Bush campaign contends that Mr. Bush's focus on improving education, particularly for poor and minority students, underscores his commitment to ''compassionate conservatism.'' The governor's aides also believe that education provides a stark contrast between the two candidates' visions for government, and they have tried to use it to attack Mr. Gore's leadership abilities. ''Vice President Gore offers more of the same,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He will not end the status quo because he is the status quo. He offers the failed ideas of the past. I offer new ideas, ideas that are working and that can appeal both to Republicans and Democrats to break the gridlock of education in Washington.'' At his event outside the governor's mansion here today, Mr. Bush surrounded himself with teachers and school administrators from Kentucky, Ohio and Michigan -- all important swing states -- who have helped form a group called Educators for Bush that could provide a counterweight, albeit a mostly symbolic one, to the powerful teachers unions that support Mr. Gore. In his remarks, Mr. Bush touted his plan for funneling federal money to the parents of students in failing public schools so the students could attend other schools, public or private. He would also encourage the growth of charter schools, require annual state reading tests for students in grades three through eight, and reward districts that issue report cards on their schools. But the governor devoted almost as much time to attacking Mr. Gore's education policies as promoting his own. He asserted that Mr. Gore's proposals would provide only ''the illusion'' of school accountability. And he sharply criticized the Clinton administration's record, saying seven and a half years of ''neglect'' had led to a widening of the performance gap between the haves and have-nots. ''Nationwide, we are spending more on our public schools,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But the achievement gap between rich and poor, minority and nonminority, has remained the same or grown worse.'' More than Mr. Bush's plan, Mr. Gore's plan focuses heavily on increasing federal education spending -- by $115 billion over 10 years -- for things like modernizing crumbling schools, reducing class sizes and increasing teacher pay. ''Al Gore is proposing real reforms and resources to improve our public schools, while Bush is pushing a voucher plan that would drain money away from our public schools,'' said Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. After Mr. Bush's education event today, the governor was pressed on health care issues by reporters. Asked if he would sign legislation based on a bipartisan Senate plan, Mr. Bush offered a conditional yes. After the news conference, Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said it was not necessary for Mr. Bush to explain the details of a prescription drug plan, because those details could be left to the legislative process.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, supports vouchers that poor families can use for private-school tuition, saying it will force public schools to improve. His Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, says vouchers will drain needed resources from public schools.
 Article in series, Governor Bush's Journey, focuses on his intense involvement in his father's 1988 presidential campaign in which he got first real taste of national politics; Governor Bush learned from master strategist Lee Atwater how to maneuver through electoral shoals, but paradoxically remained largely oblivious to substance of father's campaign; pushed no particular agenda and seemingly never, of own volition, pressed for one policy or another; correspondence with father during Bush presidency reveals virtually no instance in which he urged him to take particular position on any issue; emerging portrait is of individual immensely talented in steering political ship, but who seems less concerned with precisely where ship of state is headed; seems less of political chameleon, than ad hoc decision-maker who lacks bedrock passions; photos (L) For months a young woman had been flirting with George W. Bush, resulting in a cash bet among co-workers about whether they would end up having an affair. And now the flirtation had provoked a crisis. Mr. Bush had told the woman off, humiliating her, and a top campaign official stormed into his office and rebuked him. For months a young woman had been flirting with George W. Bush, resulting in a cash bet among co-workers about whether they would end up having an affair. And now the flirtation had provoked a crisis. Mr. Bush had told the woman off, humiliating her, and a top campaign official stormed into his office and rebuked him. ''She's hurt,'' the official scolded, glaring down at Mr. Bush. ''You really hurt her.'' ''Good, good,'' Mr. Bush replied icily from his chair. ''I'm a married man. I'm glad she got the signal.'' It was the end of 1987 in Washington, in the decrepit eighth-floor headquarters of Vice President George Bush's presidential campaign. Doug Wead, then a campaign worker who happened to be in George W.'s office talking to him when the confrontation occurred, recalled the episode, along with a senior campaign official who also witnessed it. Mr. Bush, who had moved to Washington to help his father's campaign, even asked Mr. Wead to stick by when they were on the road and to stay with him in his hotel room until late at night, Mr. Wead said. The aim was to fend off the woman, whose seductive energies Mr. Bush valued so long as they were directed at voters. George W. Bush was getting a first-rate political education, and proving his skill in maneuvering through an often treacherous electoral world. He describes himself in those days as having been ''a warrior for George Bush,'' and he became a single-minded one, constantly and sometimes rudely driving home the sole goal of getting his father into the White House. And as he got his first real taste of national politics, Mr. Bush found that he loved it and was good at it. He also learned from a master strategist, Lee Atwater, how to woo baby boomers and destroy opponents. Yet one paradox stands out: Mr. Bush immersed himself back then in the practice of national politics while remaining largely oblivious to its substance. Some people get into politics because they feel passionately about certain issues; Mr. Bush's passion in the 1988 campaign was for his father. Likewise, the correspondence between father and son during the Bush presidency, obtained from the Bush presidential library through the Freedom of Information Act, turns up plenty of times when George W. asked his father to send autographs to Texas friends or even to consider particular people for federal jobs -- but virtually none in which he suggests that his father take a particular position on an issue. All of this paints Mr. Bush not as a political chameleon, exactly, but at least as an ad hoc decision-maker who lacks bedrock passions. Like President Ronald Reagan, Mr. Bush is an amiable leader with tremendous communication skills and limited interest in policy details, but Mr. Reagan had a clearly defined ideology -- he stood for something. Mr. Bush comes across as far more flexible in his beliefs, and it is much less clear what he stands for. The upshot is that Mr. Bush, in that first encounter with national politics, proved immensely talented at steering his ship to avoid shoals and rough seas, while keeping the passengers content. But he sometimes seemed less concerned with precisely where the ship of state was headed. George W. Bush was drawn into politics in part by his failings as a businessman. Mr. Bush's oil company in Midland, Tex., had been acquired by a larger concern, leaving him with a fancy salary as a consultant but no company to run. So he accepted a standing invitation from Mr. Atwater to join his father's presidential campaign. Republican campaign officials were nervous in April 1987 when Mr. Bush settled in a town house on Massachusetts Avenue and began working in the ratty Bush headquarters at 733 15th Street NW in Washington. He would sit in his bare office, door always open, his cowboy-booted feet on his desk, a wad of tobacco under his lip and a plastic foam cup in his hand as his spittoon. ''The general rule of the campaign staff is to keep as far away from the candidate's family as possible,'' said James Pinkerton, who had an office across the hall from Mr. Bush's. ''You can never win. You can never be as respectful as you need to be, you can never work as hard as you should.'' Yet even then Mr. Bush, the boss's boy, cut himself some slack. He never wanted to spend more than two nights on the road, so the campaign would fly him back from the West Coast so he could spend a night with his wife and daughters, and then fly him out West again. Any other campaign worker asking for such treatment probably would have been laughed at. Mr. Bush was a consultant and senior adviser, paid $5,000 a month, according to federal election records, but as he told a Texas reporter at the time, ''When your name is George Bush, you don't need a title in the George Bush campaign.'' James A. Baker recalled that ''he was in a sense his father's eyes and ears.'' Mr. Baker, President Bush's longtime friend and a cabinet member in the Reagan and Bush administrations, said, ''The president knew he could rely on W. to report truthfully on what was going on.'' Mr. Bush gradually won friends in the office with his humor and lack of pretension. ''He'd come in to a meeting with a cup'' -- his spittoon -- ''and stick out his hand with a big smile and say, 'Hi, I'm George Bush, and thanks for what you're doing for my dad,' '' said Richard Bond, then the national political director for the campaign. Mr. Bush won over doubters in part by poking fun at his own role, sometimes calling himself ''Maureen'' because Maureen Reagan was then notorious in her father's White House for forever telling staff members what to do. He also sometimes mocked those he regarded as the more pretentious associates of his father, like Nicholas Brady, the future treasury secretary. Of course, spitting tobacco juice and dropping references to his father can be seen as signals of a down-home, rustic style -- or of a dauphin's arrogance. And Mr. Bush, for all his charm, eventually became something of a hit man on behalf of his father. Mr. Bush once waited at Washington National Airport with Mr. Wead when they spotted an official on the vice president's staff arguing with an airline employee. They were too far away to overhear the details, but they saw that the official was preening and showing off his leather garment bag and suitcase, which he had decorated with the seal of the vice president. Mr. Wead said he did not recognize the man, but Mr. Bush did, and ''was muttering and simmering'' in embarrassment. In his ghostwritten autobiography, Mr. Bush suggests that one of his main roles was dealing with reporters. But aides say he did little of that, partly because he was too temperamental to be trusted with journalists. He tended to become enraged when he did not like the coverage. Sometimes he yelled or cursed at them because he thought their coverage mean-spirited, and once he strode over to a bewildered television reporter who had just finished his stand-up commentary and lashed out at him for his statements about the vice president. But Mr. Bush did play a more substantive role in putting out one media fire. It was in the summer of 1987, when rumors began circulating widely, without any particular evidence, that Vice President Bush was having an affair with a longtime assistant. Mr. Atwater and two other top aides went  to the vice president's residence to discuss it with him. They were on the front porch, deeply embarrassed, when Barbara Bush strolled up and asked what everyone was talking about. There was a mortified silence, until the vice president explained. Mr. Bush attended senior staff meetings and poked around in areas ranging from budgeting to convention planning. One role was to give a quick sense of how his father might react to a proposal, and another was to be a ''loyalty thermometer,'' to preach pure dedication to the Bush campaign. Mr. Bush was also deployed in the field to make speeches and press the flesh, and he impressed campaign officials with his willingness to slog through snow in Iowa and Michigan to meet tiny groups of voters. ''Once I saw a ballroom, and I thought he'd kill me because there were only three people there,'' recalled Mary Matalin, who was working on the Bush campaign and had overseen the event. ''That was in Michigan. But he just shook their hands and talked to them and never said a word to me about it.'' As the campaign went on, Mr. Bush increasingly became Mr. Atwater's friend and protector. In the frequent quarrels between the campaign staff and the vice-presidential staff, Mr. Bush was a forceful advocate for Mr. Atwater. Mr. Atwater was tremendously skilled at hardball, negative politics, and made good use of that skill in the 1988 campaign. Famously, he tarred the Democratic candidate, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, in connection with a state program that had allowed a black murderer named Willie Horton out on furlough; Mr. Horton  then stabbed a white man and raped a white woman. Critics complained that the references to Mr. Horton had a racist subtext, although the Bush campaign vigorously denied it. Aides say Mr. Bush was not much involved in the Horton episode or other mudslinging. Some say he lacked Mr. Atwater's exuberance at bare-knuckled methods.  Once, Mr. Atwater rushed into Mr. Bush's office, exultant at finding an old magazine article saying that Mr. Dukakis had once honored a witch. Mr. Wead recalls that Mr. Atwater was thrilled and urged that it be quietly circulated among evangelical Christians to discredit Mr. Dukakis. By all accounts, Mr. Bush showed a talent for managing people in the headquarters, reassuring them when they were upset and reproaching them when they were not working hard enough. One of Mr. Bush's most remarkable abilities, a particularly useful one in politics, is making people think he likes them and approves of what they are saying. He had a knack for melting into any group he wanted. He could speak in salty language with campaign workers one moment and talk about Christ as his personal savior with evangelicals the next. Mr. Wead recalled flying at night with Mr. Bush and a senator and congressman on a private jet, returning from a campaign appearance. They were relaxing in their seats, facing each other, and the lawmakers were drinking Scotch and sodas and getting steadily more talkative. ''So these guys were telling all these stories about their girlfriends,'' said Mr. Wead, who was sitting beside Mr. Bush. ''And they were talking about where they stashed their girlfriends and telling stories about close moments with wives and journalists. They were saying what they did with their girlfriends, and it got raunchier the more they drank. And George W. was taking it all in and laughing. Mr. Bush gave the impression of not liking Washington much. The 1988 election ended in victory for the Bushes, of course, but George W. immediately became impatient to return to Texas. He worked with mounting frustration on the presidential transition -- and, aides say, helped kill the prospect that Craig Fuller, his father's chief of staff, would become White House chief of staff. Mr. Bush complained that Mr. Fuller, among other sins, had been disrespectful to the Bush family, not even returning calls. So instead Mr. Bush pushed for John H. Sununu to get the job -- and Mr. Sununu did. Likewise, Mr. Bush pushed his father to give the job of chairman of the Republican National Committee to Mr. Atwater. ''Once his father won, and he settled in to this transition, he was very unhappy,'' said Roland W. Betts, a college friend who in early 1989 joined Mr. Bush and other investors in buying the Texas Rangers baseball team. ''He did not want to be there. He was looking for 'what am I going to do next?' And that's just when the Rangers came up.'' So Mr. Bush returned to Texas to run the Rangers, but he visited the White House periodically and became a trouble-shooter. In particular, aides say that Mr. Bush became disenchanted with Mr. Sununu and began plotting with them to oust him. In Mr. Bush's account, he virtually fired Mr. Sununu, but that seems to be an exaggeration. Instead, he took soundings and reported to his father -- and also spoke bluntly to Mr. Sununu of the dissatisfaction. Mr. Sununu, instead of resigning as expected, dug in. A stack of Bush administration documents, obtained through the Freedom of Information Act, offers a window into Mr. Bush's interests during his father's administration. The letters between George W. Bush and his father's White House are strikingly mundane. They almost never mention the grand issues of the day; nearly all have to do with paying back favors for old family friends in an old-boy network. A Texas autograph collector named John W. Dorman, for example, had written to Mr. Bush asking for help in getting the president's signature. So Mr. Bush forwarded it to his father's secretary, with the notation: ''Patti -- this guy has been loyal to all Bushes. Thanks, GB.'' The record shows that in each case, President Bush sent out the autographs, personal notes and other favors, usually with a plug along these lines: ''George, the Texas Rangers man, did indeed pass along your letter.'' The result was that Mr. Bush gained chits that would be useful when he began his own political career. Sometimes Mr. Bush also backed particular appointments, invariably citing loyalty as his reason. For example, Donald B. Ensenat, an old Yale fraternity brother and former roommate of Mr. Bush's, recommended Edith Brown Clement, known as Joy, for a federal judgeship. Mr. Bush forwarded the recommendation to C. Boyden Gray, his father's counsel, with the notation: ''Boyden -- Don Ensenat is a very good man and good friend of all Bushes. Please give Joy any consideration you can. Warmly, G.'' Ms. Clement became a federal district judge. The only item in the archive containing a policy suggestion from Mr. Bush is a 1992 letter to Samuel K. Skinner, who replaced Mr. Sununu as chief of staff, about oil prices. ''We have trouble in the oil states,'' Mr. Bush warned, ''because the president is viewed as favoring cheap energy.'' In the letter, Mr. Bush suggested that Mr. Skinner meet with representatives of independent oil companies to soothe them and that ''a mention in the State of the Union message would help.'' He added: ''Perhaps, the big guy could renew his call for a cleaner America and announce that ----% of the government fleet will be converted to use natural gas or fuel with farm product additives.'' Later that year, President Bush signed into law a bill providing that some new cars in government fleets would use natural gas. Mr. Bush was far less involved in the 1992 campaign than he had been in 1988. He did some public speaking and stayed in regular touch by telephone with campaign officials, but he did not move to Washington. Mr. Bush seethed from a distance at the portrayal of his father in the news media and at the way campaign officials blamed one another, leaked secrets and generally ran an undisciplined effort. Mr. Bush has seemed cool to Mr. Baker this year, and some attribute that to resentment at Mr. Baker's slowness in leaving the State Department for the White House in 1992 to help President Bush win re-election. Yet Mr. Bush may have learned even more from the failed 1992 campaign than from the successful 1988 one. ''I saw them jumping out the windows in 1992 looking for the next campaign,'' Mr. Bush told reporters last month. ''And that influenced me. Yeah, that influenced me. I worry that some may be wanting to be involved in my campaign to enhance their consulting businesses.'' One lesson Mr. Bush drew, friends say, is the importance of relying on old friends in a campaign, even over people with more experience. This year, he has surrounded himself with friends who are absolutely devoted to his career, and his leakproof staff has the discipline and harmony of a chorus line. What Mr. Bush has never picked up, despite having a father in the White House, is a fascination for the intricacies of foreign or domestic policy. Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's spokesman, recalls that when they met during his father's White House years they would chat about baseball, not government. Mr. Skinner puts it this way: ''He was certainly not immersing himself deeply in policy.'' Some other presidential candidates, of course, have been even more removed from politics and policy. Zachary Taylor had never voted in a presidential election before the one he won in 1848, and Dwight D. Eisenhower was so apolitical that he had to figure out whether he was a Democrat or Republican in the months before he ran for president in 1952. Mr. Bush was different in that he enjoyed the horse-race excitement of politics, but he was similarly bored by policy debates. So while Mr. Bush gained an excellent political education under his father, it was focused entirely on gaining power rather than using it. He came across as a work in progress, relishing the theater of politics, but leaving questions about what he would do with the reins of government if he got hold of them. Governor Bush's Journey This is the 11th article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will look at Al Gore's midlife crisis and the book he wrote to deal with it.
 Mr. Lieberman was not alone yesterday in invoking a public role for religious belief. In a speech to a B'nai B'rith convention in Washington, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee for president, spoke of his support for Israel and also praised the work conducted by faith-based social programs. In his speech, Mr. Bush said, ''Our nation is chosen by God and commissioned by history to be a model to the world of justice and inclusion and diversity without division. Jews and Christians and Muslims speak as one in their commitment to a kind, just, tolerant society.'' Mr. Foxman said he had not been aware of Mr. Lieberman's  or Mr. Bush's comments yesterday. He said the league, a division of B'nai B'rith, had not received a reply from Mr. Lieberman. Candidates in the presidential campaign have expressed their religious faith in public terms on previous occasions. During a debate among the Republican presidential candidates in December, Mr. Bush identified Jesus as his favorite philosopher. The same month, Vice President Al Gore, now the Democratic presidential nominee, told an interviewer for ''60 Minutes'' that he considered himself a born-again Christian. ''We drew a line during the primaries for Bush and Gore,'' he said. ''And we now think Senator Lieberman crossed it.''
 Aides to Gov. George W. Bush are objecting to the three debates that have been proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The aides said they did not want to commit to three debates on prime-time television and wanted a more relaxed, conversational format. They also are concerned about the site of one debate -- near the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston. Aides to Gov. George W. Bush are objecting to the three debates that have been proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The aides said they did not want to commit to three debates on prime-time television and wanted a more relaxed, conversational format. They also are concerned about the site of one debate -- near the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston.
 Margherita Davis letter on Bruce Bartlett's Aug 22 article on Vice Pres Al Gore's tax-cut plan questions Bartlett's call for letting taxpayers apportion their tax dollars In ''The Cost of Keeping Gore's Promises'' (Op-Ed, Aug. 22), Bruce Bartlett argues the virtue of returning tax dollars to the taxpayer, for apportionment. My question: How much cancer research can (or will) an individual taxpayer purchase? In ''The Cost of Keeping Gore's Promises'' (Op-Ed, Aug. 22), Bruce Bartlett argues the virtue of returning tax dollars to the taxpayer, for apportionment. My question: How much cancer research can (or will) an individual taxpayer purchase?
 Kevin Egan letter on Bruce Bartlett's Aug 22 article holds Vice Pres Al Gore's tax-cut plan might help reduce income inequality, while Gov George W Bush's plan would widen gap between rich and poor Bruce Bartlett (Op-Ed, Aug. 22) worries that Al Gore's preference for tying tax cuts to specific taxpayer behavior is little different from direct spending; he then contrasts that proposal to George W. Bush's across-the-board cuts, a difference from which he deduces an ultimately lower cost for the Bush plan. But if Mr. Bartlett wants to be intellectually consistent, he should also decry the enormous range of business tax deductions for specific taxpayer behavior, which cost the government many times the amount that Mr. Gore's proposals would. Bruce Bartlett (Op-Ed, Aug. 22) worries that Al Gore's preference for tying tax cuts to specific taxpayer behavior is little different from direct spending; he then contrasts that proposal to George W. Bush's across-the-board cuts, a difference from which he deduces an ultimately lower cost for the Bush plan. But if Mr. Bartlett wants to be intellectually consistent, he should also decry the enormous range of business tax deductions for specific taxpayer behavior, which cost the government many times the amount that Mr. Gore's proposals would. There is a further difference between the two philosophies, though, about which Mr. Bartlett remains silent: the Gore proposal might help reduce the steadily increasing income inequality in America. The Bush proposal will instead accelerate the growing division between the wealthiest and the poorest in our country.
 Gore Names Drug Companies  Vice President Al Gore escalated his attacks on the pharmaceutical industry, calling for greater competition and singling out Schering-Plough, which makes the allergy medication Claritin, and American Home Products, the parent of Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, which makes Lodine, an arthritis medicine. Bush Assails Gore on Schools  Gov. George W. Bush said the Clinton administration had complacently presided over ''a national tragedy'' of public school decline. He also said would unveil a proposal next week to have the government subsidize prescription drug purchases by the low-income elderly. Bush Balks on Debate Plans  The Bush campaign has raised objections over format, one site and network coverage of three presidential debates proposed by an independent commission that has set up such debates since 1988.
 The current tension between prosperity and insecurity is also playing a role in the presidential campaign, analysts said, as Vice President Al Gore has tried both to claim credit for the economy's strong performance and to soothe traditional Democratic Party constituencies who may not be keeping up with pledges to improve education and health care. George W. Bush, the Republican candidate, faces a similar tension in pushing a broad-based tax cut that is supposed to offer financial relief to the middle class, but that has been attacked as too generous to the wealthy and as an excessive drain on future budget surpluses.
 Rather than grousing about the Hansen study, however, environmentalists should be extolling it as the greatest news in years. First, it revives hope for the Kyoto agreement -- which, at the insistence of State Department negotiators and Vice President Al Gore, contains a little-noticed clause saying that reductions in other greenhouse gas can be substituted for cuts in carbon dioxide. A Kyoto treaty that is fixated on reducing fossil fuel use may never be ratified, but one that goes after methane and SF5 CF3 , seems eminently practical, politically.
 ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial opens with a shot of prescription drug bottles. Then Mr. Bush speaking in front of an American flag, meeting with elderly people, shaking hands at an airport rally and speaking from a podium. Vice President Al Gore is shown, looking embarrassed, on television. Then, reinforcing the words of the announcer, graphics declare: ''Interfere with doctors,'' ''The Gore Prescription Plan: Bureaucrats Decide,'' and ''The Bush Rx Plan: Seniors Choose.'' ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial opens with a shot of prescription drug bottles. Then Mr. Bush speaking in front of an American flag, meeting with elderly people, shaking hands at an airport rally and speaking from a podium. Vice President Al Gore is shown, looking embarrassed, on television. Then, reinforcing the words of the announcer, graphics declare: ''Interfere with doctors,'' ''The Gore Prescription Plan: Bureaucrats Decide,'' and ''The Bush Rx Plan: Seniors Choose.'' The commercial closes with a glimpse of Mr. Bush, campaigning in shirt sleeves. THE SCRIPT -- Narrator: Under Clinton-Gore, prescription drug prices have skyrocketed -- and nothing's been done. George Bush has a plan: add a prescription drug benefit to Medicare. Mr. Bush: Every senior will have access to prescription drug benefits. Announcer: And Al Gore? Gore opposed bipartisan reform. He's pushing a big-government plan that lets Washington bureaucrats interfere with what your doctors prescribe. The Gore prescription plan: bureaucrats decide. The Bush prescription plan: seniors choose.'' ACCURACY -- On its central claim, zero. Mr. Bush does not have a prescription drug plan. He has said he likes some elements of plans proposed in Congress, but has not endorsed any. His running mate, Dick Cheney, said on Sunday, ''We will shortly have a detailed proposal to put forth.'' When the commercial accuses Mr. Gore of favoring a plan that would let bureaucrats override doctors' prescriptions, it is mistaken. The administration proposal would involve hiring private industry managers, like those who administer insurance plans today. The managers could establish lists of drugs allowable under Medicare, but those limits could be overridden by any doctor whose prescription identified a particular drug as ''medically necessary.'' Other advertisements for Mr. Bush are available from The New York Times on the Web: www.nytimes.com/politics
 In ''Cradle'' you're either fer us or agin us. And at a time when Al Gore is casting himself as a populist, the paradigms have obviously taken on some ambiguity.
 SURVEYS INDICATE A CLOSE RACE -- Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are in a dead heat in two new presidential polls, evidence that Mr. Gore is holding his postconvention poll bounce and could make it a close race. A CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll of likely voters showed Mr. Bush at 46 percent, Mr. Gore at 45 percent, the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, at 3 percent and the Reform Party candidate Patrick J. Buchanan at 1 percent. A poll by ICR of Media, Pa., showed Mr. Gore at 44 percent and Mr. Bush at 41 percent among registered voters. Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore by as much as 18 points before the Democratic National Convention in mid-August, but Mr. Gore has closed the gap and has even led in some polls. SURVEYS INDICATE A CLOSE RACE -- Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are in a dead heat in two new presidential polls, evidence that Mr. Gore is holding his postconvention poll bounce and could make it a close race. A CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll of likely voters showed Mr. Bush at 46 percent, Mr. Gore at 45 percent, the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, at 3 percent and the Reform Party candidate Patrick J. Buchanan at 1 percent. A poll by ICR of Media, Pa., showed Mr. Gore at 44 percent and Mr. Bush at 41 percent among registered voters. Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore by as much as 18 points before the Democratic National Convention in mid-August, but Mr. Gore has closed the gap and has even led in some polls. Mr. Bush led among independents in the latest CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll by 44 percent to 36 percent, and the candidates were tied among independents in the ICR poll. The CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll of 664 likely voters was taken Friday through Sunday. The ICR poll of 784 registered voters was taken Thursday through Sunday. Both polls had error margins of four percentage points.
 Mr. Hastert's offer comes just days after Governor George W. Bush found himself defending his proposed tax cut, and admitting that he needed to do a better job of promoting it. Scott McClellan, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said the Texas governor supported a $1-an-hour increase in the minimum wage although he did not know if Mr. Bush supported the specific details in the compromises being discussed by Mr. Hastert and the Democrats.
 Aides to Gov George W Bush balk at series of three presidential debates proposed by Commission on Presidential Debates, independent commission, saying they do not want to commit to three sessions that would be broadcast in prime time by three major networks; reportedly object to site of one of proposed debates; prefer relaxed conversational format, possibly with candidates sitting at table, with moderator who is not too adversarial (M) Aides to Gov. George W. Bush are balking at a series of three presidential debates proposed by an independent commission, saying they do not want to commit to three sessions that would be broadcast in prime time by the three major networks. Aides to Gov. George W. Bush are balking at a series of three presidential debates proposed by an independent commission, saying they do not want to commit to three sessions that would be broadcast in prime time by the three major networks. Mr. Bush's preferences were conveyed in interviews with campaign officials and have not formally been made to the Commission on Presidential Debates, which has set up presidential debates starting with the 1988 campaign. Even so, those preferences have caused something of a standoff with Vice President Al Gore, who readily accepted the commission's plans for three debates. Mr. Gore has accused Mr. Bush of maneuvering to reduce his exposure against him. The vice president has far more national debate experience than Mr. Bush, the governor of Texas. Told of the Bush campaign's misgivings, she said: ''I would certainly hope that this commission isn't being seen as the bad guy. The commission was set up to try to represent the interests of the public.'' The commission is headed by Paul G. Kirk, the former chairman of the Democratic Party, and Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., the former chairman of the Republican Party. Officials of the Bush campaign insisted that Mr. Bush was ready -- and eager -- to face off with Mr. Gore, but some viewed the commission as trying to dictate their debate strategy. ''We feel we have a lot of different options, and we're going to look at all the options,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. Other Bush aides said one option would be to agree to a debate on a Sunday morning public-affairs program, which would draw a far smaller audience than a prime-time event. Several Bush officials and outside advisers said in interviews that they feared that the commission might pick moderators who would be too aggressive. The moderator in 1996 -- Jim Lehrer of PBS -- was hardly known as combative. Mr. Bush ''feels this should be more of a discussion and less trying to be a gotcha format,'' one Bush campaign official said. Ed Gillespie, a Republican consultant and an adviser to the Bush campaign, said of the questioners at debates: ''Everyone tries to be the one that trips up a candidate. That's the mind-set that's by and large at play.'' Some Bush officials said they also objected to the proposed site of the first debate because of its proximity to the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston. The actual site is the University of Massachusetts, which sits on Columbia Point, a property shared with the Kennedy library. The library is a partner with the commission in providing educational programs tied to the debate. Bush officials complained that holding a debate near the library of a Democratic president was unfair. ''At face value,'' said one Bush official, ''it seems difficult to argue that it's neutral territory.'' In their eagerness to gain the most leverage over what has become the most-watched events of the political season, campaigns always posture and position during the run-up to the presidential debates. Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush say they expect that debates will take place. ''I know we're going to have three debates,'' Mr. Bush said at a news conference in Austin today. ''I look forward to it.'' Mr. Gore has presented himself as much more willing to debate than Mr. Bush. He has been calling for twice-weekly debates with Mr. Bush since March. But his aides insist that before they participate in any debates with the governor, Mr. Bush has to agree to the commission's three face-offs. Mocking Mr. Bush as reluctant to debate, Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said, ''George W. Bush's ideal debate would take place on a local cable access channel in Austin during the Olympic finals of the women's gymnastic contest.'' Mr. Bush's aides insist they are not ducking, and in fact are calling their proposal for five debates -- three presidential and two vice-presidential -- a record number. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, accused Mr. Gore of playing games by making any other debates contingent on the candidates' agreement first to take part in the commission debates. He said the commission had ''equal standing'' with other prospective debate sponsors, and that the campaign felt no obligation to agree to the commission's proposal. William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, and Donald Evans, his counterpart with the Bush campaign, have spoken twice about the debates, most recently late last week, according to aides in both camps. But both sides said no genuine negotiations had begun. Bush campaign officials were particularly worried that Mr. Buchanan would use such a forum to hammer away at the governor. Karl Rove, the Bush campaign chairman, questioned whether the commotion over debates was necessary. ''Absent some extraordinary mistake -- Reagan blowing the first debate in '84 or Ford giving away Eastern Europe in '76 -- debates generally tend to reinforce the partisans,'' Mr. Rove said. But, he quickly added that because ''the race is going to be very tight,'' even a 1 percent shift because of debates ''could make a difference.''
