 The ruling comes as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential candidate, has faced accusations of striking inadequacies in the state's health care for poor and uninsured children. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush's office, said the state was spending more money on Medicaid outreach programs. Ms. Zinn noted that lawmakers including Governor Bush have pushed tax cuts, money that could have gone toward health care. The tax cuts pushed by Mr. Bush have become a political issue as the state has run into a larger than expected budget shortfall, due in part to higher Medicaid expenses from rising prescription costs.
 Mr. Vajpayee's spokesman, H. K. Dua, said that the prime minister would still depart on Sept. 5 for a week and a half in the United States that will include a New York visit and an address to Congress, as well as separate meetings with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore and a trip to Silicon Valley.
 ON THE SCREEN -- A druggist filling a prescription, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, an old woman, a hand on a wheelchair, an elderly couple, a clerk interviewing an elderly woman, an elderly man, two shelves of pill bottles, a woman on crutches, Vice President Al Gore, a pill bottle, a prescription envelope being handed to a woman, Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore. Graphics repeat most of the words in the announcer's script. Flitting across the screen almost as fast as the pictures and too fast to read are lines across the top saying things like ''Source: C.B.O. Analysis H.R. 4680 6/28/00; U.S.A. House D.P.C. 4/14/00.'' That translates to Source: Congressional Budget Office Analysis of H.R. 4680, a bill proposed by Representative Bill Thomas, a California Republican, and Senator John B. Breaux, a Louisiana Democrat, that would subsidize insurance companies to provide drug insurance. The companies oppose the bill, which the House passed, 217 to 214, on June 28. THE SCRIPT -- Narrator: The issue: prescription drugs. George Bush's approach leaves millions of seniors with no prescription drug coverage. None. And Bush forces seniors he does include to go to H.M.O.'s and insurance companies for coverage. The National Council of Senior Citizens says, ''The Bush approach is favored by big drug companies and leaves millions with no help.'' Al Gore is taking on the big drug companies to pass a real prescription drug benefit that covers all seniors. George Bush? Siding with the big drug companies. The Gore plan: fighting for our seniors.'' ACCURACY -- On its major point, a stretch. Democrats contend that Mr. Bush wants it both ways by saying that he has a plan without giving any specifics that could be criticized. But the Democrats are also trying to have their cake and eat it, too. As Mr. Gore himself has been insisting daily, Mr. Bush does not have a prescription drug plan. ''Put up or shut up,'' he said on Monday. But the Democratic committee justifies its accusation that millions of seniors would be denied drug coverage under Mr. Bush's ''approach'' by pointing to analyses, some independent and some quite partisan, of bills he has said he likes but wants to improve upon. It is correct that the drug companies favor an approach that would have private insurers, and not the federal government, providing drug coverage. SCORECARD -- This is almost entirely an attack advertisement, without explanation of what Mr. Gore would do himself to see that the elderly have prescription drug coverage. The fact that it is, formally at least, coming from the Democratic National Committee and not from Mr. Gore's campaign may be intended to distance the candidate from its negativity. But that is a distinction without a difference to viewers.
 Maureen Dowd's Op-Ed column examines Vice Pres Al Gore's angry populism and whether it can stir up masses in an America, where masses are already 'fat and sated' (M) Al Gore has been doing better. But there's still a lot of skepticism about whether his angry populism can work. Al Gore has been doing better. But there's still a lot of skepticism about whether his angry populism can work. Mr. Gore can't win simply by firing the ire of the poor and middle class because there aren't enough of them any more. (Besides, not enough of them vote or give soft money). He needs to find a way to incite the yuppies, who like to think of themselves as middle class anyway. It is not as hard as it seems. Mr. Gore simply has to pit the have-nots and haves against the have-it-alls. You don't need George W. Bush if you have your own personal tax consultant to dodge and shelter you.
 First freshman class admitted to Florida's state college system since Gov Jeb Bush ended race-based admissions shows increases of 12 percent in minority students, rather than decrease predicted by critics; top twenty percent of graduating seniors from all state high schools are admitted; education expert Sam J Yarger says plan merely creates new quota system, and that real question is whether minorities are entitled to seats when there is a nonminority applicant with better credentials (S) The first freshman class selected to Florida's state college system since Gov. Jeb Bush put an end to race-based admissions has shown, instead of a decrease in minority enrollment, an increase of 12 percent. Mr. Bush, whose plan allows the admission of the top 20 percent of graduating seniors from each state high school, whether predominantly black, white or Hispanic, said the increase was proof that diversity in other college systems could be accomplished without affirmative action. The first freshman class selected to Florida's state college system since Gov. Jeb Bush put an end to race-based admissions has shown, instead of a decrease in minority enrollment, an increase of 12 percent. Mr. Bush, whose plan allows the admission of the top 20 percent of graduating seniors from each state high school, whether predominantly black, white or Hispanic, said the increase was proof that diversity in other college systems could be accomplished without affirmative action. ''The most diverse in history,'' Mr. Bush said of the incoming freshmen, who are the first students to be admitted without affirmative action mandates since racial set-asides were put in place in Florida in 1978. Mr. Bush dismissed the criticism as he celebrated what he said was a  clear victory in a difficult social and political arena. Black leaders here had said the plan would cripple college admissions of blacks. ''I've spent the last 10 months getting blistered by people who didn't believe we could do this,'' Mr. Bush said. Unlike in Texas and California, which have similar programs that produced initial drops in minority enrollment, ''we did not wait for a legal challenge or a ballot initiative,'' said Mr. Bush. Texas courts threw out affirmative action laws in 1996, but the state eventually restored its racial mix on college campuses under a plan in Texas under Gov. George W. Bush that admitted the top 10 percent of students in each school. Jeb Bush said he used elements of the Texas plan in his own. But it was California's end to affirmative action, in a statewide vote in 1997, that may have forced the Florida governor's hand. Ward Connerly, a businessman and black conservative who led the battle to end affirmative action in California, had turned his attentions to Florida, and Mr. Bush's One Florida plan was seen as a way to blunt that looming battle in a year that his brother was running for president. Critics of the plan, who fought against it when Mr. Bush unveiled it in November, said it is too soon to claim victory, and said the affirmative action program he ended was already steadily improving minority enrollment. Mr. Bush said the Florida plan does something old affirmative action did not do: It allows students to pursue an education without the stigma of set-asides and lowered admission standards. Mr. Bush said the state's universities aggressively recruited the best minority students who qualified under the plan. ''We should call Florida One Bush's Theory of Relativity,'' he said.
 Ready for Prime Time  Gov. George W. Bush, disputing suggestions that he was hesitant to commit to prime-time presidential debates, said he wanted all the debates with Vice President Al Gore to be during evening hours, when television audiences are largest. Gore Focuses on Health Care  Vice President Al Gore, campaigning in New Mexico, emphasized his plan for providing health care coverage for the country's 11 million uninsured children. Rise in Minority Enrollment  The first freshman class selected for Florida's state college system since Gov. Jeb Bush ended race-based admissions last year has shown an increase of 12 percent in minority enrollment. Mr. Bush said the figures proved diversity could be achieved without affirmative action. Critics said one year's enrollment was insufficient for such a declaration.
 HOLLYWOOD BACKLASH -- Joe Eszterhas, the Hollywood screenwriter whose credits include ''Basic Instinct'' and ''Showgirls,'' is urging industry colleagues, many of them Democrats, not to contribute to the Democratic Party until Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut explain their position on ''freedom of creative expression.'' In a full-page ad in Tuesday's Daily Variety, the widely read trade paper, Mr. Eszterhas took issue with comments by Mr. Lieberman about excessive sex and violence in movies and television shows. He accused Mr. Lieberman of making ''not so veiled threats'' about withholding license renewals, instituting federal prosecutions and legislating censorship if writers and studios do not censor themselves. Mr. Lieberman's spokeswoman, Kiki McLean, replied, ''When there are products that are not necessarily good for our kids and our families, he's not going to be shy to challenge the industry. He's somebody who believes strongly in the First Amendment and has always had an open dialogue about what we can do voluntarily to help our families do better.'' HOLLYWOOD BACKLASH -- Joe Eszterhas, the Hollywood screenwriter whose credits include ''Basic Instinct'' and ''Showgirls,'' is urging industry colleagues, many of them Democrats, not to contribute to the Democratic Party until Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut explain their position on ''freedom of creative expression.'' In a full-page ad in Tuesday's Daily Variety, the widely read trade paper, Mr. Eszterhas took issue with comments by Mr. Lieberman about excessive sex and violence in movies and television shows. He accused Mr. Lieberman of making ''not so veiled threats'' about withholding license renewals, instituting federal prosecutions and legislating censorship if writers and studios do not censor themselves. Mr. Lieberman's spokeswoman, Kiki McLean, replied, ''When there are products that are not necessarily good for our kids and our families, he's not going to be shy to challenge the industry. He's somebody who believes strongly in the First Amendment and has always had an open dialogue about what we can do voluntarily to help our families do better.'' LABOR TO PUT GORE ONLINE -- The A.F.L.-C.I.O. has created a Web site where Vice President Al Gore will hold a live Webcast on Labor Day for union members. The Web site will allow union members to send e-mail messages to political candidates, including the vice president, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and members of Congress. The Web site -- www.workingfamilies.com -- will also feature a speech by John J. Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, and video messages from what labor leaders call ''The Texas Truth Squad,'' a group of workers from Texas who are traveling the country to accuse Governor Bush of doing little on issues that unions care about. On the site, users will also be able to register to vote and can examine the voting record of candidates for Federal office. The site will be up from Aug. 30 to Sept. 6. LIEBERMAN ON GORE -- Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut has a new, pointed pitch about his Democratic running mate. He says Vice President Al Gore is the best leader for the information age. Speaking to several thousand communications workers in Anaheim, Calif., yesterday, Mr. Lieberman warned that the United States cannot afford to have a president in the 21st century who does not understand the new economy and technology. Then, in a not-so-veiled dig at whether Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has the depth and preparedness to lead in a high-tech age, he invoked a couple of not-so-swift television cartoon characters, saying, ''We as a nation can't afford to make Barney Rubble investments in a George Jetson world.'' Mr. Lieberman said that Mr. Gore not only understands the new economy and technology but wants to speed its advances by investing in training people and by making college tuition tax-deductible.
 George W Bush has visited 100 schools so far during his presidential campaign, calling for expanded federal role in education just four years after Republican party called for abolishing Education Department altogether; Al Gore responds to challenge on issue that has been strong for Democrats, calling for 'revolutionary' improvements; photos; Bush focuses on making schools more accountable for student performance, giving only modest extra funding for reading program; Gore would increase federal spending by fifty percent, $115 billion over next decade, with federal funds for teacher salaries, preschool programs and school construction; both candidates have abandoned party dogma to move to center, particularly on vouchers (M) His campaign has kept careful count. When Gov. George W. Bush goes to Springfield High School in Holland, Ohio, outside Toledo on Thursday, he will be making his 100th visit to a school since he began running for president 14 months ago. His campaign has kept careful count. When Gov. George W. Bush goes to Springfield High School in Holland, Ohio, outside Toledo on Thursday, he will be making his 100th visit to a school since he began running for president 14 months ago. Five years after the Republican Congress shut down the government in part because of the money President Clinton wanted to spend on education, four years after Bob Dole embraced a Republican platform that advocated abolishing the Department of Education, Mr. Bush has made an expanded federal role in education a central campaign issue. Vice President Al Gore, for his part, has responded to the challenge  on an issue that has been especially strong for Democrats ever since President Lyndon B. Johnson got the first law on federal aid to public schools enacted 35 years ago over the opposition of most Republicans. ''I think it's time to make revolutionary improvements in our public schools the No. 1 priority in the nation,'' Mr. Gore declared in a speech last week in Chicago to the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners. Mr. Bush focuses on making schools more accountable for their students' performance, and talks about the importance of local control. The modest additional spending he proposes would go primarily toward a program to help disadvantaged children learn to read. Mr. Gore, by contrast, would increase federal spending on education by 50 percent, $115 billion over the next decade. He would have the federal government contribute money to raise teachers' salaries -- an area Washington has always shunned -- and large amounts would be spent on  preschool programs and school construction. Before the Republican convention  last month, Mr. Bush intervened with the party's platform committee to knock out language that called for closing the Department of Education. Instead, Mr. Bush would expand the department's authority by giving it jurisdiction over Head Start, the preschool program for poor children that is now in the Department of Health and Human Services. Mr. Bush has also expressed a more limited advocacy of vouchers than the conservatives of his party have. Many Republicans in Congress would like to give all parents vouchers to help pay their children's tuition at private schools. Mr. Bush would allow vouchers only if a school failed for three years to make the improvements needed to meet state standards, after repeated warnings. ''Under Bush, education has come of age for Republicans,'' said Denis Doyle, a political scientist and a  founder of Schoolnet.com, a company that provides Internet services for school districts. ''On education, Mr. Bush looks more like Mr. Gore than he looks like Mr. Dole.'' Mr. Gore emphasizes stiffer standards for teachers, a position not likely to be met enthusiastically by the teachers' unions, which are important Democratic constituents. More than 300 delegates at the Democratic convention were members of the National Education Association or the American Federation of Teachers. Mr. Gore would require all new teachers to pass qualification tests. He would ensure that all secondary school teachers have college majors or minors in the subjects they teach and that all primary school teachers are trained in teaching reading. Teachers would have to pass rigorous evaluations to keep their licenses. And communities would be encouraged to develop procedures for discharging poor teachers and assigning teachers to particular schools based on expertise rather than just seniority. But her union's members might not feel that way. For example, when Mr. Gore spoke last spring to the Michigan Education Association, he was vigorously applauded when he described his plans for recruiting teachers and increasing salaries. But his remarks about making teachers more accountable were met with icy silence. Polls show that Mr. Bush's strategy has helped close a gap between Republicans and Democrats on education. In 1988, when Mr. Bush's father was running for president, 55 percent of those questioned in a New York Times/CBS News poll said Democrats were more likely to improve education; 23 percent said Republicans were. In answer to the same question last month, the Democrats' lead narrowed, with 45 percent of respondents favoring Democrats' chances of improving education and  33 percent the Republicans'. Both candidates offer a ream of specific policy proposals. Mr. Bush would spend $1 billion a year for five years to train teachers to diagnose and correct reading problems. Just last week, he offered modest proposals to build and repair schools on and near military bases and to give grants to historically black and Hispanic colleges. Mr. Gore would spend $50 billion over 10 years to provide public preschools for all 4-year-olds and many 3-year-olds. He would offer interest-free bonds for school construction and modernization, provide money for raising teacher pay, award signing bonuses to recruits and give tax credits to offset the cost of college for students from families with incomes below about $100,000 a year. Oddly, given Mr. Gore's assertions in recent weeks about the specificity of his policy proposals, his campaign was unable this week to provide a breakdown of exactly how the $115 billion extra he intends to spend on education over the next 10 years would be allocated. But Washington's influence on public education could depend on who is elected. Mr. Gore would have the government much more involved in local education matters. Mr. Bush would mostly keep his hands off except for holding schools responsible for the progress of their students. Mainly what seems to have happened this year is that Mr. Bush felt comfortable with education as an issue, having dealt extensively and, by most accounts, successfully with the matter as governor of Texas, and he began promoting his positions early in the campaign. Mr. Gore has long talked about improving education. But members of his staff acknowledged that the unusual emphasis Mr. Bush placed on the issue was probably what led the vice president to proclaim that it was now the nation's top priority.
 But then she realized that the man was not exactly a stranger. He was Brad Blakeman, a lawyer who works for the George W. Bush campaign and one of the many critical contacts she and her husband have made over their four years of writing letters, visiting lawmakers and talking to anyone who would listen about the plight of their daughter, Lori Helene Berenson, 30. In January 1996, Ms. Berenson, 30, was convicted by a masked military tribunal of conspiring to attack the Peruvian congress, and has been imprisoned high in the Peruvian mountains on a life sentence ever since.
 Voters in several Pittsburgh neighborhoods are at last turning attention to sizing up presidential candidates, with many experiencing 'epiphanic' moments that have caused them to rethink way they intend to vote; some point to what they see as Al Gore's winning performance at Democratic convention, others to discovery that George W Bush's running-mate, Dick Cheney, did not favor Head Start program; interest in campaign has increased since conventions, so that knowledge of issues and opinions about candidates are suddenly abundant; photos; shifts generally favor Gore, particularly his choice of Joseph Lieberman as running-mate (M) Here is how it happened for Joyce Doty: She started the summer already sold on Gov. George W. Bush. Then the conventions rolled around. Suddenly, Vice President Al Gore was looking handsome, sounding smart and intriguing her with the idea that ''maybe he wasn't too corrupted by Clinton after all.'' Mr. Bush's convention performance, and subsequent stump speeches, have given her pause. Here is how it happened for Joyce Doty: She started the summer already sold on Gov. George W. Bush. Then the conventions rolled around. Suddenly, Vice President Al Gore was looking handsome, sounding smart and intriguing her with the idea that ''maybe he wasn't too corrupted by Clinton after all.'' Mr. Bush's convention performance, and subsequent stump speeches, have given her pause. For some people, the shifts have sprung from large single events -- a convention speech, a tax proposal, a choice of running mate. But for many others, their change in thinking has emerged from the smallest but most resonant of details, like a well-placed bottle of wine in a televised home video of Mr. Gore with his family that made Josh Kamody suddenly decide that Mr. Gore was ''fun, someone I felt I would like as my dad.'' Or the discovery that Mr. Bush's running mate did not favor the Head Start program, which sent Gregg Rosen's vote packing. Rebecca Hepka, 23, was more or less indifferent to the race until she heard one of Mr. Gore's people use the term ''living wage,'' which sent her into paroxysms of rage and made her decide to vote for Mr. Bush. ''I don't like that term, no way,'' said Ms. Hepka, who sells medical insurance. ''I don't want to give away all my taxes to have other people set up for life.'' Interest in the campaign appears to have heated up here considerably since the political conventions, and knowledge of the issues as well as opinions about the candidates are suddenly in abundance. Many people interviewed agreed that the candidates, who not long ago were largely unknown and almost cartoon-like to them, have revealed far more about themselves in recent days. In most cases, these shifts have favored Mr. Gore, whose legendary stiffness has been softened in many voters' eyes by a sheen of sincerity and a distancing in his relationship with Bill Clinton. Recent national polls place the candidates in a dead heat, in part resulting from a postconvention bounce that pulled Mr. Gore closer to, and in some cases beyond, his rival. Here, Mr. Gore was gaining some favor with people who said they had not planned to vote at all, like Linda Kelso, a store clerk who said that a recent visit to Pittsburgh by Mr. Gore's daughter softened her. ''It seemed sincere, like they were really for the people,'' Ms. Kelso said. ''I was negative on both earlier this summer,'' said Ann Hazlett, 71, a retired social worker who lives in Fox Chapel. ''I was negative on Bush the person and Gore the party. But I liked Bush better later in the summer when he began to be more substantial and not such a smarty. And while I didn't think Gore's speech was outstanding, I felt there was sincerity there and I thought he did a good job of distancing himself from Clinton, who I no longer think will be telling him what to do. Really, I've warmed on them both.'' ''I am party-indifferent,'' said Mr. Rosen, 47, a lawyer. ''My feelings started to evolve when Bush called the Greek people Grecians, and my opinion of Gore had been neutral. I would say now it is neutral to positive, largely because Bush doesn't have any policy positions. He speaks in conceptual terms.'' Although fewer in number, some people interviewed said that recent days had brought them to Mr. Bush. ''I was for Bush and now I am more so,'' said Heather Hurley, who works with Ms. Hepka selling insurance downtown. ''I thought Gore looked better than ever but I don't care, because Bush's tax plan is more fair. And I like what he said last week about a strong military.'' Their paths have diverged at points. ''I was going to announce to Melissa that by pain of death I would be voting for Bush,'' said Mr. Brotsker, who lives on the city's North Side. His reason was fairly simple. ''As my economic situation has improved, I've been more intrigued by the Republican economic platform.'' But then he started hearing whispers among those who handle his investments and market prognosticators that swayed him. With some embarrassment, he confessed that a comment of support for Mr. Gore voiced by the money manager Jim Cramer in an online chat swayed him greatly. ''The markets have seemed to indicate that the Bush tax cut might be inflationary,'' he said. Ms. Kelley has had her own epiphanies. ''What I knew of Gore did not impress me initially,'' said Ms. Kelley, a lawyer. ''But he has been better at articulating his policies. It has been a long time since I have heard a candidate say women will retain choice regarding abortion, and that was impressive.'' And then there is Joseph I. Lieberman. ''Making a choice can be a defining thing, an active thing,'' Ms. Kelley said. ''Gore's choice of Lieberman gave me an indication of other types of actions he might take. So I remain cynical, but I am happier than I had been.'' In fact, several people indicated that the candidate's choice of running mate was hugely influential. ''I didn't like either of them until Gore chose Lieberman,'' said Carmen Hatcher, a systems technician. ''I don't believe Gore is a strong leader, but Lieberman will guide him,'' Ms. Hatcher said. Ms. Hazlett said: ''I don't like Dick Cheney, which I hate to think would influence me so much. And I can't say that Lieberman would make me vote for Gore, but I have to tell you I am surprised by how many of my friends talk about that.'' Some voters have stuck hard to one issue. ''I believe that Gore has a better understanding about education and has shown that in recent speeches,'' said John Bornyas, an education administrator. ''And I have gotten negative on Bush in the week since he could not get his numbers straight. But I need to see them both in the debates. And the truth is, there is always the Green Party.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore keeps campaign focused on health care, emphasizing his plan for providing access to coverage for nation's 11 million uninsured children; speaks to parents and health care workers in Albuquerque; photo; New Mexico is swing state where access to health insurance is serious problem (M) Vice President Al Gore kept his campaign focused on health care today by emphasizing his plan for providing access to coverage for the country's 11 million uninsured children. Mr. Gore's plan, for insuring all children by 2005, relies primarily on an expansion of the Children's Health Insurance Program, or CHIP, an initiative that has provided coverage, with modest premiums, for about two million children since its enactment in 1997. Vice President Al Gore kept his campaign focused on health care today by emphasizing his plan for providing access to coverage for the country's 11 million uninsured children. Mr. Gore's plan, for insuring all children by 2005, relies primarily on an expansion of the Children's Health Insurance Program, or CHIP, an initiative that has provided coverage, with modest premiums, for about two million children since its enactment in 1997. The program now covers children in families with incomes up to 200 percent of the poverty level, and Mr. Gore would raise that ceiling to 250 percent, or about $41,000 at present for a family of four. ''We need to cover every single child within this next presidential term,'' Mr. Gore said, addressing a group of parents and health care workers gathered by his campaign in a park here. New Mexico is a swing state that was carried by President Clinton in both 1992 and 1996 but before then had voted for the Republican nominee in six consecutive presidential elections. Access to health insurance is a serious problem in the state, where 14 percent of poor children are uninsured, the sixth-highest proportion of any state, according to the Census Bureau. The problem is particularly severe among Latinos and American Indians, and Mr. Gore laced his comments today with Spanish phrases. The Democratic nominee had little to say about his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. But, in what has become a regular feature of his policy discussions, he closed his remarks by challenging Mr. Bush to issue a detailed plan. ''Presently he has not presented any plan to address this problem,'' Mr. Gore said of children's health coverage, ''but there is still time, even before Labor Day, to offer these specifics.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, called Mr. Gore's claim ''inaccurate,'' and said Mr. Gore should explain why the number of uninsured children had increased by more than two million during the Clinton-Gore years. Mr. Bush, Mr. Bartlett said, has put forth a plan to provide a tax credit of up to $2,000 for premiums of health insurance policies bought by families with incomes of $30,000 or less. Families earning $30,000 to $60,000 would qualify for a smaller credit. Sarah Bianchi, a Gore policy adviser, said the Bush credit would not be large enough to help many families buy insurance in the private market. Mr. Gore's proposals, which would increase access for both poor children and their parents, would cost the federal government an estimated $95 billion over 10 years. The CHIP program relies on states to sign up eligible children. The state and federal governments share the cost, with the federal government paying most of it. The proposal to raise the income ceiling for CHIP coverage is the centerpiece of Mr. Gore's plans to move incrementally toward a system of universal health coverage. That incremental approach, he has said, reflects the lessons learned from Mr. Clinton's failed efforts to insure all Americans in one vast restructuring of the American health care system. ''I want to make it clear that the proposals that I'm announcing here do not represent a complete solution to every problem in health care,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The approach that I'm recommending is the step-by-step approach, paso a paso, so that we move toward universal health insurance for all.'' In the Democratic primaries, Mr. Gore's opponent, former Senator Bill Bradley, criticized his reliance on the CHIP program, because it has had difficulty enrolling all eligible children. Currently an estimated seven million children eligible for CHIP are not enrolled. Mr. Gore acknowledged that shortcoming today, but placed blamed for it on states that, he said, ''put up barriers to participation'' because they ''don't really want to put their own money into the program, and so they make it difficult for families to participate.'' Some governors, noted Mr. Bartlett, the Bush spokesman, have attributed the problem to a lack of flexibility in federal regulations. Mr. Gore has outlined a series of measures intended to lower what he called the ''cultural barriers'' to enrolling in CHIP. Those measures include simplifying applications for coverage, eliminating asset tests that sometimes intimidate eligible families, requiring states to change their minimum eligibility periods to a year from six months, and allowing families to apply by mail instead of in person. The vice president would also allow families with incomes above the higher CHIP ceiling that he proposes  to buy insurance for their children, through either CHIP or Medicaid. Those families would have to pay a full premium, but the financial burden would be reduced somewhat if they applied for Mr. Gore's proposed 25 percent tax credit on health insurance premiums. Another Gore proposal would extend CHIP coverage to the seven  million uninsured parents of children who are eligible for either CHIP or Medicaid. Some 85 percent of the parents of eligible children are not insured, according to Gore aides. Under Mr. Gore's plan, states could set their own eligibility levels but would receive federal matching funds for those parents they enroll. If health coverage for parents is provided, Mr. Gore reasons, families  will be more likely to seek coverage for their children as well.
 Talk of religion is nothing new for Senator Lieberman, who made it part of his previous campaigns and wrote about it in a book published this year, ''In Praise of Public Life.'' At virtually every stop in this campaign, he mentions his own devout faith and the faith of Vice President Al Gore, frequently telling his listeners that people of all religions are ''children of the same God.'' While Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have both talked about religion in interviews and debates, Mr. Lieberman has gone further, making his faith a central part of his stump speech. In Albuquerque today, Mr. Gore defended Mr. Lieberman in a series of interviews with local television stations around the country. ''He also believes, as I do, in separation of church and state,'' Mr. Gore told KSDK in St. Louis. ''I believe in what he's saying.'' ''I understand that some people who are particularly sensitive to religious discrimination may get uncomfortable when people talk about their faith, but I find it both informative and encouraging,'' he added. When religious Christians discuss their faith, as Mr. Gore has done repeatedly, ''I don't feel excluded by it,'' he said.
 Officials had previously said Mr. Clinton would decide this summer on deploying a system. But with the Russians objecting and even the allies expressing concern, the officials have signaled that Mr. Clinton simply planned to decide whether to move ahead with an initial development. He would leave a final decision to deploy -- and break the treaty -- to the next administration, whether that of the Democratic nominee, Al Gore, or the Republican, George W. Bush, who has advocated a much more encompassing system.
 George W Bush says he wants all of his debates with Al Gore to be held in evening hours, disputing suggestions that his campaign hestitates to commit him to prime-time television; Bush nevertheles has not agreed to any of three 90-minute forums proposed by bipartisan commission on presidential debates (M) Disputing suggestions that his campaign was hesitant to commit to prime-time presidential debates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that he wanted all of his debates with Vice President Al Gore to be held in evening hours when television audiences were largest. ''The idea of saying I don't want to debate on prime time is ridiculous,'' Mr. Bush, the Republican nominee for president, told reporters aboard his campaign plane this morning. ''I want as many people to watch our debates as possible.'' Disputing suggestions that his campaign was hesitant to commit to prime-time presidential debates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said today that he wanted all of his debates with Vice President Al Gore to be held in evening hours when television audiences were largest. ''The idea of saying I don't want to debate on prime time is ridiculous,'' Mr. Bush, the Republican nominee for president, told reporters aboard his campaign plane this morning. ''I want as many people to watch our debates as possible.'' Mr. Bush, who has agreed to three debates with Mr. Gore, added, ''I would welcome all three being in prime time.'' But Mr. Bush and his aides said he was not yet prepared to agree to any of the three 90-minute forums proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates, an independent, bipartisan group that has been the prime sponsor of general-election presidential debates in the last three elections. Instead, they said that Mr. Bush was considering debate proposals from 53 organizations, including television networks, newspapers and  Web sites. And they left open the possibility that the governor might not agree to any of the three debates proposed by the commission. ''There's more than just the commission debates,'' Mr. Bush said. ''There are a lot of opportunities.'' Mr. Bush made his remarks about the debates today in response to a New York Times article reporting that his aides have resisted the commission's series of debates, saying they were reluctant to commit to three prime-time debates on the major television networks. One other option the aides suggested was a debate on a Sunday morning public affairs program. It is traditional for front-runners to be slow about agreeing to debates, and until very recently, Mr. Bush was running well ahead of Mr. Gore in most national polls. But since the Democratic convention two weeks ago, the race has tightened considerably. And now, many Democrats believe Mr. Bush runs the risk of appearing defensive when he hesitates on debates. Mr. Gore's campaign has seized on the issue to try to paint Mr. Bush as faint-hearted about facing off against the vice president on issues. Today, Mr. Gore's campaign formally accepted all three of the commission debates in a news release that also pointedly noted that Mr. Bush has yet to commit to any of the commission forums. ''We firmly believe that the commission's proposal offers the best opportunity for the most Americans to see the candidates in the most effective forum to debate their views,'' William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, said in a letter to the commission. Today, the Bush campaign suggested that one reason they have declined to accept the commission debates is that they want greater control over details of the forums. ''As the Republican nominee, he feels both the responsibility and the right to have some input into the format of those debates to ensure that they are thoughtful and they are substantive,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. She added that Joseph Allbaugh, Mr. Bush's campaign manager, and Andrew Card, a Bush adviser, would travel to Washington on Friday to meet with commission officials, as well as television network representatives, to discuss possible debates. During his in-flight news conference, Mr. Bush said he might have problems with certain debate formats. ''Sometimes the formats lend themselves to who best can walk around the stage, act dramatically,'' he said. ''I'd rather have a good discussion.'' Asked what kind of format he has felt most comfortable with, Mr. Bush said, ''The ones that were more free flowing.'' He added, ''Larry King was good,'' a reference to a primary debate on CNN's ''Larry King Live.'' This afternoon, Mr. Bush traveled to Portland, Me., where he appeared with a middle-class family of five that he said would pay no federal income taxes under his sweeping tax-cut proposal, but would have to pay more than $900 a year in federal taxes under Mr. Gore's more modest tax-reduction plan.
 Laura Bush and Tipper Gore might want to pay a visit to the First Ladies' Hall at the Smithsonian Institution. In this exhibit, usually crowded with tourists, first ladies are known by their china and their clothes, not their resumes. The gowns of the nation's first five first ladies are even displayed on headless mannequins, symbolizing, perhaps, that heads are not really necessary in this role. Laura Bush and Tipper Gore might want to pay a visit to the First Ladies' Hall at the Smithsonian Institution. In this exhibit, usually crowded with tourists, first ladies are known by their china and their clothes, not their resumes. The gowns of the nation's first five first ladies are even displayed on headless mannequins, symbolizing, perhaps, that heads are not really necessary in this role. In their own marriages, some presidential wives may still prefer the traditional approach. If Mrs. Bush or Mrs. Gore wants to be a stay-at-home wife, fine. However, let's not expect her to do anything substantial about raising literacy levels or improving our mental health. And let us not have a first lady answer to any title that begins with ''co-'': co-partner, co-conspirator, co-president. Three of the four wives of the men on the major party tickets this year have master's degrees: Laura Bush in library science, Tipper Gore in psychology and Hadassah Lieberman in American government and international relations. The fourth, Lynne Cheney, holds a Ph.D. in English. It is ludicrous to expect women like these to give up their own interests to serve solely as their husbands' adjuncts, even if we paid them.
 It is a bipartisan bunch: Terry McAuliffe, President Clinton's top fund-raiser; C. Boyden Gray, a former counsel to President Bush and now with the law firm Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering; Thomas Downey, a former Democratic congressman and  now a lobbyist; Richard Burt, the former ambassador to Germany;  and Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster. Even the Senate sergeant-at-arms, James Ziglar, has a share in the $3.3 million restaurant with mahogany paneling and marble floors, not so subtle reminders of the hallowed halls of Congress.
 With Mrs. Clinton out of town, it fell to State Comptroller H. Carl McCall and City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi to continue her attacks on Mr. Lazio's tax plan. They said he had deliberately underestimated the cost of his plan to distance himself from George W. Bush's. Mr. Lazio's spokesman, Dan McLagan, called those assertions partisan attacks.
 ''Under Bush, education has come of age for Republicans. On education, Mr. Bush looks more like Mr. Gore than he looks like Mr. Dole.'' ''Under Bush, education has come of age for Republicans. On education, Mr. Bush looks more like Mr. Gore than he looks like Mr. Dole.''
