 The competency of lawyers who represent indigent defendants in capital cases in Texas has become a political issue this year. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, has strongly defended the state's death penalty system as fair.
 Australia's decision reflects opinions shared by some Americans who oppose what they see as a growing tendency toward international scrutiny. John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, a former assistant secretary of state in the Bush administration, said his objections were constitutional.
 William Safire Op-Ed column supports school vouchers, which he says have been shown to improve education for black students, and says here is an issue where presidential candidates have drawn clear distinction: Gov George W Bush supporting vouchers and Vice Pres Al Gore opposing them (M) Al Gore told cheering teacher-delegates, ''I will never support private school vouchers, which would drain public money away from public education.'' Litmus-testily, he indicated that his Supreme Court choices would vote against vouchers' constitutionality, which the present court has declined to do. George W. Bush holds an opposing view. He wants local communities to set standards and hold schools accountable for meeting them. If after three years the schools fail, then the federal contribution should go to parents to spend at competing private schools. He pointedly agrees with Joe Lieberman's pre-convention support of vouchers. And to counter Gore's  warning about ''draining,'' Bush vows to increase federal spending on schools. The Harvard study shows Bush is on the right side of this. He should embrace the successful voucher students and joyfully join the controversy in states where children's futures are now at stake.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column questions sincerity of Gov George W Bush in promising to look out for nation's children; says for years Republicans have fended off new programs designed to help children, while fighting hard to slash support for those that already exist; cites Dick Cheney's voting record in Congress and Bush's efforts in Texas (M) George W. Bush and the Republicans have spent much of the presidential campaign promising to look out for the nation's children. They have gone so far as to hijack the phrase ''leave no child behind'' from the very liberal Children's Defense Fund. George W. Bush and the Republicans have spent much of the presidential campaign promising to look out for the nation's children. They have gone so far as to hijack the phrase ''leave no child behind'' from the very liberal Children's Defense Fund. ''When George W. Bush is president and I am vice president, tests will be taken, results will be measured, schools will answer to parents, and no child will be left behind.'' Now, with George W. Bush campaigning as a champion for children, we learn that the state of Texas has not bothered to comply with a 1996 consent decree requiring it to provide appropriate health care services to more than 1.5 million children who are eligible for Medicaid. Dr. Redlener is a supporter of the Gore-Lieberman ticket and has been an adviser to Vice President Gore on health matters. So he is hardly nonpartisan. But his attempt to draw more attention to the link between health care and education is an important one. He talked to me more than a year ago about chronic medical conditions, like asthma and ear infections, that interfere with a child's ability to function in school. Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney may be sincere when they say they want to leave no child behind. But they come late to this issue. Mr. Cheney's Congressional voting record on legislation to help children was hideous. And Mr. Bush's Texas has an abysmal record on children's health issues. Moreover, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney may have considerable trouble dragging other elements in their party -- the Trent Lotts, the Tom DeLays, the Dick Armeys -- anywhere near a progressive program for children. The Children's Defense Fund has been a terrific group for many years. Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney and the Republicans have stolen its motto. Now might be a good time to borrow its commitment.
 Letter from James J Florio, former New Jersey governor, comments on August 28 editorial on nation's looming environmental problems that seem to have taken back seat in presidential campaign; says Vice Pres Al Gore's proposals for energy efficiency and for nonpolluting renewable energy sources are deserving of universal support; drawing Al Gore's proposals to increase energy efficiency and to promote nonpolluting renewable energy sources are deserving of universal support.
 Presidential campaigns of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush settle into day-by-day battle for control of policy agenda, with both men sticking to their messages and avoiding responding to other's swipes; Gore, campaigning with Sen Joseph I Lieberman in Portland, Ore, focuses on health care; Bush, in Erie, Pa, focuses on education; table details candidates' education proposals; photo (M) Sticking to message like epoxy, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush continued their efforts today to set the terms of engagement in their presidential contest, with Mr. Gore promoting his plans to fortify Medicare and Mr. Bush pledging to increase federal aid to college students. Both men studiously avoided responding to the other's swipes as the campaign settled into a day-by-day battle for control of the policy agenda. The Gore campaign believes it prospers if the debate centers on health care, while the Bush campaign, both in its advertising and the focus of its candidate, sees education as the key to stealing women's votes from the Democrats. Sticking to message like epoxy, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush continued their efforts today to set the terms of engagement in their presidential contest, with Mr. Gore promoting his plans to fortify Medicare and Mr. Bush pledging to increase federal aid to college students. Both men studiously avoided responding to the other's swipes as the campaign settled into a day-by-day battle for control of the policy agenda. The Gore campaign believes it prospers if the debate centers on health care, while the Bush campaign, both in its advertising and the focus of its candidate, sees education as the key to stealing women's votes from the Democrats. But wary of appearing defensive, the candidates have been careful not to engage the opposition. Last week, the Bush campaign was thrown somewhat off balance by Mr. Gore's attacks on his proposed income tax cut and Mr. Bush's own admission that he had to do a better job of explaining his plan. Neither candidate wants to fall into that trap this week. Mr. Gore spent the day arguing that Mr. Bush's proposed income tax cut would not leave enough of the federal surplus to protect Medicare, a charge that Mr. Bush ignored. Mr. Bush, meanwhile, accused Mr. Gore and President Clinton of overseeing ''seven years of stagnancy'' in education, and Mr. Gore likewise acted as if he had not heard the charge. Mr. Gore, the Democratic nominee, rejoined his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, today at a forum on Medicare at Portland State University here. As has been the case throughout a week devoted to health policy, the minutiae of Mr. Gore's remarks concerned insurance coverage, but his underlying purpose was to demonstrate his deep philosophical differences with Mr. Bush over how to spend the federal surplus. ''The other side has placed its top priority on taking virtually all of this projected surplus and giving it all in the form of a giant tax cut, mainly to the wealthy,'' Mr. Gore said. ''And their theory is that's going to be good for the country, and they say it's your money. Well, it is your money. But it's your Medicare, it's your Social Security, it's your environment, it's your school system, it's your country.'' Mr. Gore renewed his call today for spending $339 billion over 10 years to add a prescription drug benefit to the Medicare program and to restore Medicare financing to teaching hospitals, nursing homes, rural hospitals, home health care aides, and rehabilitative services. Money for those programs was cut under the 1997 balanced budget act, and Mr. Gore said today that those reductions ''went too far.'' He also said he would extend the solvency of Medicare by putting the $400 billion Medicare surplus that is expected in the next decade in a so-called lock box to protect it from spending raids by Congress. Under Mr. Gore's plan, that money would be used to reduce the federal debt, saving $75 billion in interest payments that would then be used to extend the solvency of Medicare from 2025 to 2030. Mr. Gore also rejected the majority conclusions reached last year by a bipartisan commission on Medicare, saying he would not support raising the Medicare eligibility age to 67 from 65, forcing the elderly into managed care, or raising premiums and co-payments. Mr. Bush plans to spell out his Medicare reform proposals in a major address on Tuesday in Allentown, Pa. His aides have said he would base his plan on bipartisan Senate legislation that would give Medicare recipients the ability to choose between a variety of public and private insurance plans. They have said that such a restructuring of Medicare, by promoting competition, would produce savings to keep the program solvent for the long term. Mr. Gore's plan, said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, would amount to tinkering when compared to Mr. Bush's yet-to-be-announced approach. In Erie, Pa., today, Mr. Bush proposed expanding the federal Pell grant program to help more low-income students attend college, warning that the achievement gap separating rich and poor, black and white students was widening. In a speech before local Republicans, a subdued Mr. Bush focused heavily on education for the third day this week, emphasizing local control and school accountability, while attacking Mr. Gore for upholding what he called a failed status quo. ''Today, incredibly enough in our country, 7 out of 10 fourth graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read,'' Mr. Bush said. ''They are children who are destined to be locked into failed hopes and diminished dreams. The achievement gap between minority and non-minority students is wide and growing wider. And we must do something about it in America early, before it's too late.'' Arguing that freshman year is often the most difficult for college students, Mr. Bush proposed increasing the maximum first-year Pell grant to $5,100 per student, from $3,300. The proposal would cost $5 billion over five years, his aides said. Under the Clinton administration, spending on Pell grants has increased by $1.5 billion, to $7.9 billion. Mr. Bush today also called for building a $1.5 billion federal fund over the next five years to help states create or expand merit scholarship programs. And he proposed abolishing federal taxes on so-called pre-paid college tuition plans that allow parents to create special escrow accounts to finance future tuition costs. This program would cost $275 million over five years, his aides said. With the campaign having taken a more testy turn in recent days, Mr. Bush sought to capture the high ground today by repeatedly calling for greater civility. Without mentioning Mr. Gore by name, he suggested the vice president had poisoned the presidential debate with negative, overly partisan campaigning. ''I don't expect this to be a major theme of the campaign,'' Mr. Leiberman said in a interview in Portland,  where he appeared with Mr. Gore.
 Cheney Asserts Clinton Mishandled the Military  Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential candidate and former defense secretary, delivered a harsh assessment of the condition of the armed forces under President Clinton, accusing him, and by association Vice President Al Gore, of ''running down'' a military that succeeded in recent conflicts only because of the military build-up of Republican administrations. He said the military is stretched over too many theaters and is hampered by low morale, low pay, inadequate training and unreliable weapons and equipment. Candidates Stay With Themes  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stuck to their messages, with Mr. Gore promoting his Medicare plans and Mr. Bush pledging more aid to college students.
 There was extraordinary security in place for Mr. Clinton's visit, the first by an American president since President Bush made a similar trip 10 years ago. Cartegena is a tourist haven and one of Colombia's safest cities, unlike the capital, Bogota, and various cities where drug cartels rule. Similarly, Mr. Clinton spent part of last week in Nigeria in the new capital, Abuja, avoiding the tumult of Lagos, the largest city.
 Prof Michael W Golay letter, commenting on August 28 editorial on looming environmental problems that seem to have taken back seat in presidential election, says neither Vice Pres Gore nor Gov George W Bush have much to offer on issue Your Aug. 28 editorial ''Protecting the Earth'' praises Al Gore for his ''detailed'' and ''muscular'' energy policy statement as opposed to the vacancy of George W. Bush's. In fact, neither has anything to show in this area. Your Aug. 28 editorial ''Protecting the Earth'' praises Al Gore for his ''detailed'' and ''muscular'' energy policy statement as opposed to the vacancy of George W. Bush's. In fact, neither has anything to show in this area. The global-warming response plan of Mr. Gore would save the planet without recourse to nuclear and hydroelectric energy, the only available nonemitting industrial-strength energy technologies. Their omission from his ''policy'' is the surest sign that it is not one.
 Chef Eberhard Muller is leaving Manhattan restaurant Lutece to become partner and executive chef at Manhattan restaurant Bayard's; cites reluctance of Lutece's owners to move to site with adequate facilities; Vice Pres Al Gore's daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, and photographer Chuck Close are promoting online auction of over 1,500 works from over 75 artists that could raise $1 million for Democratic National Committee; Mayor Rudolph W Giuliani catches mouse in his City Hall office; appears on Late Show with David Letterman, where Letterman complains about rats at Ed Sullivan Theater; Roger Cedeno, now Houston Astro, dines at Manhattan restaurant where he often dined while playing for New York Mets; follows meal by hitting home run against Mets; photo (M)
 MOUNTAIN WEST CONFERENCE--Named Bob Burda assistant commissioner for communications.  CCNY--Announced the resignation of Dan Nigro, men's basketball coach.  CORNELL--Named Eric McDowell director of athletic communications and Jennifer Johnson women's assistant lacrosse coach. Named Scott Urick men's part-time assistant lacrosse coach.  DELAWARE--Named Melissa McLinden and Andrew Capone women's assistant volleyball coaches, Rachel Barger volunteer assistant field hockey coach, Christine DeLalio women's assistant rowing coach, Jessica Celi women's assistant soccer coach, and Eric Hymowitz men's and women's soccer goalkeeper coach.  ST. FRANCIS, PA.--Named Joe Spagnola men's assistant soccer coach, Michael Coll women's assistant soccer coach and Martin Romeril women's field hockey and lacrosse coach.  SETON HALL--Named Ron Farina men's and women's swimming and diving coach-aquatics coordinator.  SUSQUEHANNA--Named Denny Bowers, John Bush and Casey Goff assistant football coaches and Sean Noonan men's and women's assistant soccer coach.  UC IRVINE--Named Robert Smitheran director of compliance and Kelly Crawford women's golf coach.  VASSAR--Named Michael Levin director of sports information.
 Mr. Cheney said the American military was stretched over too many foreign theaters and hampered by low morale, low pay, inadequate training and unreliable weapons and equipment. He accused Mr. Clinton, and by association Vice President Al Gore, of neglecting the national defense to the point where military planners were no longer certain that the United States could meet its stated goals of being prepared to fight two medium-size conflicts at the same time. Mr. Cheney said the American military was stretched over too many foreign theaters and hampered by low morale, low pay, inadequate training and unreliable weapons and equipment. He accused Mr. Clinton, and by association Vice President Al Gore, of neglecting the national defense to the point where military planners were no longer certain that the United States could meet its stated goals of being prepared to fight two medium-size conflicts at the same time. Mr. Cheney also seemed to be trying to play the role that Republicans had hoped he would take in the campaign -- lending his age, experience and authority as a former defense secretary to the Republican presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Indeed, Mr. Cheney not only framed his remarks as the words of the defense secretary who helped defeat Iraq, but portrayed himself as a man who had returned to public life in large part because of his desire to repair the damage he said had been done to the military. Mr. Cheney offered few concrete proposals in his speech today. But in the past the Bush campaign has called for a $20 billion increase in the military budget for research and development from 2002 through 2006, for directing the Defense Department to spend a fifth of its procurement budget on new technologies and for increasing the recently enacted pay raise for members of the armed services by a further $1 billion a year. Mr. Gore responded tonight to Mr. Cheney's criticisms. ''We have the strongest military in the world by far, and we reversed the decline that began in the Bush-Quayle years,'' Mr. Gore told reporters. ''And I have advocated additional steps to continue the rebuilding and strengthening to make sure it's always the best and always more than adequate.'' The Gore campaign has said that the vice president advocates a 10-year, $127 billion increase in spending on military salaries, training and modernization, and that amount may increase when Mr. Gore adjusts his budget proposals to reflect a growing surplus. In his speech, Mr. Cheney also sought to counter the Democratic response to the criticism directed by Mr. Bush at President Clinton's military policies. Since those attacks began in recent weeks, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, accused Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney of denigrating the American military, which they said sent a bad signal to allies and potential adversaries. Mr. Cheney said that Mr. Gore had expressed concerns that criticism about the military would send the wrong message to potential adversaries, and he used it to make another dig at the Clinton administration. ''If our potential adversaries have received any 'wrong messages' recently,'' he said, ''it was not from the newspapers, but from the nuclear lab at Los Alamos. And what lesson do they draw from the fact that this administration has failed to safeguard our nation's most vital national secrets?'' Mr. Cheney attributed the Clinton administration's military successes, like the NATO bombing that led to the withdrawal of of Serb forces from Kosovo, and the air strikes on Iraq, to the military buildup under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush. And he said that the Republicans in Congress deserved the credit for recent increases in the defense budget. ''It is the record of eight years of stewardship over the American armed forces by President Clinton and Vice President Gore,'' he said. ''Eight years of neglect and misplaced priorities. Eight years of multiplying missions and unclear goals.  Eight years during which the enemies of freedom have not been idle. Eight years is a long time -- and eight years is long enough.'' A former national security budget specialist under Mr. Clinton, Gordon Adams, said many of the problems Mr. Cheney cited, including substandard military housing, was prevalent during the Bush administration. Mr. Cheney offered few concrete proposals to bolster the nation's military in his speech, although he did say that a Bush-Cheney administration would spend more money researching new technologies and deploying missile defenses, that it would raise pay for the troops and improve their housing and schools. A much easier call is where to place responsibility for all of this. It is the record of eight years of stewardship over the American armed forces by President Clinton and Vice President Gore. Eight years of neglect and misplaced priorities. Eight years of multiplying missions and unclear goals. . . . The needs of our nation's defense, and the needs of our defenders, are not merely relevant in a national campaign. They must be front and center. For his part, Governor Bush has been raising these issues for more than a year. He has offered specific proposals to rebuild the strength and morale of the armed forces, and make them fully capable of meeting every challenge the new century will bring.
 SCORECARD -- Although the ostensible subject of the advertisement is campaign finance reform, it really is about Mrs. Clinton's credibility, and thus, the crucial sentence in this ad is the last one. It is a theme that Mr. Lazio used in another ad earlier this week, and one that will recur. Mr. McCain was a popular figure, nationally, during his run for the presidency this year, although he did lose the primary in New York to George W. Bush.  In theory, at least, he appeals to independent voters who may not have made up their minds in this race.
 Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign announces Texas will appeal Federal Judge William Wayne Justice's ruling that state failed to abide by terms of 1996 consent decree intended to improve health care for poor children enrolled in Medicaid (S) Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign announced yesterday that Texas would appeal a federal court ruling that the state had failed to abide by the terms of a 1996 consent decree intended to improve health care for poor children. ''We are very disappointed with the ruling and believe it misrepresents Texas' effort to provide comprehensive health care to children enrolled in the Medicaid program,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign. Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign announced yesterday that Texas would appeal a federal court ruling that the state had failed to abide by the terms of a 1996 consent decree intended to improve health care for poor children. ''We are very disappointed with the ruling and believe it misrepresents Texas' effort to provide comprehensive health care to children enrolled in the Medicaid program,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign. Asked about the ruling yesterday, Mr. Bush said, ''I just found out about it today.'' Other campaign officials said that senior Bush aides were not notified of the ruling until yesterday morning, even though the attorney general's office had learned about it several days ago. Asked about the lapse, Mr. Bartlett said, ''Welcome to state government.''
 With Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas entering a crucial phase of their race for the White House, their running mates are waging starkly different campaigns as they strike out on their own for the first time since each party's national convention. But he firmly rejected what has become conventional political wisdom among even some Republicans -- that while Mr. Lieberman is helping Mr. Gore, Mr. Cheney is not yet doing the same for Mr. Bush, whose standing in the polls has sagged since his selection of Mr. Cheney. Mr. Cheney's restrained style, meanwhile, reinforces what many consider to be his strongest contribution to Mr. Bush: his reputation as a senior statesman with the depth of experience to offset Mr. Bush's relative lack of exposure to military issues, foreign affairs and the ways of Congress. Mr. Cheney's understatement has also added a quiet potency to his criticisms of Mr. Gore and President Clinton, not to mention his calls for a restoration of honor in the Oval Office, a line that drew roars of approval from party stalwarts at the Republican National Convention. Only yesterday, in a campaign event in Atlanta, Mr. Cheney drew on his experience as secretary of defense in the Bush administration to accuse Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore of presiding over a military that is ''overused and under-resourced.'' Mr. Lieberman has also chosen to adopt an understated tone when laying into Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney. He usually sets up his sharpest criticisms by first declaring that both men are ''decent and honorable.'' And after he delivers a zinger, he tends to soften the blow by smiling and raising his eyebrows, as if to ask, ''Wasn't that a good one?''
 With time, relationships between God and American politicians became more personal, as manifest in the exchange of endorsements -- the politician usually endorsing the Divine and his works and claiming a responsive endorsement of the politician by the divinity. Lincoln's second inaugural address, by one count, had 14 references to God and four quotations from the scriptures. (Senator Joe Lieberman has been criticized for a speech in Nashville, after he was named Al Gore's running mate, in which he mentioned God 13 times. But he still falls short of the Lincoln standard.) When Vice President Al Gore called Senator Lieberman to select him as his running mate, we are told the two men shared a prayer. And at the Democratic ticket's debut in Nashville, God was mentioned often. During the primary campaign, Gov. George W. Bush was asked his favorite philosopher, thinker or historic figure. He named Jesus. (To his credit, Senator John McCain picked Theodore Roosevelt.)
 Gov George W Bush's advisers meet with television network representatives on network proposals for presidential debates; deny seeking to cut audience with debates sponsored by individual networks, instead of debates sponsored by Commission on Presidential Debates and covered by all major networks (M) Senior advisers to Gov. George W. Bush met here today with representatives from three television networks to discuss presidential debates that individual networks have proposed. Mr. Bush has said that he will participate in three debates and that he wants those debates to be watched by as many television viewers as possible. But he has not agreed to the three debates proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates, which are by far the most likely to garner prime-time coverage by all the major networks as opposed to an individual network sponsor. Senior advisers to Gov. George W. Bush met here today with representatives from three television networks to discuss presidential debates that individual networks have proposed. Mr. Bush has said that he will participate in three debates and that he wants those debates to be watched by as many television viewers as possible. But he has not agreed to the three debates proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates, which are by far the most likely to garner prime-time coverage by all the major networks as opposed to an individual network sponsor. If Mr. Bush instead chooses one or more debates sponsored by individual networks, there is a strong likelihood that networks other than the one sponsoring the debate would not televise it, and that the audience for the event would be diminished. Mr. Bush's aides said that was not their aim, and that it was one of the factors they were weighing and discussing with network executives. A trio of Mr. Bush's senior advisers met today with representatives from CNN, ABC and CBS, and these advisers were scheduled to meet on Thursday with representatives from Fox, NBC and PBS, said Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman. ''The governor believes the debates should be seen as widely as possible,'' Mr. Fleischer said, echoing comments that Mr. Bush made on Tuesday as he tried to beat back news reports that he might be casting around for formats that would not be as prominently broadcast. But by not yet agreeing to the commission's debates and publicly entertaining other options, Mr. Bush has opened himself to accusations by aides to Vice President Al Gore that he is trying to minimize the impact of the debates or contrive formats tailor-made to his preferences and strengths. ''He says he wants a big audience, so it's a mystery why he wouldn't accept the commission debates,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. Mr. Gore has essentially signed off on the commission debates and accepted invitations to 42 others, a number that is almost unimaginable from a logistical standpoint and clearly intended to provide a contrast to Mr. Bush's response and paint the Texas governor as timid. Mr. Bush's aides said they simply believed that the two major party's nominees should have some say over the shape of the debates and were trying to exert that privilege. Several political strategists said that Mr. Bush might have an enormous public-relations problem if he did not consent to all or at least two of the commission's debates. They also said that his advisers' activities this week might be nothing more than a way of playing hard-to-get and gaining some leverage with the commission over certain details of its proposed debates. Mr. Bush's advisers are to meet here with members of the commission on Friday. Mr. Bush's remarks in recent days, and the comments of several of his aides, suggest that he prefers informal formats to formal ones. Officials with the Bush campaign have also questioned the neutrality of one of the commission's proposed debate sites, a building in Boston near the John F. Kennedy Library.
 Jeff Madrick column on Census Bureau data showing persistent erosion of income of male workers since early 1970's, which he says helps explain the potency of Vice Pres Al Gore's call at Democratic convention to help working families; says that women have had to fill the breach in family income, with a far higher proporton of them now working, and that although their wages have risen substantially on average, their pay remains roughly 20 percent below what men make; photo (M) But what is too often ignored is that this remarkable performance has not yet compensated for the persistent erosion of the income of male workers since the early 1970's. And this goes a long way toward explaining why Al Gore's message at the Democratic convention to help working families seems to have caught on. Women have had to fill the breach, with a far higher proportion of them now working. But although their wages have risen substantially on average, their pay remains roughly 20 percent below what men earn. But what is too often ignored is that this remarkable performance has not yet compensated for the persistent erosion of the income of male workers since the early 1970's. And this goes a long way toward explaining why Al Gore's message at the Democratic convention to help working families seems to have caught on. Women have had to fill the breach, with a far higher proportion of them now working. But although their wages have risen substantially on average, their pay remains roughly 20 percent below what men earn. Few of the instant television analysts at the convention grasped the point. ''Contentment'' is the tenor of the times, one pundit asserted, asserting that Mr. Gore was misreading the electorate. The going line was this: Maybe we should worry about the poor and those without health insurance, but should we really be concerned with most of working America? For a long time, both political parties put the best face on these grinding facts. Mr. Gore simply let the cat out of the bag. My guess is that George W. Bush is beginning to get the message, even if the instant media pundits are not.
 Either President Al Gore or President George W. Bush may well have to face those contingencies, and the options they will have to choose from will not be easy.
 Today Mr. Lieberman is calling for a fourth ''awakening'' of religion as an antidote to violence, promiscuity and the degradation of family values. These positions, not to mention his condemnation of President Clinton's sexual misconduct in 1998, appeal to many voters and were clearly a major reason Vice President Al Gore selected him as his running mate. The idea that spiritual guidance can help in combating immorality is irrefutable. The danger lies in political appeals that are so zealous that they unsettle Americans with different religious views, making them feel like second-class citizens, or lead to policies coercive toward non-believers. As Mr. Lieberman has pointed out, throughout American history tolerance for American pluralism and diversity has done far more to enhance religion than to undermine it. That is why it is good for the national dialogue to see someone of deep religious faith argue in favor of abortion rights and against school prayer and discrimination against homosexuals, as Mr. Lieberman has. Mr. Lieberman has also condemned the movie industry for its disdain of moral values, deplored the proliferation of pornographic and violent material on the Internet and -- like Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush -- called for greater government funding for ''faith-based'' organizations that deliver services to the poor and the homeless.
 GORE RETAINS MOMENTUM -- Vice President Al Gore is still enjoying a postconvention bounce in presidential preference polls. Mr. Gore has taken a 15-point lead over Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in Maryland, an 8-point lead in Florida, a 5-point lead in Illinois and has closed to within 4 points in New Hampshire. In Maryland, according to a Gonzales-Arscott poll of 649 registered voters taken Wednesday through Sunday, Mr. Gore leads 51 percent to 36 percent, while in Florida, according to a Rasmussen Research poll of 439 voters conducted Saturday and Sunday, he leads 48 percent to 40 percent. In Illinois, a Mason-Dixon poll of 629 voters taken Thursday through Sunday showed Mr. Gore ahead of Mr. Bush 46 percent to 41 percent, while in a New Hampshire poll, covering 540 registered voters and conducted Thursday through Saturday, Mr. Bush retained a lead of 48 percent to 44 percent. The margin of sampling error for the new Florida poll was plus or minus five points. In the three other polls it was plus or minus four percentage points. GORE RETAINS MOMENTUM -- Vice President Al Gore is still enjoying a postconvention bounce in presidential preference polls. Mr. Gore has taken a 15-point lead over Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in Maryland, an 8-point lead in Florida, a 5-point lead in Illinois and has closed to within 4 points in New Hampshire. In Maryland, according to a Gonzales-Arscott poll of 649 registered voters taken Wednesday through Sunday, Mr. Gore leads 51 percent to 36 percent, while in Florida, according to a Rasmussen Research poll of 439 voters conducted Saturday and Sunday, he leads 48 percent to 40 percent. In Illinois, a Mason-Dixon poll of 629 voters taken Thursday through Sunday showed Mr. Gore ahead of Mr. Bush 46 percent to 41 percent, while in a New Hampshire poll, covering 540 registered voters and conducted Thursday through Saturday, Mr. Bush retained a lead of 48 percent to 44 percent. The margin of sampling error for the new Florida poll was plus or minus five points. In the three other polls it was plus or minus four percentage points. SIGN OF THE TIMES -- It was bound to happen. On Tuesday, at a late night rally in downtown Portland, Ore., Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman (did we mention that he's Jewish), were greeted by supporters waving placards that spelled out Gore-Lieberman in Hebrew letters. It should be noted, however, that the signs said ''Gore-Lieberman 2000,'' not Gore-Lieberman 5761, the date of the coming election in the Hebrew calendar.
 Now, with Republicans holding slimmer margins in Congress and Vice President Al Gore edging ahead of Gov. George W. Bush in some national polls, Democrats say the time is right for them to reclaim some of the executive offices they have lost in recent years. One variable, particularly in the close races, is the effect of the presidential election. A strong Democratic turnout for Mr. Gore in West Virginia, where Representative Bob Wise, a nine-term Democrat, is challenging Gov. Cecil H. Underwood, could help Mr. Wise in one of the six races for governor rated a tossup by The Cook Political Report. The other tossup states, where presidential fortunes could play a role, are Delaware, Missouri, Montana, North Carolina and North Dakota. On the other hand, a strong showing in Indiana by Mr. O'Bannon, who is leading his Republican challenger, Representative David M. McIntosh, in recent polls, could help Mr. Gore win a state that has voted for only two Democratic presidential nominees in 100 years, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson.
