 In ''Bush and Gore Stake Claims to Federal Role in Education'' (news article, Aug. 30), you say there is no evidence that the public is paying more attention to education this year. Yet our recent national survey found that 29 percent of parents say ''improving public schools'' should be the next president's top priority. That put education way ahead of health insurance (17 percent) and tax cuts and strengthening moral values (both 16 percent). In ''Bush and Gore Stake Claims to Federal Role in Education'' (news article, Aug. 30), you say there is no evidence that the public is paying more attention to education this year. Yet our recent national survey found that 29 percent of parents say ''improving public schools'' should be the next president's top priority. That put education way ahead of health insurance (17 percent) and tax cuts and strengthening moral values (both 16 percent).
 Vice Pres Al Gore should be elected president according to mathematical formulas devised by seven political scientists and presented at 96th annual meeting of American Political Science Association in Washington; winning percentage of two-party vote ranges from 52.8 to 60.3 (M) But for seven visitors seeking to impose a precision and predictability on political life that even those working in its midst cannot discern, Vice President Al Gore has already beaten Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- sort of. But for seven visitors seeking to impose a precision and predictability on political life that even those working in its midst cannot discern, Vice President Al Gore has already beaten Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- sort of. Then, the day after Election Day, everyone could look up to see whether Mr. Gore's winning percentage of the two-party vote was the 52.8 forecast by James E. Campbell of the State University of New York at Buffalo, the 60.3 expected by Thomas M. Holbrook of the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, or something between. The political scientists presented their formulas at a panel on Thursday. The predictions of six of the formulas depend heavily on the health of the economy, by one measure or another, and on presidential popularity or the candidates' standings in Labor Day polls. The seventh, offered by Helmut Norpoth of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, depends on how the nominee of the incumbent party did in the New Hampshire primary. Mr. Norpoth's formula, which allows a forecast as soon as the incumbent party's nominee is clear (in March this year), gave Mr. Gore 55 percent. But at another level, these formulas reflect an underlying advantage for the Gore campaign, an economics-based edge that these students of past elections say it will take major efforts by one or both campaigns to overcome. But his formula and some of the others also include a discount when a party is seeking to hold the White House for a third term or more. That is one reason why despite President Clinton's high poll ratings and a booming economy, Mr. Abramowitz's forecast was toward the lower end of the range, expecting Mr. Gore to get 53.2 percent. In 1988, he acknowledged, Governor Bush's father outperformed the predictions because his opponent, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, ran a poor general election campaign. Mr. Campbell, the lone acknowledged Republican on the panel, said that in past elections ''glitches and gaffes'' had accounted for no more than one or two percentage points. ''Most of us are predicting that the fundamentals will shift the campaign so that it's pretty remote'' that Mr. Bush will win, he said. As Christopher Wiezien of the University of Houston, with a 55.2 percent forecast for Mr. Gore, observed, ''He still might lose, but based on our analysis, it's not very likely.''
 New television commercial for Gov George W Bush attacks Vice Pres Al Gore as an untrustworthy, untruthful chameleon, and it signals what will be a generally heightened aggressiveness by Bush campaign as Bush's leads in the polls evaporates; Bush campaign has heretofore stressed Bush's positive agenda; map shows Bush and Gore itineraries (M) For most of the spring and summer, with a seemingly durable advantage in the polls, Gov. George W. Bush chatted genially with voters about his own good intentions, and his swipes at Vice President Al Gore were fairly perfunctory. When Mr. Gore belittled him, Mr. Bush expressed something akin to bemusement. For most of the spring and summer, with a seemingly durable advantage in the polls, Gov. George W. Bush chatted genially with voters about his own good intentions, and his swipes at Vice President Al Gore were fairly perfunctory. When Mr. Gore belittled him, Mr. Bush expressed something akin to bemusement. No more. As Labor Day opens the curtain on the pivotal act in the 2000 presidential campaign, and Mr. Bush confronts the evaporation of his lead, he and his advisers said that it is no longer enough to tell Americans why they should want the Texas governor in the White House. Voters must simultaneously be convinced that they do not want Mr. Gore there. And that is precisely what the Bush campaign intends to do, as it readjusts and adapts its strategy to the higher stakes of the presidential race and the relentless ticking of the clock. In interviews over the last few days, Republican officials tied to the Bush campaign said a new Republican television commercial last week that cast Mr. Gore as an untrustworthy, untruthful chameleon was a harbinger of similar television salvos. And it signaled what will be a generally heightened aggressiveness by the Bush campaign, apparent today at a news conference here in which Mr. Bush sought to gain the upper hand on the debate over presidential debates, which Mr. Gore has been winning. With nine weeks until Election Day, Mr. Bush's advisers said they will also begin picking apart and poking holes in Mr. Gore's policies more assiduously and raising more pointed questions about his leadership abilities. ''The people who are left after the conventions are the hard sells,'' said Karl Rove, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign, referring to the small, crucial cluster of undecided voters. So when Mr. Bush this week begins discussing a plan for prescription drug benefits under Medicare, he will not simply present his ideas, advisers said. He will also tell older Americans that Mr. Gore's proposal, which involves more federal regulation, smacks of nationalized health care and represents a bid for ''the government to be their pharmacist,'' said Karen P. Hughes, director of communications for the Bush campaign. Ms. Hughes was previewing more than a sound bite; she was making clear that the Bush campaign, with increasing vigor, would portray Mr. Gore as an old-style Democrat bent on intrusive government solutions. Other Bush campaign officials said that they planned to put a more exacting microscope over Mr. Gore's calls for increased government spending and assert that the vice president's appetite for new programs endangered projected federal surpluses. Mr. Gore has levied the same charge against Mr. Bush's sweeping tax cut proposal. The Bush campaign is also paying close attention to other aspects of the fight -- monitoring polls in battleground states so that Mr. Bush can tailor his schedule to those fluctuating yardsticks. After meetings on Saturday in  which Mr. Bush's aides hashed over new evidence that Mr. Gore was pulling ahead in Pennsylvania, the Bush campaign extended his schedule for this week to include a second visit, on Friday, to that crucial state. Mr. Bush was already planning to be there on Tuesday for the unveiling of his prescription drug plan. ''We're trying to be agile and flexible and change things around as we go,'' one Bush aide said. And Mr. Bush is already deep into  debate preparation. Last Monday, Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, a close Republican ally of Mr. Bush's, visited Austin in his role as the stand-in for Mr. Gore in rehearsals, one of Mr. Bush's advisers said. The adviser said that Mr. Gregg and Mr. Bush did not actually position themselves at lecterns or simulate the formal trappings of a debate, but practiced some of the back-and-forth exchanges that would probably occur between the candidates. Amid all this activity, Mr. Rove's use of the phrase ''an appropriate way'' to describe how Mr. Bush would distinguish himself from Mr. Gore pointed to a potential problem for the Bush campaign as it gets more aggressive. Sharp attacks on Mr. Gore could come across as a hypocritical contradiction of Mr. Bush's pledge to ''change the tone'' of politics. But Republican officials said that pitches like the one used in last week's commercial -- which mocked Mr. Gore's appearance in 1996 at a fund-raiser at a Buddhist temple and his boasts about a role in creating the Internet -- had tested well with independent-minded, swing voters in focus groups conducted by the Bush campaign. Even Mr. Bush, in an interview on Friday, hinted that there was plenty more ammunition against Mr. Gore. ''There's a lot of different things we could have used,'' he said. Mr. Bush was on a day trip to Louisiana and Arkansas that reflected the campaign's ongoing analysis of the electoral map. Neither of those states belongs firmly to either candidate. The governor's advisers expected him to dominate elsewhere in the South and will focus most strongly on Florida, where Mr. Gore was mounting a strong challenge. Its 25 electoral votes are the the nation's fourth-richest prize, behind California and New York, where Mr. Gore should prevail, and Texas, which is a cinch for Mr. Bush. Although Mr. Bush will visit California next week and his advisers want to force Mr. Gore to spend time and money there, their only  genuine hope on the West Coast seems to be Washington. The Northeast, with the exceptions of New Hampshire and possibly Maine, is also a stronghold for Mr. Gore, which leaves the states in or abutting the Midwest as the most intense war zone. Wisconsin and Iowa are possibilities. And then come Michigan and Pennsylvania, ripe with electoral votes. Mr. Bush will pass through both of these states more than once this week, along with visits to Illinois, Wisconsin, Ohio and Indiana. In terms of events, the Bush campaign plans to extend to other issues its practice of introducing middle-class families who would benefit from his proposed tax cuts. Mr. Bush will probably stand alongside older Americans who prefer his prescription drug plan to Mr. Gore's and people in their 20's or 30's who like his call for the option of private investment accounts within the Social Security system. But several of his advisers acknowledged that Mr. Bush's message had to transcend -- and, in a sense, trump -- policy details, because polls show that more voters see Mr. Gore's positions on issues as compatible to their own. So Mr. Bush will assert that no matter where Mr. Gore stands, he cannot deliver, because he lacks the ability to forge bipartisan cooperation. And Mr. Bush will talk, as he has since last year, about Mr. Gore's prescriptions as the reflections of a man who believes in government as the font of all wisdom and his own remedies as a gesture of faith in people. ''I think if it got to be about specific issue positions, you're playing on Gore's turf,'' one adviser to the Bush campaign said of the upcoming election. ''But if you make issues about broader realities and broader dynamics, you're on our turf.''
 Jennifer Kasper letter says Vice Pres Al Gore's promise of universal health care for children by 2005 (Aug 30 article) will not reach its goal unless his program addresses issue of health care coverage for immigrant children Al Gore's promise of universal health care for children by 2005 (news article, Aug. 30) won't reach its goal unless he publicly addresses the issue of health care coverage for immigrant children. Welfare ''reform'' drastically altered the availability of health and hunger assistance for legal immigrants. Al Gore's promise of universal health care for children by 2005 (news article, Aug. 30) won't reach its goal unless he publicly addresses the issue of health care coverage for immigrant children. Welfare ''reform'' drastically altered the availability of health and hunger assistance for legal immigrants.
 Mr. Holbrooke's potential foreign policy role in a new Democratic administration -- if Vice President Al Gore wins the presidency in November -- is the focus of unending speculation among other diplomats. But he said he intended to ''work straight through until Jan. 20'' no matter what the outcome of the election. His arrival here was delayed a year by Congressional blocks and federal ethics investigations, largely into his contacts with American embassies after he left a federal post.
 Vice Pres Al Gore begins fall stretch of president campaign buoyant in the polls and brimming with confidence; strongest sign of self-assurance is Gore campaign's visible grab for Florida, a state that has been perceived as favoring Gov George W Bush for months and that, according to Gore operatives, has now moved over to Gore; photo of Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman in Philadelphia (M) Vice President Al Gore begins the fall stretch of the presidential campaign buoyant in the polls and brimming with confidence. Perhaps the strongest sign of this self-assurance is the Gore campaign's visible grab for Florida, a state that has been perceived as favoring Gov. George W. Bush for months and where Mr. Bush's brother Jeb is the governor. Gore operatives say they are now slightly ahead in Florida. Mr. Gore has visited the state twice in the last week and is popping into Tampa on Monday morning during his 24-hour whirlwind Labor Day tour. Vice President Al Gore begins the fall stretch of the presidential campaign buoyant in the polls and brimming with confidence. Perhaps the strongest sign of this self-assurance is the Gore campaign's visible grab for Florida, a state that has been perceived as favoring Gov. George W. Bush for months and where Mr. Bush's brother Jeb is the governor. Gore operatives say they are now slightly ahead in Florida. Mr. Gore has visited the state twice in the last week and is popping into Tampa on Monday morning during his 24-hour whirlwind Labor Day tour. In addition, advisers said, either Mr. Gore or Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Mr. Gore's running mate, will visit Florida at least once a week from now through the November election, as they will regularly visit other battlegrounds that are becoming increasingly more plausible for the Democrats: Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan. There is no question that the Gore team is pumped and basking in a spate of positive media coverage. But its euphoria is tempered with caution. There are tricky shoals for Mr. Gore to navigate, and the campaign has some decisions to make. These concern how he will respond to attacks from Mr. Bush, how to present himself as a change from President Clinton even while advocating many of Mr. Clinton's policies, and how to counter the impression of voters that Mr. Gore is weaker on certain personality traits. A memorandum from Hickman-Brown Research Inc., a firm that conducts polls for the Gore campaign, says that Mr. Gore has made strides in important ways. His personal popularity is up, it says, and voters agree with his positions on most issues that are most important to them and have more faith in him than in Governor Bush to carry out certain presidential duties, like managing foreign policy and preparing the country for the future. But the memorandum also says that Mr. Gore has shown major improvements in some areas of vulnerability. The pollsters refer to these as ''key personal dimensions,'' which they define as traits related to leadership and trustworthiness, although Republicans perceive him as vulnerable on matters of credibility. Governor Bush is an aggressive opponent, however, flush with cash, and he has already demonstrated that he will not lie down for a Gore steamrollering. The Republicans, who have spent twice as much as Mr. Gore on television commercials, are on the air now skewering Mr. Gore's credibility on improving the campaign finance system. Mr. Bush is also stepping up his criticism that the Clinton administration has squandered the opportunities of the last eight years. Republicans say that commercials in the works show Mr. Clinton making the same promises in 1992 -- for a middle-class tax cut, for a prescription drug benefit for the elderly -- that Mr. Gore is making today. How severely, and how soon,  should Mr. Gore respond? He has a reputation as a cutthroat competitor whose aggressiveness can fire up the partisans but alienate independents and swing voters. The Gore team is deploying countless surrogates, including Mr. Lieberman, to make the case against Mr. Bush. But there is some internal debate about the level on which Mr. Gore should engage. His recent challenge that Mr. Bush should ''put up or shut up,'' ridiculed by the Bush campaign as a playground taunt, gave a hint of Mr. Gore's eagerness to get in the fight. But the Democrats withheld a commercial they had prepared last week criticizing Mr. Bush's record in Texas. That is likely to be broadcast in the coming week. Perhaps the most nettlesome question for the Gore campaign is how to take advantage of the humming economy. In times of peace and prosperity, the incumbent party is almost always rewarded. The good news for the Gore campaign is that internal polling suggests that in several important states, a majority of voters perceive the nation to be on the right track. This has historically been one of the most important indicators for whether or not incumbents are re-elected. But for Mr. Gore to have climbed to his place in the polls only now suggests that other factors are at work. The central concern is that while voters appreciate the good times, there is lingering resentment toward Mr. Clinton over his personal behavior, creating a complex web of emotion that still seems to ensnare Mr. Gore. Allan J. Lichtman, a political analyst at American University, who has written about the basic factors on which people vote, said: ''The fundamentals are in Gore's favor. Peace, prosperity, tranquillity at home and a united incumbent party. Why has the race even been close? The Clinton scandals.'' Ed Goeas, a Republican pollster, said that of all the issues voters rank as important, one, declining moral values, hurts Mr. Gore most. Will Mr. Gore pay for that? He has worked hard to close the Clinton chapter, staging a ''passing of the baton'' ceremony before his convention last month and declaring himself in his acceptance speech his ''own man.'' Still, the centerpiece of his campaign is the thriving economy, and the economy is the most sterling part of the Clinton legacy. ''This election is not an award for past performance,'' Mr. Gore told workers here today. ''I'm not asking you to vote for me on the basis of the economy we had; I'm asking for your support on the basis of the better, fairer, stronger economy that we're going to create together over the next four years.'' The coming week should reveal more of the Gore strategy as the vice president focuses on the economy, including in a major speech in Cleveland on Wednesday. Mr. Gore's current strategy is to stick to the issues, and to try to make the campaign about the issues on which he has an advantage. Internal polling suggests that undecided voters side with Mr. Gore on health care, Social Security and the economy. They side with Mr. Bush on crime and moral values, and in many states they rate the candidates about even on education. Democratic officials indicated that they were not so worried about the lack of support on crime, noting that it is not as big an issue as it was in 1992, and not one that swing voters are making their decisions on.  Also, they suggest, few voters think Mr. Gore has had anything to do with crime rates anyway, so it is not very fertile ground for him. But declining moral values are another matter. Mr. Gore is well aware of this, and it goes a long way toward explaining why he picked Mr. Lieberman, with his reputation for rectitude and his history of criticism of Mr. Clinton's personal behavior, as his running mate. Mr. Goeas said that education and values ranked as the top issues for married women, and that married women, who make up 60 percent of female voters, tended to support Mr. Bush. Tad Devine, a chief strategist for the Gore camp, said that at this point the campaign was trying to reach as broad an audience as possible. In the next few weeks, he said, different groups of people will click in to the election, and they will be ''persuadable'' at different times. He said the campaign was talking about broad themes now, but as the pool of persuadable voters shifted and shrank, the campaign would deliver its message more to specific audiences, largely through direct mail, radio advertising and campaign destinations.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman fly from Philadelphia to Flint, Mich, to begin round-the-clock Labor Day campaign swing designed to portray them as the ticket for the working class, continuing populist theme on which Gore has based his general election run (M) Like college students pulling an all-nighter together, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman today kicked off a round-the-clock Labor Day campaign swing designed to portray them as the ticket for the working class. On the holiday weekend traditionally seen as the start of the stretch run to the November election, Mr. Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, continued the populist themes on which he has based his general election run. Like college students pulling an all-nighter together, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman today kicked off a round-the-clock Labor Day campaign swing designed to portray them as the ticket for the working class. On the holiday weekend traditionally seen as the start of the stretch run to the November election, Mr. Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, continued the populist themes on which he has based his general election run. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman set a grueling schedule from this afternoon through Monday night. Mr. Gore was scheduled to join a Labor Day celebration in Pittsburgh, and end his day with another Labor Day event in Louisville, Ky. After stopping at Pat's, a well-known cheese steak restaurant in Philadelphia, Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman made their way to the dusty construction site, which leaked water in a driving rain. They addressed a carefully screened group of construction workers -- some work on the project, some do not -- and tried out the campaign's theme for the week, stewardship of the economy. ''If you want a job done right, have it done by union workers,'' Mr. Gore said. ''If you want a job done right on our economic policy, take a look at the blueprint. There are two competing blueprints.'' Some workers at the event said they knew little about politics or economic policy, beyond the remarkable growth they have seen under President Clinton and Mr. Gore. Patrick Stafford, 21, an electrician, said, ''Clinton did a real good job with the economy, and Gore was his V.P., so he's the next-best thing to Clinton if we can't have Clinton. Also, Gore's pro-union and Bush isn't.''
 Gov George W Bush's charge that 2 of Army's 10 active divisions are 'not ready for duty' prompts examination of an arcane, sometimes subjective readiness accounting system that can be misleading and is not easily reduced to the sound bites of a presidential campaign; 49th Armored Division of Texas National Guard--nominally under Bush's command--has lowest ranking for wartime readiness that Pentagon gives and has been that way for last three years; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush kicked off a heated political debate when he declared that 2 of the Army's 10 active divisions were ''not ready for duty, sir.'' Had he wanted to highlight the complexities of measuring military readiness, however, he could have looked closer to home. Gov. George W. Bush kicked off a heated political debate when he declared that 2 of the Army's 10 active divisions were ''not ready for duty, sir.'' Had he wanted to highlight the complexities of measuring military readiness, however, he could have looked closer to home. Even Mr. Bush and his running mate on the Republican ticket, Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary, who has joined heartily in the criticism, do not dispute that the American military is technologically advanced, highly trained and well equipped. And so the two divisions cited by Mr. Bush -- the 10th Mountain and the 1st Mechanized Infantry -- were briefly classified as unready for war last fall, not because they suffered from budget cuts and low morale, as Mr. Bush suggested, but rather because large parts of the divisions were keeping peace in Bosnia and Kosovo, according to Army and Pentagon officials. ''The idea that it counts if you're training to fight Saddam but doesn't count if you're actually deploying deterring Milosevic or containing conflict in the Balkans is a strange artifact of our national military strategy, and makes little sense,'' said Michael O'Hanlon, a defense analyst at the Brookings Institution in Washington who has informally consulted for the Gore campaign. For the 49th, Governor Bush's own division, the meager readiness rating it holds may not be the best indicator of its ability to conduct military operations. According to the Pentagon's system, the 49th is unfit to fight a war. Since March, however, nearly 700 men and women of the 49th, including its headquarters company and most of its commanders, have overseen the American sector of NATO's peacekeeping operation in Bosnia and, by all accounts, doing it well. Next year, the 49th is sending roughly 300 more combat troops to Bosnia. In October, the Texas Air National Guard is sending Governor Bush's old unit, the 111th Fighter Squadron, to patrol the so-called no-fly zone over southern Iraq, where American pilots are routinely responding to Iraqi antiaircraft fire with air strikes. It is the sort of combat the unit never saw when Mr. Bush trained as a fighter pilot in the Texas National Guard during the Vietnam War. John Hillen, a former Army captain who has been a defense policy adviser to the Bush campaign, said,  ''These things are so eminently capricious and fungible that the readiness ratings are not really significant.'' Still, the 49th slipped to the lowest level three years ago because of  shortages in training time, equipment and personnel, officials in Texas and Washington said. (Even though he is commander in chief of the Texas National Guard, Mr. Bush has little impact on the 49th's readiness, since the state provides only 5 percent of the Guard's budget.) So far in the campaign, neither Mr. Bush nor his Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, has proposed ways to address the fundamental problems, at least as measured by the accounting system. Mr. Bush has proposed increasing the modernization budget by $20 billion to design and build new weapons systems, and raising pay and benefits by $1 billion, or nearly $750 for each person in uniform. Mr. Gore, too, has proposed increasing benefits for the troops.
 Sheila A Spector letter on Bob Herbert's Aug 28 column cataloging Gov George W Bush's malapropisms; says Bush should be made to clarify his positions Re ''Political Tongue Twisters,'' by Bob Herbert (column, Aug. 28): Gov. George W. Bush is not the first politician to trip over language. George Orwell argued in ''Politics and the English Language'' that ''political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible.'' He added, ''Thus political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness.'' That is not simply a matter of concern to English teachers. ''If thought corrupts language,'' Orwell explained, ''language can also corrupt thought.'' Re ''Political Tongue Twisters,'' by Bob Herbert (column, Aug. 28): Gov. George W. Bush is not the first politician to trip over language. George Orwell argued in ''Politics and the English Language'' that ''political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible.'' He added, ''Thus political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness.'' That is not simply a matter of concern to English teachers. ''If thought corrupts language,'' Orwell explained, ''language can also corrupt thought.'' Rather than bemusedly cataloging the malapropisms dominating Mr. Bush's speech, we ought to be demanding that the governor clarify his positions, if he can.
 Photo of Gov George W Bush in Austin, Tex After watching his lead in the polls evaporate, Gov. George W. Bush is adjusting and adapting his campaign strategy. In the past, when Vice President Al Gore belittled him, Mr. Bush expressed something akin to bemusement. No more. A new Republican commercial casts Mr. Gore as an untrustworthy, untruthful chameleon. And in his own whirl of campaign trips, Mr. Bush plans to pick apart Mr. Gore's policies and raise more pointed questions about his leadership. PAGE A14 After watching his lead in the polls evaporate, Gov. George W. Bush is adjusting and adapting his campaign strategy. In the past, when Vice President Al Gore belittled him, Mr. Bush expressed something akin to bemusement. No more. A new Republican commercial casts Mr. Gore as an untrustworthy, untruthful chameleon. And in his own whirl of campaign trips, Mr. Bush plans to pick apart Mr. Gore's policies and raise more pointed questions about his leadership. PAGE A14
 I am pulling for Bush and Cheney, not Gore and Lieberman, and I am not Jewish but Roman Catholic. Still, I love what Senator Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, is doing to wake this nation up to its deepest identity, rooted in Jewishness. I am pulling for Bush and Cheney, not Gore and Lieberman, and I am not Jewish but Roman Catholic. Still, I love what Senator Lieberman, an Orthodox Jew, is doing to wake this nation up to its deepest identity, rooted in Jewishness.
 ''The bet is now, even if Franks has two or three weeks of effective commercials, they'll be less effective,'' the adviser said, ''because Franks is competing not just with Jon Corzine, but with Hillary and Lazio in New York, with Rick Santorum and Ron Klink in Pennsylvania, and with Al Gore and George Bush.''
 Bush Offers Debate Dates And Tries to Turn Tables  Trying to end questions about his willingness to debate and turn the tables on his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush announced a schedule of three hand-picked debates that he wanted to do, only one of which is guaranteed to be broadcast on the three major networks. Mr. Bush pointedly challenged Vice President Al Gore to meet him on these chosen dates and terms. His idea drew an immediate reaction from Mr. Gore, who said he was ''very disappointed.'' Vice President Al Gore begins the fall stretch of the presidential campaign buoyant in the polls and brimming with confidence. But the Gore team's newfound euphoria is tempered with caution. Mr. Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman kicked off a round-the-clock Labor Day campaign swing designed to portray them as the ticket for the working class. What War-Ready Means  The 49th Armored Division of the Texas National Guard -- nominally under Gov. George W. Bush's command -- has the lowest ranking for wartime readiness that the Pentagon gives, according to military officials. It has been that way for the last three years. But just as the Pentagon disputes that its active-duty forces are not ready for combat, the 49th Guard division's case reveals a far more difficult question about the overall state of the American military today. It involves an arcane, sometimes subjective readiness accounting system that can be misleading and is not easily reduced to the sound bites of a presidential campaign.
 William Safire Op-Ed column scores Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush for whining about 'personal attacks' from the other's camp and trying to turn any sort of criticism into an 'attack' (M) When Al Gore, seeking G.O.P. specifics to denounce, went so far as to suggest it was ''kind of put up or shut up time,'' George W. Bush put on a hurt look and went into whining mode. ''That doesn't sound very presidential to me. ... We have to do something to change the tone of the discourse.'' He later added reverently that ''politics doesn't have to be ugly and mean.'' When Al Gore, seeking G.O.P. specifics to denounce, went so far as to suggest it was ''kind of put up or shut up time,'' George W. Bush put on a hurt look and went into whining mode. ''That doesn't sound very presidential to me. ... We have to do something to change the tone of the discourse.'' He later added reverently that ''politics doesn't have to be ugly and mean.'' Then the Bush campaign dared to air a TV commercial suggesting that Gore's eager participation in illegal 1996 Asian fund-raising -- in contrast to his current embrace of campaign finance reform -- was evidence of a credibility problem. At this fairly gentle jab, Gore went into full frontal whine. He dispatched his running mate (slogan: ''Gore-Lieberman in 5761'') to intone ''these new attack ads ... drag us back to the worst politics of the past.'' ''GOP Goes on Attack in New Ad,'' headlines the easily horrified Washington Post; ''Bush Approves New Attack Ad Mocking Gore,'' tut-tuts The New York Times. Reporters on the campaign trail grill both candidates fiercely not so much for stories about sharp disagreement with the opponent as for telltale signs of the great no-no of negativity. Bush pioneered the whining strategy in the primaries with his orchestrated offense-taking at John McCain for slamming evangelicals who were hinting the former captive was crazy; McCain then retreated into the rictus of a forced smile. But when Bush tried to repeat this don't-touch-Mr.-Nice-Guy tactic against an expected Gore onslaught, he ran into world-class, hand-over-the-heart counter-whining mournfully accusing him of ''changing his tune about changing the tone.'' As a result, Bush is being flayed for his criticism of the Gore record. When he draws a distinction between what Gore did as vice president with what he says now, that is described as ''a personal attack on Gore for hypocrisy.'' Then comes the beauty part for Democrats: because Bush promised to change the tone and then dared to cast even lighthearted aspersions on Gore's mistakes and exaggerations, it is Bush who is attacked for his hypocrisy, mocked for his mockery, and pilloried endlessly for his unwillingness to move on. Because negativity is the supreme no-no, politicians are persuaded that sunniness is next to godliness and outrage is outre. That's why Bush is told to point with pride but rarely to view with alarm. When Bush transgresses by criticizing the hollowed-out state of our national defense, he risks the withering whining of Gore about running down our brave men and women in uniform. Thus has the declension of ''all politics is local'' gone from ''all criticism is an attack'' down to ''all attacks are personal.'' In 2000, amiability is all. Gore has solemnly promised that he is ''not going to say a single negative thing about my opponents,'' leaving it to his once-removed surrogates to treat Texas as a state governed by a despot who starves its poor and fries its convicts. Republicans, whose convention theme song seemed to be a Dewey-eyed ''Sheep May Safely Graze,'' thought they could attract the don't-bicker crowd by constant choruses of ''Mean to Me.'' They are coming to the Labor Day realization that Bush's technique of compassionate complaining is being neatly countered by Gore's systematic sniveling.
 Profile of Sarah A Bianchi, Vice Pres Al Gore's 27-year-old deputy issues director and one of his move visible staff members; photo (M) THE wispy young woman paces at the back of the crowd, nodding incessantly as Al Gore makes another arcane point about the intricacies of Medicare. She claps gently and gives her fist a half-pump,  almost as if afraid that someone will see. It is not every 27-year-old, after all, who can be driven to ecstasy by a candidate's pledge to put the Medicare surplus in a lock box. But Sarah A. Bianchi is not just any twenty-something. In the five years since she graduated from Harvard, where she shared a suite in Leverett House with Mr. Gore's eldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, Ms. Bianchi has worked as an assistant to the associate director for health at the Office of Management and Budget, an assistant director for health policy at the president's domestic policy council, the senior health care adviser to the vice president and now as deputy issues director of the Gore campaign. THE wispy young woman paces at the back of the crowd, nodding incessantly as Al Gore makes another arcane point about the intricacies of Medicare. She claps gently and gives her fist a half-pump,  almost as if afraid that someone will see. It is not every 27-year-old, after all, who can be driven to ecstasy by a candidate's pledge to put the Medicare surplus in a lock box. But Sarah A. Bianchi is not just any twenty-something. In the five years since she graduated from Harvard, where she shared a suite in Leverett House with Mr. Gore's eldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, Ms. Bianchi has worked as an assistant to the associate director for health at the Office of Management and Budget, an assistant director for health policy at the president's domestic policy council, the senior health care adviser to the vice president and now as deputy issues director of the Gore campaign. As Mr. Gore has increasingly positioned his politics around his devotion to policy, Ms. Bianchi has become one of his most visible staff members. Last week, after pulling near all-nighters to compile briefing papers on health care, she worked the campaign's press filing centers doggedly and sat in on conference calls, answering reporters' questions about the details of Mr. Gore's proposals and taking shots at those of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. On Tuesday, at a health care forum in Albuquerque, a woman in the audience asked Mr. Gore whether his proposal to expand the federal Children's Health Insurance Program would cover prenatal care. He had no idea. ''Is Sarah out there somewhere?'' Mr. Gore pleaded, scanning the crowd. She wasn't, having stayed in a nearby filing center, where reporters and Gore aides were watching the event on closed-circuit television. Hearing her name, Ms. Bianchi scurried to the rescue. She assured the woman, and Mr. Gore, that the plan would restore prenatal care coverage that had been cut several years ago. ''It's something that Gore's been fighting for for a long time,'' Ms. Bianchi told the woman. Mr. Gore, laughing at himself, said, ''As I was saying, part of my proposal is to restore the coverage for people in that situation.'' Over the course of the campaign, Mr. Gore and his aides said, Ms. Bianchi has earned a place at the table with a passionate commitment to social policy, a steel-trap mind for numbers, a quiet confidence that belies her age and a determination that policy not be compromised by politics. If some Gore aides once dismissed her because of her youth, they now know that she has his complete confidence. Mr. Gore, in an interview, described Ms. Bianchi -- ''Sarah B.'' to the Gore family -- as ''scary smart,'' and possessing an encyclopedic expertise on health and welfare policy. She came to know the Gores through her ties to Ms. Schiff, and she spent time playing basketball at the vice president's residence and water skiing with the Gores in Tennessee. But several Gore aides said she had risen on the merits, and Ronald Klain, Mr. Gore's former chief of staff, said he first hired her without even knowing of her connections to the Gores. Campaigns, of course, are often populated with bright young people who are valued for their enthusiasm, their stamina  and their willingness to sleep on futons. Mr. Gore's research director, David Ginsberg, is 25. Michael B. Feldman, a senior adviser, is 31. Mr. Gore's national field director, Donnie Fowler, is 32, as is his speechwriter, Eli Attie. His press secretary, Chris Lehane, is 33. She acknowledged feeling the doubts of her  colleagues in early strategy sessions, but said that Mr. Gore had helped establish her credentials. Ms. Bianchi's most important role, said several Gore aides, may be in fighting the temptation to push the campaign's rhetoric beyond the limits of its policies.
 The Republican vice presidential nominee did not, as originally reported, threaten to ''rescind'' these monument designations, nor did he say that he would ask Congress to do so. Under law, only Congress has the power to roll back a designation. However, he made one telling remark that has annoyed the White House while reinforcing the impression that a Bush administration would be much more reluctant than Mr. Clinton has been to use federal power to expand wilderness protections. The Republican vice presidential nominee did not, as originally reported, threaten to ''rescind'' these monument designations, nor did he say that he would ask Congress to do so. Under law, only Congress has the power to roll back a designation. However, he made one telling remark that has annoyed the White House while reinforcing the impression that a Bush administration would be much more reluctant than Mr. Clinton has been to use federal power to expand wilderness protections. It is also true, however, that a monument designation is a quintessentially federal act, imposed from above by the executive branch. Although that is just what Congress intended in 1906 when it passed the Antiquities Act, giving the president unilateral authority to rescue historic sites imperiled by Congressional inaction, recent Republican presidents have resisted using it. Presidents Nixon, Reagan and Bush are the only chief executives since 1906 not to designate at least one monument. Governor Bush is on that wavelength. He says he sees an important federal role in conservation, but mainly as a manager of existing parks and wilderness areas and as a ''partner'' in local conservation efforts. Mr. Clinton, by contrast, is prepared to use federal powers pre-emptively to protect additional lands from development, and presumably Mr. Gore would do the same. It is that expansive view of the federal role, as much as anything, that prompted Mr. Cheney's criticism.
 But Mrs. Clinton seemed to do anything but vacation. In Washington, she summoned her campaign staff to the White House, where she went through several hours of debate practice, with Bob Barnett, a Washington lawyer and book agent, playing the part of Mr. Lazio. Mr. Barnett played the part of President Bush in mock debates with Bill Clinton in 1992.
 Photo of Vice Pres Al Gore campaigning for president in Philadelphia Vice President Al Gore begins the fall stretch of the campaign buoyant in the polls and brimming with confidence. Perhaps the strongest sign of this self-assurance is the Gore campaign's grab for Florida, a state that has been perceived as pro-Bush for months and where Gov. George W. Bush's brother Jeb is the governor. Mr. Gore will pop into Tampa in a 24-hour Labor Day tour and plans to pay frequent calls to other swing states, including Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan. PAGE A14 Vice President Al Gore begins the fall stretch of the campaign buoyant in the polls and brimming with confidence. Perhaps the strongest sign of this self-assurance is the Gore campaign's grab for Florida, a state that has been perceived as pro-Bush for months and where Gov. George W. Bush's brother Jeb is the governor. Mr. Gore will pop into Tampa in a 24-hour Labor Day tour and plans to pay frequent calls to other swing states, including Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan. PAGE A14
 Gov George W Bush announces schedule of three hand-picked debates that he will do, only one of which is guaranteed to be broadcast on the three major networks; challenges Vice Pres Al Gore to meet him on these chosen dates and terms, trying to turn Gore's response into a referendum on his credibility; Bush proposal is a rebuff to Commission on Presidential Debates, which has proposed three debates, all to be broadcast on the major networks; Gore aides suggest that Bush is afraid of prime-time confrontation; photo (M) Trying to end questions about his willingness to debate and to turn the tables on his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush today announced a schedule of three hand-picked debates that he would do, only one of which is guaranteed to be broadcast on the three major networks. Mr. Bush pointedly challenged Vice President Al Gore to meet him on these chosen dates and terms, with the first debate on Sept. 12. And he tried to turn Mr. Gore's response into a referendum on the vice president's credibility. Trying to end questions about his willingness to debate and to turn the tables on his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush today announced a schedule of three hand-picked debates that he would do, only one of which is guaranteed to be broadcast on the three major networks. Mr. Bush pointedly challenged Vice President Al Gore to meet him on these chosen dates and terms, with the first debate on Sept. 12. And he tried to turn Mr. Gore's response into a referendum on the vice president's credibility. ''My opponent has said he will debate anytime, anywhere, and he has already accepted the debates that I am accepting today,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's important for the American people to be able to trust the next president to keep his commitments, and therefore I take Al Gore at his word that he will be there.'' Mr. Bush's proposal was a rebuff to the Commission on Presidential Debates, which was created by both parties and has supervised the presidential debates since 1988. That agency had proposed three debates, all to be broadcast on the major networks, a plan Mr. Gore has accepted. Mr. Bush, who made his announcement at a hastily called news conference on the lawn of the governor's mansion this afternoon, said he would debate Mr. Gore on a prime-time edition of NBC's ''Meet the Press'' on Sept. 12, on ''Larry King Live'' on CNN on Oct. 3, and in St. Louis on Oct. 17. The last debate, at Washington University, was the only presidential commission debate accepted by Mr. Bush. At his news conference, Mr. Bush played video clips of Mr. Gore in appearances with Tim Russert on ''Meet the Press'' in July and on ''Larry King Live'' in March in which he said he would be happy to appear in debates on their shows. As the videos played, Mr. Bush stood at a lectern tapping his foot. Mr. Gore, who learned of Mr. Bush's offer at a campaign appearance in Philadelphia, instantly rejected it. His aides said that the commission debates were the only ones likely to be carried by all the major television networks and seen by the broadest television audience possible. Another Gore aide said that Mr. Gore would agree to the CNN and NBC sessions -- but only if he also agreed to the three commission debates. ''We've already accepted these,'' Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said of Mr. Bush's CNN and NBC debates. ''We have no problem with these. We just want to make sure we do the three presidential ones.'' Mr. Gore's aides have been suggesting that Mr. Bush is afraid of a prime-time confrontation, raising the question of whether he is up to the presidency. Mr. Bush was trying to plant the idea today that Mr. Gore is not a man of his word. Gore aides also said that Mr. Bush was deliberately trying to shrink the audience because unless there was blanket coverage, viewers would likely stray to other programming. ''Unless these debates are road-blocked, you don't get the kind of viewership you do with the commission debates,'' said one aide, noting that Mr. Bush's proposal for the NBC debate would bump up against popular shows like ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire'' and ''NYPD Blue.'' It was not clear how much exposure the noncommission debates proposed by Mr. Bush would get. Donald L. Evans, Mr. Bush's campaign chairman, said that NBC and CNN had offered to make their videotape available to other networks. Asked about the Gore campaign's reaction to Mr. Bush's debate proposal, Karen P. Hughes, his director of communications, said, ''We'll be there and we'll see if Al Gore will keep his word.'' She added, ''After eight years of prevaricating, after eight years of 'no controlling legal authority' and of debate over what the meaning of 'is' is, the American people deserve a president who will keep his word.'' Ms. Hughes said she saw no reason why the networks would not agree to broadcast all three debates as a public service. Mr. Gore, who was beginning a 24-hour Labor Day tour in Philadelphia, said, ''I'm very disappointed in this reaction because what's needed is to respect the rights of the American people, to see the debates on all the networks in prime time.'' Of the commission debates, Mr. Gore said: ''It is a bipartisan, nonpartisan tradition, and it's not about Governor Bush, it's not about me, it's about the American people and giving the American people the chance they deserve to make an informed judgment as to who they want to be the next president.'' Mr. Bush's aides replied that President Clinton had rejected some of the commission's proposals in 1996. On Monday, The New York Times reported that Bush aides were resisting the commission, because they did not want to commit to three sessions broadcast in prime time on the three major networks. But the next morning, Mr. Bush told reporters that he was not afraid of prime time. ''I want as many people to watch our debates as possible,'' he said. In the case of the one commission debate that Mr. Bush accepted, it was not clear what the format would be. Mr. Evans said that still had to be negotiated and that all the campaign had accepted was the St. Louis site. Mr. Bush today also said his campaign would agree to two vice-presidential debates, one in Winston-Salem, N.C., sponsored by the debate commission and another one in a forum yet to be decided. Mr. Bush is generally considered  by political strategists to be a weaker debater than Mr. Gore and his aides had been angling for different formats. On Friday commission officials told aides to Mr. Bush that they would not revise the locations of schedules for the forums because the work was too far advanced. Mr. Bush said he had selected the three formats because they would be varied and because he wanted one debate on the West Coast. ''This will give the American people an opportunity to see the candidates in a wide range of locations and formats,'' he said. As the debate over debates has simmered, Mr. Bush has appeared on the defensive, looking like he was seeking a better format for himself. He and his aides were clearly trying to turn the tables and use the struggle over debates to go after Mr. Gore's character and make him look untrustworthy. After Mr. Bush's news conference, Ms. Hughes reminded reporters that Mr. Gore had said he would debate anytime and anywhere. ''We take him at his word,'' she said. And on CNN, before Mr. Bush's news conference, Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman, also noted that the vice president had been accepting numerous debate offers. Mr. Fleischer said, ''I predict to you, they're going to change their position all of a sudden again.'' Mr. Bush issued his challenge hours before flying to Chicago, where he planned to begin the Labor Day kickoff of the general election campaign. Polls show the race to be a dead heat or else give Mr. Gore a slight lead. The debates are considered an important forum that could well help undecided voters make up their mind. Mr. Bush and his senior advisers had been saying for weeks that they wanted to explore options beyond those proposed by the bipartisan debate commission, because they felt that there could be other debates of equal or greater value to voters. But one adviser conceded tonight that in selecting debates that would be moderated by the journalist Tim Russert in one case and the talk-show host Larry King in another, Mr. Bush was guaranteeing that he would take questions from people who had quizzed him before, and with whom he felt familiar. One Republican strategist in Washington said that by spurning two of the three commission debates, which would be more structured, Mr. Bush was showing ''that he's concerned about filling the full two-minute answer'' in a debate with formal time parameters. But several of Mr. Bush's advisers said that while journalists were sure to deride Mr. Bush's decision, most voters would care only about the fact that Mr. Bush was debating and would find all the noise surrounding the negotiations to be meaningless.
