 Excerpts from remarks about religion and God made recently by Gov George W Bush, Vice Pres Al Gore, Sen Joseph I Lieberman and Dick Cheney (M) George W. Bush, at the annual convention of B'nai B'rith International in Washington on Monday. George W. Bush, at the annual convention of B'nai B'rith International in Washington on Monday. Al Gore in an interview on Tuesday at a television station in St. Louis.
 Less than a year before his death, Mr. Hoffman was writing a book about George Bush and the 1988 presidential campaign, including a chapter that was sold as an excerpt to Playboy about Mr. Bush's role in the Iran-Contra affair. A postscript reveals Mr. Hoffman's fears of continuing government surveillance. Because of the explosive contents of this article & a pact I have with Playboy, no one is to make a copy of this article or read it without you present & in possession of all the pages. This is the first chapter of a book by Abbie Hoffman & Jon Silvers [''The Faking of the President''] . . .  The article should present some serious problems for George Bush. . . . Congress may indeed want another whack at why pre-1985 arms sales (we have tons more evidence on this point) weren't pursued more vigorously by the past panels -- that's up to [Representative John Conyers Jr.] & Congress . . . During the research, we just felt it was our obligation to our country & the truth to do a good a job as we could. But if Bush doesn't lose 500,000 votes on this I'll eat the article raw! These notes refer to [Contemporary Classics, a publishing venture] which I think can be a real steady money maker. I got tons of fans out there -- like a cult rock singer -- who simply aren't covered by mass distribution techniques & desperately want stuff. I auctioned my No Bush . . . T-shirt for $65 for a group. Now I want to start making profit & need your help.
 Andrew Sullivan article on improbable circumstance that son of man who was elected US President in 1988 is running for same post, and could win, in 2000; notes that Bush family already controls two of largest states in country and next generation is already being groomed; notes other American political dynasties; drawing (M) If the Bush dynasty were a freak occurrence, it might be amusing rather than disturbing. But the Bushes are increasingly not the exception. The family controls two of the largest states in the country and, with George P., is already grooming the next generation. On the other side of the aisle we have Al Gore, whose first political campaign was running for the Congressional seat once held by his daddy. Both parties' conventions were crammed with the nattering nabobs of nepotism. In Philadelphia, a former librarian named Laura Bush gave a prime-time speech on education, while the speaker of the House was shunted to the sidelines. Lynne Cheney spoke in prime time, and Mary Cheney emerged as a leading adviser in her father's campaign. George P. Bush also muscled in on prime time, doing outreach for the Bush campaign to young and Hispanic voters. Was he truly the best qualified of all the young Republicans in the country? There were also addresses by Elizabeth Dole, wife of a former Republican nominee, by Representative Vito Fossella, great-grandson of a former congressman, and Theodore Roosevelt IV, great-grandson of a former president. Their qualifications? Try the gene pool. In Los Angeles, the picture was no prettier. There were no fewer than five members of the Kennedy family onstage at different times -- a record even for their nepotistic excesses. Karenna Gore Schiff, a 27-year-old former journalism intern, gave a major talk, and pundits spoke glowingly of her political future. The vice president's campaign is run by William Daley, brother of the mayor of Chicago -- and son of the former mayor of Chicago. Andrew Cuomo, son of a former governor of New York State and husband of a Kennedy, was also on hand to boost his rising star. And of course, a prime speaking slot was devoted to Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is running for a Senate seat in a state she has barely lived in for the first elected public office of her life. Hmmm. I wonder how that happened. Her career places the United States elite at the same level of democratic accessibility as the those of the Philippines, Sri Lanka or Pakistan, where the wives and daughters of able leaders are expected to continue their legacies. I emigrated for this? America was founded on the republican principle of popular self-government, in which the citizenry all had an equal chance -- and responsibility -- to be involved in public life. This republican Constitution was a conscious rebuke to the aristocracies and monarchies of the Old World, an assertion that in America, merit alone would determine who would run the country. But in the 21st century, our political system is characterized by court cronies, family hangers-on and primogeniture. With the Gores and Bushes and Daleys and Kennedys, who needs a House of Lords? It is particularly troubling that this is happening at a time when the country itself is becoming more and more diverse. If anything, the narrow influence of bloodlines should be at an all-time low, not an alarming high. The dangers are not simply that we'll discredit the democratic process itself, but that we'll see national politics descend into family power struggles rather than real issues. So George W. Bush is running in part to avenge his father's defeat in 1992, and Al Gore is running in part to avenge his father's Senate defeat in 1970. Even their ideologies seem soaked in genealogy. In some respects, this election is between the son of Albert Gore Sr., Southern populist, and the grandson of Prescott Bush, bleeding-heart Republican. It's less a War of the Parties than a War of the Roses. But why now? The two main culprits, I think, are money and celebrity. The fund-raising requirements in today's electoral circus are so onerous that it is more than a help to have a pre-existing mailing list and money network that belonged to daddy or mommy or hubby. This is a kind of hereditary incumbency, where being related to someone already plugged in gives you a massive head-start. And the power of celebrity is now so great and the media universe so crowded that having a famous name or a famous family is an increasingly priceless asset -- and can outweigh any meritocratic criticism. In the annals of modern nepotism, it is hard to beat John F. Kennedy's appointment of his own brother as attorney general, which established a conflict of interest that could only undermine public confidence in the neutral enforcement of the nation's laws. But the Kennedys' telegenic charm turned their nepotism into an asset. George W. Bush follows in Kennedy's wake. He draws on money and connections unavailable to, say, Gary Bauer, son of a janitor, and charms his way through the rest. It's particularly poignant when you consider that Bush's main primary rival was John McCain, a man who refused to let his own powerful military father pull strings for him as a prisoner of war.
 That sense was later applied to more general opinions or abilities. When Joseph Lieberman was chosen by Al Gore to be his running mate, Rabbi Avi Shafran told The New York Times that concern about Jewish visibility in politics was ''sort of hard-wired into our system, for better or worse.'' Similarly, a coach for the California Bears recently told The San Francisco Chronicle that he had high hopes for a young player because ''he's wired the right way for a quarterback'' -- that is, he had the stable temperament and quick reactions suited to that position.
 If these stylish scrapbooks are making you ache with envy -- the apartments! the pedigrees! the clothes! -- an evening with ''4 Blondes'' (Atlantic Monthly, this month) by Candace Bushnell will bring you right down: ''4 Blondes'' is aversion therapy for social climbers. Like the characters in Evelyn Waugh's ''Decline and Fall,'' Ms. Bushnell's ersatz blondes make it hard to decide which is more depraved. There's Janey (''Nice 'n Easy''), an over-the-hill model, who sleeps her way into a summer house in the Hamptons each year; Winnie (''Highlights''), a not-quite-smart-enough magazine editor, who loathes her feckless writer husband and for whom a $500 pair of Manolo Blahniks -- toe cleavage! -- generates a sly plot twist; and Cecelia (''Snow Angel''), a pill-popping princess-by-marriage, who may or may not have murdered her best friend. The fourth blonde is Ms. Bushnell's stand-in, a sex columnist on assignment in England; she's the ''nice'' one, who wins a love interest on the last page.
 Profile of playwright Gore Vidal in light of return to Broadway of his 1959 play The Best Man, starring Charles Durning, Spalding Gray and Elisabeth Ashley and directed by Ethan McSweeny; photo (M) Mr. Vidal attended his first convention at the age of 14, yet he did not even consider stopping by when the Democrats met in Los Angeles to nominate Al Gore last month, even though he was 25 minutes away by car, settled in at a rooftop suite with a private garden at the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel. ''It's too dismal,'' Mr. Vidal said, the morning after President Clinton gave his valedictory speech to the assembled Democrats. ''I'm not interested in any of the candidates.'' Still, Mr. Vidal has not, it seems, lost enthusiasm for what was probably his best-received play, nor has he made any changes in the original script to account for the intervening 40 years. Now formally retitled ''Gore Vidal's The Best Man,'' to avoid confusion with an unrelated movie called ''The Best Man'' that was released last fall, the drama abounds with themes and lines that are at times strikingly contemporary, notwithstanding the fact that they were written before many of the current crop of politicians were old enough to vote. This was Nixon versus Stevenson in its time, the inspiration for the competing politicians in the play, but there is no shortage of present-day analogies. ''There are only so many types who are drawn to politics,'' Mr. Vidal observed. And the questions he raises in setting up the combat between his politicians are the same ones that Bill Bradley's dispirited supporters were asking themselves in New Hampshire as Al Gore cheerfully pummeled their candidate into defeat: Who would make the better candidate for office? And who would make the better president? ''I don't have an answer and I never will,'' Mr. Vidal said last month in Los Angeles, poking at a slab of seared salmon and drinking iced coffee in the dining room of the Beverly Wilshire, which was teeming with Democratic delegates who, to his constant distraction, had taken to chanting ''Gore!'' as they marched through the hotel corridors. THE speech he gave warned that the drive to increase the country's military might was a threat to the economic viability of the Republic at a time when the nation is anxious for peace and suspicious of interventionism (much as Mr. Gore's grandfather was when he served as a senator from Oklahoma). ''It was quite something,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Not only a standing ovation, but they began to chant, 'Go, Gore! Go, Gore! Go, Gore!' They were running me for president!'' Al Gore is another matter. The two are distant cousins through Mr. Vidal's mother, though Mr. Vidal, in the polite way one talks about strayed relatives, leaves little doubt at his disappointment -- or perhaps disinterest -- in this particular member of the famous family. Would he vote for his cousin? Mr. Vidal, at this point speaking from his villa in Italy by telephone, laughed heartily at the question. ''As they say in the House of Representatives, at the end of the day, Gore is thicker than Nader,'' he said, presumably meaning that his blood-tie to Mr. Gore counted more than his ideological attraction to Ralph Nader. In any event, Mr. Vidal said he had never met Mr. Gore, and does not think it possible to learn much about him, or George W. Bush, from the way presidential campaigns are conducted. ''We'll never know whether they're interesting or not,'' he said.
 Senator Paul Wellstone, a Minnesota Democrat who has crusaded for legislation  to force insurance companies to treat mental health the same as physical health, recalled a meeting at Vice President Al Gore's house a few years ago about a proposed bill.  More than 30 senators were there, most with their wives or husbands. They spoke ''very personally about members of their own family or close friends who struggled with mental illness, but not to the point of talking about themselves.'' The last time a high-profile campaign tried to damage an opponent by accusing him of seeking psychiatric help was in 1988, when the Bush campaign and President Reagan sought to discredit Michael A. Dukakis. John Deardourff, a longtime Republican consultant, said he believed that ''there are enough people in both parties'' today ''who would speak out against anybody who tried to raise that issue against a candidate that it would be very dangerous.'' Even Tipper Gore, praised by one psychiatrist after another for discussing her depression and treatment last year, spoke of ''counseling.'' And when an article in The New York Times Magazine in 1993 described the family therapy received by the Gores after their son was struck by a car and nearly died, the vice president's office complained that the article should not have said he had weekly visits from a ''therapist,'' but from a ''facilitator.''
 Called to Be Gore  In ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima find in Al Gore a compulsive self-scrutinizer, virtually born on Page 1 and required all his life to think about how whatever he does will look; reviewed by Ben Macintyre. Called to Be Gore  In ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima find in Al Gore a compulsive self-scrutinizer, virtually born on Page 1 and required all his life to think about how whatever he does will look; reviewed by Ben Macintyre.
 Four walking tours of H.P.D.-sponsored housing developments are scheduled, one for the Bushwick section of Brooklyn on Saturday and others later in the month in Jamaica, Queens, the Melrose section of the Bronx and Harlem.
 Slightly more optimistic but also more wary is Robert Burns, principal of Public School 86 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. He said he wanted to believe that some good would come from the various education proposals offered by George W. Bush and Al Gore, but expressed concern about just what that might be. He has no taste for vouchers that allow school choice, as Mr. Bush advocates, and is equally wary of shuttering failing schools, as Mr. Gore has proposed. But, he contended, a way to improve schools can be found. Diane Ravitch, a New York University education historian and an assistant secretary of education in the Bush administration, said she was not surprised that so many candidates have jumped on the education bandwagon. But as she listens to the debates between various candidates, particularly Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, she wonders if people will come to expect too much from the winners. ''There is a certain unreality to this because what Washington does best is send money back,'' Dr. Ravitch said. ''They don't have the capacity to run programs. The responsibility and accountability is still going to be at the local level.''
 Editorial says intense new phase of presidential campaign starts this weekend, since experience suggests that whoever is ahead in polls after Labor Day usually wins race in November; says underlying reality of campaign is that polls show most voters favor Vice Pres Gore on issues but seem to like Gov George W Bush better as a leader By tradition an intense new phase of the presidential campaign starts this weekend. Since experience suggests that whoever is ahead in the polls after Labor Day usually wins the race in November, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are scrambling hard to gain traction on defining issues -- fiscal responsibility, health care and retirement security for Mr. Gore, and schools, tax cuts and defense for Mr. Bush. But a new measure of the Texas governor's troubles in the last two weeks came with his decision to launch a tough television ad with a personal attack on Mr. Gore's integrity. Suddenly a tone of alarm could be detected in a once-confident Republican campaign that had promised to remain positive. Sooner or later, Mr. Bush's campaign was bound to remind voters of what Mr. Gore himself has called an embarrassment, his visit to a Buddhist temple in California where campaign donors were in attendance. The vice president's implausible denials that he was aware that this was a fund-raising event are, of course, fair game as an issue. But Mr. Gore is right to remind Americans that he favors campaign finance reform and Mr. Bush does not. There may be no similarly awkward pictures of the governor meeting with donors, but Mr. Bush has been a prodigious fund-raiser from special interests this year and his Republican allies in Congress are the ones who blocked the soft-money ban that would do much to clean up the system. By tradition an intense new phase of the presidential campaign starts this weekend. Since experience suggests that whoever is ahead in the polls after Labor Day usually wins the race in November, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are scrambling hard to gain traction on defining issues -- fiscal responsibility, health care and retirement security for Mr. Gore, and schools, tax cuts and defense for Mr. Bush. But a new measure of the Texas governor's troubles in the last two weeks came with his decision to launch a tough television ad with a personal attack on Mr. Gore's integrity. Suddenly a tone of alarm could be detected in a once-confident Republican campaign that had promised to remain positive. Sooner or later, Mr. Bush's campaign was bound to remind voters of what Mr. Gore himself has called an embarrassment, his visit to a Buddhist temple in California where campaign donors were in attendance. The vice president's implausible denials that he was aware that this was a fund-raising event are, of course, fair game as an issue. But Mr. Gore is right to remind Americans that he favors campaign finance reform and Mr. Bush does not. There may be no similarly awkward pictures of the governor meeting with donors, but Mr. Bush has been a prodigious fund-raiser from special interests this year and his Republican allies in Congress are the ones who blocked the soft-money ban that would do much to clean up the system. The new ad reflects an underlying reality of the campaign: that on most issues of concern to voters, the polls show Mr. Gore at an advantage, whereas until the conventions most voters seemed to like Mr. Bush better as a leader. For months Mr. Gore found it hard to make headway in the polls, despite broad popular support for using the surplus to pay for school aid, limited tax cuts and a prescription drug program in Medicare. In the last two weeks Mr. Bush has not had much success in rallying support for his more sweeping tax cut. Despite his 100th appearance in a school in this campaign, he is not especially favored on education either. Mr. Bush's campaign may have felt it had little choice but to return to the two issues that have worked before -- defense, where Republicans hold a distinct advantage according to most polls, and the issue of trustworthiness as a leader. Indeed, tacticians in both camps have long assumed that Mr. Bush would have to link Mr. Gore to the ethical lapses of the Clinton administration at some point in the campaign. The problem is that the Republican ad depicting Mr. Gore as a politician who would say anything to win appeared only a day after Mr. Bush promised not to engage in personal attacks. It undercut the one advantage the governor has enjoyed thus far: voters' perception of him as a likable, confident and straight-talking leader. Since polls show that voters overwhelmingly hate so-called negative ads, it is now possible that voters will focus on the Bush tactic, and think less of him for it, than on the point the ad is making. A similar problem arose with Mr. Gore a couple of months ago when he started attacking Mr. Bush on issues and then had to defend himself against criticism that he was going negative. In political terms, it is hard to tell how voters will react to Mr. Bush's decision to have his running mate, former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, attack Mr. Gore for alleged declines in military readiness. Though many voters trust Republicans on this issue, the polls also show that they do not seem to be terribly concerned about it this year. Their attention may also be called to the uncertain tone of the criticism. While Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney want greater readiness, they also say they want less involvement by American troops in peacekeeping in Europe and elsewhere. Such a position runs counter to Mr. Bush's pledge for the United States not to shrink from its global responsibilities. William Kristol, the acerbic editor of The Weekly Standard, last week called such talk from Republicans of reduced involvement more reminiscent of George McGovern than Ronald Reagan. A final note of defensiveness by the Bush campaign was sounded on the issue of debates. Mr. Bush says he wants to participate, but his negotiators are pressing for debates to be broadcast on one network only. That demand would not serve the public. With issues mattering more and more, the best way for them to be addressed would be in debates on prime time with all networks showing them. The Gore and Bush campaigns should get down to the business of agreeing on times and dates without delay.
 Arthur Richman, the senior adviser in the Yankees' media relations department, has a special interest in the outcome of the presidential contest between George W. Bush, former managing partner of the Texas Rangers, and Al Gore. Richman said he told Bush five years ago that he would someday be president of the United States. After asking him what he was smoking, Richman, a friend of the Bush family, said that Bush told him, ''If I become president, I'm going to appoint you my good-will ambassador to the world.''
 Ben Macintyre reviews book The Prince of Tennessee: The Rise of Al Gore by David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima; photo (M) The Rise of Al Gore. The Rise of Al Gore. Al Gore can balance quite large objects -- tennis rackets, umbrellas, coat hangers, that sort of thing -- on the end of his nose. This unlikely acrobatic skill, perfected when he was a St. Albans schoolboy, tends to find expression when the vice president is bored or keen to defuse a situation, but it is also an apt motif for a life spent juggling rival forces, internal, familial and political. In this fine, deep-mine biography, David Maraniss, an associate editor at The Washington Post, and Ellen Nakashima, a staff reporter there, depict Gore's personality as a remarkable balancing act: parental pressure pulling against personal inclination, the rural son of Tennessee at odds with the cosmopolitan princeling of the Fairfax Hotel, the dreamy idealist and the hard-punching political pro, self-doubt struggling with self-righteousness, ''competing characteristics of farsightedness and caution, selflessness and self-aggrandizement, that have defined him, for better and worse, during his political career.'' Gore called his 1992 manifesto on environmentalism ''Earth in the Balance''; an alternative title for ''The Prince of Tennessee'' might be ''A Life in the Balance.'' The balance is not always comfortable, and the authors depict a character far more complex and conflicted than the man he would succeed in the White House. Where Maraniss's essential biography of Bill Clinton, ''First in His Class,'' was painted in great swaths of color, this is more a work of pointillism, myriad small dots of reportage brought together to form a vivid portrait. The shaping of the Gore biography started before his birth. ''If I have a baby boy, I don't want the news buried on an inside page,'' Albert Gore, the father-senator, told the Washington bureau of The Tennessean. ''I want it on Page 1, where it belongs.'' Gore has spent his entire life on Page 1; he was raised to belong there. When he was 6 his parents were already planting media stories of his precocity, showcasing ''another Gore on the way toward the political pinnacle.'' Perhaps unsurprisingly, given these circumstances, at every critical stage in his life Gore seems to have been aware of an unseen but omnipresent biographer, hovering behind his shoulder, taking notes. ''I was a real little politician,'' he once said, somewhat sadly, of his own childhood. From the earliest years almost every strategic decision, in the authors' phrase, appears to have been underpinned by ''thinking politically on a longer arc.'' So Gore went to Vietnam, to take part in a war of which he passionately disapproved, because it would make a bad impression and damage his father's already struggling senatorial campaign if he did not. He kept his distance from the tumult of antiwar protest at Harvard, ''taking into account not just his feelings at the moment, but also how his actions might affect the political futures of himself or his father.'' When his father made him work in the Tennessee tobacco fields, was that good farming or just good politics? There are other, less familiar but equally telling examples of Gore's compulsive self-scrutiny. In 1971, Gore was not attacked by a bear during a camping trip in Yosemite. The Gores had failed to heed warnings and left a half-eaten candy bar in their tent when they fell asleep. Sure enough, a brown bear came into the campsite, clawed the Gore tent and then wandered off again, having signally failed to change the course of history. To anyone else, this might be an opportunity for self-deprecating reminiscence, but not to Gore, who declined to tell the story when urged to, according to a friend, because ''he couldn't stand to look bad in front of a group of people.'' The environmentalist could not be seen to be ignorant on the subject of ursine eating habits. Someone who senses possible political danger in a half-eaten Snickers dating back three decades is not an easy character to pin down. It is perhaps this restraint, rather than his well-publicized self-inflations and midcampaign image adjustments, that explains why voters still feel they do not know Gore. How well can you know someone so adept at self-projection and protection, whose guard never seems to come down? Maraniss and Nakashima have come closer to the core Gore than any other biographers to date. They reveal a man of intensely competitive urges, impelled by a Calvinist fear of chaos, plagued by doubts, exceptionally competent and confident but uneasy in his own skin, indefatigable, loyal and loyalty-inspiring yet also somewhat lonely. There is a scientific literalness in the Gore mentality as described here, an absolute faith in the power of pure information that comes close to obsession. He may not have invented the Internet, but at times Gore speaks and behaves as if the Internet had invented him. ''Everything came down to facts -- more than parliamentary skill or emotion or personality or intuition or chemistry or poetry or even wealth, pre-eminent was the raw data that comprised information.'' There is little of that quality Keats admired, ''when a man is capable of being in uncertainties, mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact.'' A highly trained political animal with an expansive mind and an instinct for the jugular, he yet appears quirkless in his adult life, lacking the edges that give form to character. Although people who know him well consistently vouch for Gore's black and understated sense of humor, there are no memorable examples in this book. ''Always do right,'' Gore's father reportedly told his only son as he lay dying. If true, these are strange last words; not a release or a farewell, nor yet an expression of love, but a quotable injunction, another order. You can almost hear the invisible biographer scribbling away. Albert Gore Sr. looms over every page of ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' a white-haired Shakespearean patriarch demanding obedience and dedication, even in death; more insistently in death. The old man's astonishment and anger when his son's first presidential campaign was rocked by the issue of pot smoking is one of the most telling episodes in a deeply formal relationship, fraught with unspoken tension. Plainly it had never occurred to the father that his son could do something that might jeopardize the presidential plan. For sure, there was little enough devilry in the young scion. Indeed, so heavy is the weight of paternal expectation, of destiny foretold, that at times he almost seems to lack a will of his own, his own instincts obscured by the overriding commandment to ''do right.'' Thus we find his wife, Tipper, as Gore is debating whether to go to Vietnam, pleading with him: ''What do you really think and how are you going to feel if you do this?'' ''The Prince of Tennessee'' achieves what Gore himself has found so difficult on the stump, by rounding him out into a full character, neither the wooden bore depicted by his enemies nor the perfect prince that his father forged and he has always tried to be. Gore's sense of balance has made him a formidable politician: stable, agile, unflappable, a master of policy and a superb debater. But it may also have suppressed some of the humanity within. The prince born to be president was so busy looking ahead to the prize -- amassing all the facts, doing right, projecting the correct image, blending belief and calculation, trimming the message to the audience and circumstance -- that his sense of self somehow got buried. The famously stiff and distant campaigner is also the one who asks insistently: ''How'd I do? How'd I do?'' The impression given here is of a man who knows almost everything about almost everything except his own personality. If Al Gore wants to get to know himself better, he would be well advised to read this book.
 Mr. Kennedy is representing Bush Terminal, a five million square foot collection of 12 multifloor warehouses on the Brooklyn waterfront. The owner, Industry City Associates, is seeking to transform two of the buildings into a telecommunications center. Plans call for the installation of backup generators on the space behind the buildings where railroad lines once brought cargo from the docks to the city. One of the early tenants at Bush Terminal is Winstar Wireless, a long distance carrier. Algis Butkus, the company's senior manager for construction, said the systems being installed now at telecommunications centers are an extension of the backups that kept voice systems working during power failures.
 Margot Bittenbender is also drawn to nature, but her rather stark black and white intaglio prints, though they ostensibly present nature rather calmly, emphasize natural energy and tireless primal forces. ''Tulips'' is especially illustrative of this. Tulips as much as any flower symbolize a kind of hedonism, but Ms. Bittenbender with her love of chiaroscuro effects and rampant line, makes a trio of tulips, mysterious as if they had been drawn by Edward Gorey. Because the linear feistiness of her ''Roots'' is set below ground, this print is more purely elemental.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column says Gov George W Bush is alarmed about Vice Pres Al Gore's leap ahead in polls, and one result from Bush camp is scalding ad designed to rip Gore's truthfulness and ethics; says it is disingenuous for Bush to describe his cheap-shot ad as 'humorous'; says Bush looks sulky about setting debates; says Bush seems to feel he should be trusted to govern without having to prove himself The Bush campaign has dissolved into a whiny puddle. The Austin team put out a press release Friday bawling that Joe Lieberman was a big meanie to compare Governor Bush to Barney Rubble. The Bush campaign has dissolved into a whiny puddle. The Austin team put out a press release Friday bawling that Joe Lieberman was a big meanie to compare Governor Bush to Barney Rubble. The cocky, jagged-edged strategist, a jogging partner and political ally of W. during the '88 campaign, would have snickered at the oxymoron some Bushies have used to describe the ad campaign against Al Gore: soft negative. The Republicans' new ad has a female narrator sarcastically mocking Mr. Gore's image on TV as he says he ''took the initiative in creating the Internet'' and as he hangs with Buddhist monks. The ad is designed to rip Mr. Gore's truthfulness and ethics. Yet on Friday Mr. Bush defended it by parroting his aides' assertions that it was merely ''humorous'' and ''tongue in cheek.'' In two short weeks, W. and Al have switched roles, and it's making the Bush campaign nuts. Al is now the sunny one, crowing to The Washington Post that ''the wind is at our backs and it's filling our sails.'' He's 10 points ahead, according to a Newsweek poll. And he's now seen as smarter and better-looking than W., according to a Gallup poll, and also the one voters would rather dine with. Thanks to the big smooch, women have finally cottoned to the Democratic nominee. And suddenly W., who had been loftily promising to restore civility to politics, seems like Slashing, Opportunistic Guy. Besides the cheap-shot ad, W. looks sulky about setting the debates. The Bush family has a proud history of aversion to debates, which don't suit them because of their curious relationship with grammar and because they feel they should be trusted to govern without having to prove themselves. He also released his tax returns, showing why $3.5 million was a piddling sacrifice. His income went from $258,394 in 1992, when he was the Bush secretary of defense who helped direct the Persian Gulf war to save a ritzy gas station called Kuwait and keep American oil prices down, to $4,423,289 in 1999, when he was an avatar of Big Oil. The Gore campaign might think about using that Cheney financial statement in an ad. Mr. Cheney didn't fare too shabbily in the Democratic economy. His annual income multiplied 17 times during the Clinton-Gore administration. He got a whopping $20 million in 10 years and gave a measly 1 percent to charity.
 Strategists on both sides of presidential campaign agree that more than 90 percent of electorate has by now settled on either Gov George W Bush or Vice Pres Al Gore; that leaves outcome in November hinging on sliver of expected voters--fewer than 10 percent--who truly have not made up their minds; this narrow pool of voters reflects what pollsters say has been appreciable shift in electorate in two weeks since Democratic convention: Gore consolidated base vote in his party, something Bush accomplished weeks, if not months, earlier; estimated 5 million of voters who are expected to vote are seen undecided; table shows demographics of undecided voters in most hotly contested states (L) Labor Day is the unofficial opening of the general election campaign, but for most voters the race is already over. Strategists on both sides agree that more than 90 percent of the electorate has by now settled on either Gov. George W. Bush or Vice President Al Gore. That leaves the outcome in November hinging on a sliver of expected voters -- fewer than 10 percent -- who truly have not made up their minds. This narrow pool of voters reflects what pollsters say has been an appreciable shift in the electorate in the two weeks since the Democratic convention: Mr. Gore consolidated the base vote in his party, something Mr. Bush accomplished weeks, if not months, earlier. Labor Day is the unofficial opening of the general election campaign, but for most voters the race is already over. Strategists on both sides agree that more than 90 percent of the electorate has by now settled on either Gov. George W. Bush or Vice President Al Gore. That leaves the outcome in November hinging on a sliver of expected voters -- fewer than 10 percent -- who truly have not made up their minds. This narrow pool of voters reflects what pollsters say has been an appreciable shift in the electorate in the two weeks since the Democratic convention: Mr. Gore consolidated the base vote in his party, something Mr. Bush accomplished weeks, if not months, earlier. The competition over these swing voters is driving the political calculations of each side. It explains why Mr. Bush traveled to Ohio today to visit a high school -- his 100th school visit -- and in fact spent all week promoting his education plan. It also explains the Gore campaign's decision to celebrate the Labor Day weekend with a 24-hour ''American Workathon,'' for which the vice president will travel to five cities to spend time with people who are working. The push and pull over swing voters is particularly intense and of utmost consequence this year because both sides acknowledge that the electoral dynamic has changed significantly, with polls now showing a dead-even race between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. For months leading to the party conventions, Mr. Bush  clung to a small but unmistakable lead. In some current polls, Mr. Gore has even pulled ahead. Now, Mr. Gore's aides, citing private and public polls in several states, are confidently declaring for the first time that they are leading in the Electoral College tally. ''We're ahead substantially,'' said Tad Devine, a top strategist for Mr. Gore. ''I've been surprised at the depth of the movement to Gore.'' Karl Rove, the architect of the Bush strategy, conceded that Mr. Gore had made inroads. Yet Mr. Rove disputed the surveys cited by the Gore camp and insisted that the Texas governor was still dominant in the Electoral College. But, sounding a bit frustrated by questions about his candidate's potency in the polls, Mr. Rove added: ''Tune in, man. We've been saying for about three weeks that the race will essentially be dead even by Labor Day. Welcome to reality!'' Whom does she favor today? ''I'm thinking of Gore,'' she said, explaining that she was put off by Mr. Bush's promises about improving education. ''Everybody says they're going to do this and do that. You know it never happens that way.'' Arland Van Kirk, 68, a retired worker in a carburetor shop in Lock Haven, Pa., also has not decided. She identifies more with Republicans than Democrats, she said, but voted for Mr. Clinton twice -- and is torn between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. Explaining that she was not inclined to back Mr. Bush, she said: ''I never liked Bush the father. I always thought he was too mealy-mouthed.'' Her problem with Mr. Gore was also one of style. ''He sometimes acts like he's Mr. Big,'' she said. Even as Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush battle over these voters, the candidates' target audiences are slightly different. Strategists on each side said that among undecided voters, Mr. Bush was aiming at a younger, slightly more upscale pool by promoting measures like privatizing Social Security. Mr. Bush is struggling to hold on to a chunk of women voters in that swing group who polls show are slipping back to the Democratic fold. That, his advisers said, was the impetus behind his visits to schools because women are particularly supportive of improving schools. With his emphasis on prescription drugs and protecting Medicare, Mr. Gore is fashioning his appeals for slightly older swing voters who are faring adequately economically but not as well as they would like. Although his campaign has had far more success with women than men, Mr. Gore is trying to eat into the support for Mr. Bush among working-class men. The Bush campaign has been more aggressive than the Gore operation in homing in on those swing voters. That relentless focus was on display this week in the northwestern corner of Ohio, a crucial battleground state. After Mr. Bush's plane landed at the Toledo airport, one of his aides told reporters that the media market here had the fourth-largest number of swing voters in the state. It was no accident that when he arrived, Mr. Bush was greeted by what he called ''a real family of four,'' with an annual income of $50,000, that he said would benefit from his tax cut plan. And it was no accident that on his one stop in Ohio, Mr. Bush headed for Springfield High School in Holland to promote  himself as the candidate most dedicated to improving education. The Bush campaign could afford to be more narrow in aiming at swing voters, Mr. Rove explained, because Republicans rallied behind Mr. Bush faster than Democrats did behind Mr. Gore. While Mr. Bush was in Ohio today, Mr. Gore was stumping in Seattle with a message of his own for the undecided. Rather than specifically refer to a family with the demographics he is seeking to reach -- as did Mr. Bush -- Mr. Gore broadly appealed to voters who acknowledge the nation's prosperity but worry that they have not benefited sufficiently from it. ''We've got to fight to make sure that everybody participates in the prosperity,'' Mr. Gore said at an outdoor rally in downtown Seattle, ''that nobody is left behind.'' That Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are competing over slightly different profiles of swing voters is apparent in their television commercials. Since the Democratic convention, advertising by the Bush campaign and the Republican Party has included images of 40 children or young adults, 18 adults and 15 elderly people, according to an examination by Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School of Communication at the University of Pennsylvania. By contrast, in keeping with Mr. Gore's focus on older voters, Ms. Jamieson found that the Gore and Democratic Party advertisements in that same period featured 23 children or young adults, but 56 adults and 25 elderly people.
 People laughed, but they were laughing because a famous comedian was onstage. Tucker wasn't really funny, and I'm not sure he was even trying to be all that funny. It's more like he just needed to be on a stage that night. He looked relaxed and contented. He said: ''I'm voting for Gore. Bush looks like he's been partying too much,'' and that got a laugh, but because of the charm of his delivery. No anger. No politics, really.
 Comment on presidential candidates' stances on high-costs of prescription drugs for the elderly; Vice Pres Alo Gore pushes his plan for Medicare prescription drug benefit as humane effort to help older Americans who are being gouged by profit-hungry pharmaceutical industry; Gov George W Bush's campaign characterizes Gore plan as another example of bureaucracy run amok; issue of drug pricing is complex, and beneath candidates' harsh oratory are complex questions about economics of drug advertising, dynamics of price controls and budgets of research laboratories; with more sophisticated and expensive medicines being introduced every year, a big question is whether Medicare will be able to afford them; chart shows increase in drug use, drug sales and drug prices (L) On the campaign stump, Vice President Al Gore pushes his plan for a Medicare prescription drug benefit as a humane effort to help older Americans who are being gouged by profit-hungry pharmaceutical manufacturers. In television commercials, Gov. George W. Bush's campaign characterizes the Gore plan as another example of bureaucracy run amok. On the campaign stump, Vice President Al Gore pushes his plan for a Medicare prescription drug benefit as a humane effort to help older Americans who are being gouged by profit-hungry pharmaceutical manufacturers. In television commercials, Gov. George W. Bush's campaign characterizes the Gore plan as another example of bureaucracy run amok. ''Unfortunately, this is not the kind of issue that bumper stickers are made of,'' said Gail R. Wilensky, who ran the Health Care Financing Administration, the agency that administers the Medicare program, under Mr. Bush's father when he was president. ''The good news is we don't pass legislation in campaigns.'' With profits that rank consistently higher than other Fortune 500 companies and products that can cost tens of thousands of dollars a year, the drug industry has long been an easy target for politicians. Forty years ago, Estes Kefauver, the Democratic senator from Mr. Gore's home state of Tennessee, held hearings into the pricing practices of drug companies. Mr. Gore's plan to ease that burden is nearly identical to President Clinton's. Except for the poorest of the poor, the elderly would not have insurance covering the full cost of all their prescription drugs. Older Americans whose incomes are 135 percent of the poverty level or lower, about $12,000 a year for an individual and $14,000 for couples, would have all of their drug costs covered. The Gore campaign estimates the cost of the proposal at $253 billion over 10 years; an analysis by the Congressional Budget Office estimates the president's plan would cost $297 billion during that time. But the actual cost, Ms. Wilensky said, is extremely difficult to predict. A central feature of the Gore plan is that it offers a uniform benefit; in each region, all Medicare beneficiaries would be covered by the same plan, administered by a single pharmacy benefits manager under contract with Medicare. That kind of government control worries the pharmaceutical industry. Mr. Gore's plan would effectively give Medicare vast purchasing power, enabling the government to extract deep discounts from drug makers. Medicare drug prices would then become public -- in the private sector, negotiated discounts are kept secret -- and private insurers would inevitably demand similar breaks. Like most Republicans, Mr. Bush favors letting the private sector handle prescription drug coverage, an approach that has drawn criticism because many private insurers say they will not offer drug benefits. The Bush campaign has characterized the Gore proposal as a ''one-size-fits-all plan'' that would interfere with the authority of doctors, presumably by restricting the list of drugs covered by insurance. Under Mr. Gore's plan, Mr. Reischauer said, ''The notion that the government will choose your drugs is far from the reality that will evolve.'' Mr. Bush will offer a specific prescription drug proposal next week, his campaign says. His aides have said he would incorporate a prescription drug benefit into an overhaul of the Medicare program, building on work of a bipartisan Congressional commission that has called for competition between the public and private sectors. The commission's proposal, which like the Gore plan would have the government absorb prescription drug costs for the very poor, has been introduced as legislation by Senators John B. Breaux, a Louisiana Democrat, and Bill Frist, a Tennessee Republican. These two approaches -- a uniform Medicare benefits package versus a range of private sector plans -- reflect deep ideological differences between Democrats and Republicans about the proper role of government. Caught in the middle are the drug makers, who are siding with Mr. Bush. Since last year, according to an analysis by the Campaign Study Group, drug makers have contributed $235,515 to Mr. Bush compared with $50,700 for Mr. Gore. And there is another possible explanation: advertising, according to Steven Findlay of the National Institute for Healthcare Management Foundation, a nonprofit research group. During campaign stops in Florida and Oregon this week, Mr. Gore has asserted, correctly, that many drug companies spend more on marketing than research. He singled out one of the most widely advertised medications, Claritin, the antihistamine by Schering-Plough.
 Candidates Court a Sliver Of Voters: the Undecided  Strategists on both sides agree that more than 90 percent of the electorate has by now settled on either Gov. George W. Bush or Vice President Al Gore. That leaves the outcome in November hinging on a sliver of expected voters -- fewer than 10 percent -- who truly have not made up their minds. Al Gore returned to an earlier version of himself, as a writer, during a difficult time: He was turning 40, was deeply in debt and he had just waged a failed campaign for president. In that period he wrote ''Earth in the Balance,'' an environmental call to arms and an examination of his own life.
 Igor Aniskin wants to be an engineer, like his father, Leonid. And he wants to work at a nuclear power station, like his father. He tells me this in confidence, as we flip through an encyclopedia of the physical world, his most prized possession after the Secret Service pin given to his dad by a member of Al Gore's security detail during the vice president's 1997 visit to Chernobyl.
 Scavengers and city workers pick up what they can. ''Frankly, it's a very sad sight,'' said Kedar Gore, the education officer of the World Wide Fund for Nature -- India. The group has issued an ''urgent appeal'' against immersion. ''Serious damage is being done to the sea floor,'' Mr. Gore said sternly.
 Article in series Al Gore's Journey describes how Gore handled his midlife crisis by turning to writing, and by regarding himself as a writer, a role that he seems to see superior to that of politician; after he watched car hit his six-year-old son in 1989, his therapy, his catharsis was a writing project that became the book Earth in the Balance, environmental call to arms; Gore's life at midlife recalled; photos (L) One of Al Gore's Senate colleagues was worried about his late-night comings and goings. ''Son, you need to get home to your family,'' the senator, Howell Heflin of Alabama, told Mr. Gore repeatedly back in 1990 and 1991. Mr. Heflin lived in the same Capitol Hill apartment building where Mr. Gore's parents kept a place after they moved back to Tennessee, and regularly spotted him getting into his car at 2:30 or 3 in the morning. One of Al Gore's Senate colleagues was worried about his late-night comings and goings. ''Son, you need to get home to your family,'' the senator, Howell Heflin of Alabama, told Mr. Gore repeatedly back in 1990 and 1991. Mr. Heflin lived in the same Capitol Hill apartment building where Mr. Gore's parents kept a place after they moved back to Tennessee, and regularly spotted him getting into his car at 2:30 or 3 in the morning. Mr. Gore had embarrassed himself by running for president before he was ready, in 1988. He shuttered that campaign, his first losing effort, just as he was turning 40. Not quite a year later, he watched a car hit his 6-year-old son. His therapy, his catharsis, his way of making sense of all he had been through, was a writing project that became the book ''Earth in the Balance,'' an environmental call to arms. ''I began to take stock, but didn't really know how to do it,'' Mr. Gore said, self-critically, in a recent interview. ''It was obvious to me I had a lot of growing to do, yet I channeled my feeling into the global environmental crisis and addressing it.'' In a darkened car in rural Tennessee a few months later, Mr. Gore tried to describe the scene to Mr. Forrester, who recounted the conversation in an interview. ''I looked down and his hand was slipping out of my hand,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Why was it doing that? Then he was sliding through traffic and everything was slow motion.'' The boy made it across two lanes before he was struck by a '77 Chevy and thrown 20 feet. ''I couldn't get to him fast enough,'' Mr. Gore told his aide. ''I turned his head and he was alive, but we didn't know.'' The child had half of his spleen removed to stop internal bleeding, and spent nearly a month in the hospital and weeks after that in a full body cast. As he began to recover, Mr. Gore felt that he himself was getting a second shot at life. If the result was not an all-new Al Gore -- and it wasn't -- at this time in the life of a newly chastened Mr. Gore, he did learn to do things differently. He put his four children's soccer games and school plays on the schedule, in ink. And traded his dozen-a-day Diet Cokes for club soda with cranberry juice. He made changes large and small, much like George W. Bush, who stopped drinking and got serious after 40. Mr. Gore was still a workhorse, though, still someone who would want to explore the public policy implications of his personal crisis. So instead of sticking close to home, he stepped up his travels to environmental hot spots, including Antarctica and the Amazon, to inspect the damage himself. And rather than cut back his hours, he took on the second demanding job of writing a book. The astonishing thing Mr. Gore did with his second shot, though, was to write the sort of book that could do serious damage to a sitting senator with aspirations. Knowing he would run for president again some day, Mr. Gore produced a work certain to be used against him -- iconoclastic, personal and full of fat targets for ridicule. In terms certain to be lampooned, he connected the dots between family dysfunction and man's collective callousness toward nature. In ''Earth in the Balance,'' Mr. Gore also revealed himself in baldly unflattering ways, harshly judging his own failings as a man and a politician. ''I began to doubt my own political judgment'' in the 1988 campaign, he wrote, ''so I began to ask the pollsters and professional politicians what they thought I ought to talk about. As a result, for much of the campaign I discussed what everybody else discussed, which too often was a familiar list of what the insiders agree are 'the issues.' '' Then, barely back from his book tour, Mr. Gore hooked up with Bill Clinton -- who as governor of Arkansas was not exactly known as an ardent environmentalist. And he took a post that requires whoever holds it to be the opposite of independent, brave and out there. When John Sterling, then editor in chief of Houghton Mifflin, heard in June 1990 that Senator Al Gore wanted to write a book on the global environment, he was skeptical. ''I wasn't interested in some kind of campaign book,'' Mr. Sterling recalled telling Mr. Gore's agent, Mort Janklow. ''I don't do those books. I thought, 'Are we talking a ghostwriter? Is he serious?' '' Still, he traveled to Washington, thinking he might get half an hour, tops, with the would-be writer, probably in tandem with some aide who would have to walk Mr. Gore through the material. Mr. Gore hired a researcher and a clerical assistant, and worked closely with Mr. Sterling to impose a cogent structure on, in the editor's words, the ''287 things he knew he wanted to say.'' Mr. Gore also wanted a little editorial hand-holding. ''I have my own issues I want to work through here,'' he told Mr. Sterling. ''How much Al Gore should there be'' in the book? ''How personal should it be?'' He was also uncharacteristically bold as a lawmaker during this period. A month after his son's accident, he had introduced a bill financing a $1.7 billion program to expand what was then called the information superhighway -- and yes, he did contribute to the development of the Internet. The bill supported research and development for fiber optics and required the Pentagon to upgrade the computer network that was the Internet's forerunner. And it financed research crucial to expanding the Internet beyond military uses. Mr. Gore spent three years pushing it before President George Bush signed it into law in 1991. In the thick of his writing project, in January 1991, he cast a vote that seemed sure to end whatever might be left of his career after his book came out. He voted with Republicans -- and only nine other Senate Democrats (including Joseph I. Lieberman, now his running mate) -- in favor of the Persian Gulf war, infuriating party leaders. The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, refused to speak to Mr. Gore for months, and made it difficult for him to speak on the Senate floor. ''He was a traitor, someone who had abandoned the Democrats,'' said a former Gore aide, Steve Owens. It is ironic that people later accused Mr. Gore of trying to position himself to run as a moderate in 1992, Mr. Owens said. ''Because if Al Gore ever cast a nonpolitical vote, that was it.'' Mr. Gore also began do-it-yourself psychotherapy. And though he can still say, as he has, ''I was never on a couch,'' he took that work seriously, too. One of the first meetings Mr. Gore had after his son's accident was with a Knoxville psychotherapist, Lance Laurence, and five of his colleagues, who wanted him to support a bill increasing Medicare coverage for the treatment of mental illness. In the very first minute of the meeting, though, Mr. Gore said he already favored the bill. ''It was, 'O.K., now what do we talk about?' '' Dr. Laurence recalled. ''He was very psychological-minded,'' Dr. Laurence said. ''There was a click, and we were all able to talk about things that were important, about meaning versus disconnectedness and the pathology of narcissism.'' Mr. Gore knew a lot about Robert Bly's book ''Iron John,'' which discusses the damage that distant fathers do their sons. And as Mr. Gore talked, Dr. Laurence thought that this ''wasn't some theoretical experience with no personal resonance. He was trying to make sense of this for himself and had an emotional appreciation of those issues because he'd been there.'' That night began what one of Mr. Gore's friends called his ''psychotherapy by correspondence course.'' He read books recommended by Dr. Laurence, devoured Carl Jung, listened to personal development tapes in his car and, according to aides, regularly talked to Dr. Laurence on his car phone about what he was reading. Why not do therapy the old-fashioned way? Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, often talk about the need to destigmatize it; would seeking counseling have been so shameful? ''We had family counseling'' at the hospital after his son's accident, Mr. Gore said, ''and we talked about that, but I never really considered doing therapy for myself. I didn't think I needed it, though I would encourage anyone who does to get it.'' Then he added, ''Well, Tipper helped me.'' Friends thought Mr. Gore shunned counseling less because he feared exposure than because he is the do-it-yourself type and doesn't take help that easily -- as he has repeatedly shown in the current campaign. Yet Mr. Gore did re-examine his life, and in his reading was particularly taken with ''The Drama of the Gifted Child,'' by Alice Miller, a book he handed out to friends and drew on in his own writing. The book speaks to the high-achieving children of narcissistic parents, who can lose track of their own desires while striving to please. Mr. Gore has never spoken other than respectfully of his own self-made, intensely ambitious mother and father. But in his book, he wrote this: ''A developing child in a dysfunctional family searches his parent's face for signals that he is whole and all is right with the world; when he finds no such approval, he begins to feel that something is wrong inside. And because he doubts his worth and authenticity, he begins controlling his inner experience -- smothering spontaneity, masking emotion, diverting creativity into robotic routine.'' As Mr. Gore was writing those words, he was struggling to stay true to his promise to spend more time with his own children. ''There had been a real strain on the family,'' said Mr. Owens, who worked for Mr. Gore in both the House and the Senate. And Mr. Gore's relationship with his wife remained tense for some time after their son's accident. His staff saw a relationship that seemed passionate -- they witnessed some major smooches, too -- and very real, but with real fights to show for it. One night, months after the accident, Tipper Gore was with her husband in Tennessee, where she was to appear with him at a fund-raiser for his 1990 senatorial race. In the car on the way there, she asked him to brief her on the event. Who would be there? The fight went on like that until Mr. Gore finally threw a sheaf of briefing papers at his wife, who was behind him in the back seat. ''Here, read this,'' he told her. Then Mr. Gore put his seat back in a reclining position and almost instantly went to sleep. In a recent interview, Mrs. Gore said in a general discussion of family life that she and her husband believe ''even fighting is communication,'' and have no desire to be portrayed as the kind of no-muss, no-fuss, picture-perfect couple that does not exist in nature. ''At times it needs to go into the Jiffy Lube,'' she said of their relationship. Even in the thick of his presidential campaign, the Gores still go on dates; they took in ''The Perfect Storm'' one recent Sunday night. And Mr. Gore takes enormous pride in having been to all but one of his son's high school football games last year. Friends recall that Mr. Gore's own father never attended one of his. As he was working on becoming a more present husband and father, Mr. Gore became aware that he had not always been the world's most sensitive boss. As a result, he brought in a management consultant to hear his staff members' frustrations, and even took them on retreat in West Virginia. He tried harder to listen to their concerns, they said, and let them put their children's soccer games on the schedule, too. In one of his debates with Bill Bradley, the former New Jersey senator, during the primary season, the candidates were asked what mistake in life they had learned the most from, and Mr. Gore said this: ''Early in my career in public service, I fell prey to what a lot of people who get into the work force and get excited about their work do. And they get drawn into it so much that they don't balance their lives.'' When Mr. Gore again had the chance to speak, he circled back to the question. ''Every time you are in a situation with a friend or a small group where you are unkind unnecessarily, that is a mistake and there is no excuse for it, whether it's stress or whatever,'' he said. ''And as you get older and mature, if things go well you learn from those mistakes and stop doing that.'' His old Tennessee friend Steve Armistead said, ''His quiet answer to me was, 'Bush's ratings are so high with Desert Storm, it's not in my interest to get in this.' '' For whatever combination of reasons, Mr. Gore chose his family and his book. And in the spring of 1992, Al Gore the author became the kind of hit Al Gore the candidate never was. At a small book party at his high school friend Reed Hundt's house, Mr. Gore could hardly contain himself. ''He stood on my stairs and said, ''I hope you like it, because this book is me,' '' Mr. Hundt remembered. '' 'I hope you know it's really me.' '' The book was eventually translated into more than 20 languages and sold more than half a million copies. It was a best seller for eight weeks even before Bill Clinton chose to put Mr. Gore on the ticket. Mr. Clinton did not know Mr. Gore well at the time, and chose him at least in part because of ''Earth in the Balance.'' Rahm Emanuel, then Mr. Clinton's senior adviser, remembered that at the first meeting to discuss the vice-presidential short list, he saw the book on Mr. Clinton's night stand. ''He had been up until all hours of the morning reading that,'' Mr. Emanuel said. ''When we got to Gore's name he praised the book, and was very taken with it. I always believed it was Gore's writing and thoughtfulness that caught his attention.'' But why, after working so hard on his environmental manifesto and political declaration of independence, did Mr. Gore accept Mr. Clinton's invitation? In a recent interview in his car, Mr. Gore described it as something of a sacrifice. Two friends said Mr. Gore told them much the same thing at the time. Someone close to Mr. Clinton who participated in the selection process remembered it this way: ''He was not disinterested, but he didn't drop and do 50, either,'' the confidant said, referring to the way Mr. Gore began training right after deciding to make his first run for Congress. ''He wasn't doing what other people were doing, which was position themselves. He did not campaign for it.'' After thinking it over, Mr. Gore said, ''I thought it mattered a lot to the cause that I wrote about whether we had four or eight years of moving in the right direction and laying the groundwork to a solution for global warming, compared to another four years of neglect'' under Republicans. ''I really felt we were headed for trouble, and I thought that between Bush and Clinton, Clinton would do better.'' Later in the same conversation, though, Mr. Gore challenged the premise that Mr. Clinton had not made the environment a priority in Arkansas. ''It was not an awful record,'' he said. ''It was mixed, certainly mixed, and gave me cause for concern.'' It was not a quid pro quo, he made clear, and he signaled that if all went well he certainly would join the ticket. But, he said, ''I wanted to make it the topic.'' And when Mr. Clinton did call to offer him the job, Mr. Gore said, ''He began by saying, 'I'd like to talk to you about the environment.' '' In the first of their weekly lunches Mr. Gore showed his new boss some charts on global warming, he said, adding that a good 90 percent of their lunches at least touched on the environment. Mr. Gore often touts the Clinton administration's work in strengthening clean air regulations, forcing companies to disclose the toxins they use and protecting huge new tracts of land in the West. But some environmentalists have expressed disappointment over the consequences of the Nafta treaty and say the administration should have more aggressively forced industry to curtail greenhouse gases. Maybe it's the new clothes, the new headquarters, the new proposals? For the first time in more than a dozen long interviews, Mr. Gore looked as if he might scream. ''That's a myth!'' he cried, leaning forward, very close to his interviewer in the car. ''Tipper and Karenna,'' his oldest daughter, ''took me to a store and said we're sick of these dark suits. What's the big deal?'' But then, asked how he would know if he had sold out, Mr. Gore not only simmered down but almost laughed. ''I don't know,'' he said, ''because I haven't.'' This is the 13th in a series of articles about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next article will explore Gov. George W. Bush's relationship with his father. 'Earth in the Balance,' Gore's Call to Arms Following are excerpts from ''Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit,'' by Vice President Al Gore:
 Catherine Lockerbie reviews The Rules of Engagement by Catherine Bush; drawing (M) By Catherine Bush. By Catherine Bush. WAR is such a useful metaphor, and such a wearily overused one. Its language is co-opted for conflicts in which no physical danger is ever likely to arise, and, routinely and traditionally, for the travails of love. To set a novel about relationships specifically in this arena, then, is to court cliche: the minefield of the emotions, lovers as combatants -- that old, exhausted vocabulary. Paralleling an inner battleground with an outer one is a high-risk strategy. Catherine Bush, however, is clearly a high-risk author, intellectually unafraid. In her second novel, ''The Rules of Engagement,'' she traverses war zones -- psychological, sexual, real -- with a cleareyed, cerebral sophistication. Cliches are not part of this territory. Bush's prose favors philosophical questioning over bloody engagement, and this too is Arcadia's preferred modus operandi. Armed with her degree in war studies (not peace or defense but war, a bald fact that pleases her), Arcadia probes conflict and its ethical dilemmas from a decent distance. She is not a war junkie, not addicted to the glamour of sniper fire, of the shells cascading onto Sarajevo's Holiday Inn. She examines the methodology and morality of intervention in Bosnia, never having been near Srebrenica. She notes the new imbalance in the casualties of war, the massive slaughter of civilians in Rwanda, never having been a spectator (a ''witness,'' as a war correspondent friend insists) to those atrocities. Bush probes these matters in only occasionally undigested chunks of information, of questioning. This is a novel, after all, not a treatise. Arcadia is not in its pages merely to wonder about how we avoid or embrace passivity in an age of global, instant information about every available conflict. She is also a sexual being, a troubled being. War management may be dropped into Arcadia's conversation at the dinner table, even in bed. It becomes part of a pattern of seduction: not arousal because of violence but arousal because of intellectual as well as erotic engagement. With her lover, Amir Barmour, Arcadia lolls in a postcoital discussion of whether aggression can in fact be said to be the cause of war. It sounds risibly pedantic, yet Bush makes it almost believable. ''My own body burned,'' Arcadia reflects, ''achy with exhaustion, stretched taut from sex -- my brain singing a bright, electric tune, which he also aroused in me.'' Passion and arousal are at the heart of this cool book. Arcadia has a secret. She has run away -- fled across the Atlantic -- to London from Toronto. She speaks repeatedly of finding safety. There is loss and fear in her. Bush teases the reader with what Arcadia's secret might be and takes plenty of time to reveal it. Bush's prose, mostly plain and restrained, lurches into the sensuous when describing sex or cities. She writes a love letter to England, its fields smelling of ''fog and peat,'' and to London with its spreading trees and sudden bursts of pastoral beauty. Later, she will lavish equal love on Toronto, caressing its street names, the sounds of the streetcars, the melting heat of its summers. Her heroine sees London's canals and Toronto's ravines as hidden places of possibility, invisible borderlands where the strange or the deadly may happen out of sight of the mundane world. Thus the need for explanation and expiation. Thus her sudden decision to return to Toronto, to try ''to decide what were appropriate or necessary acts of intervention.'' Again, the elements of her vocabulary deliberately, carefully collide; interior and exterior conflicts run in tandem. Again, the risk is high. The temptations for an author are strong; the handling must be gossamer-fine. (One thinks of Bush's fellow Toronto resident Michael Ondaatje and his recent novel, ''Anil's Ghost,'' in which a troubled, solitary female protagonist enters a war zone with a potent mix of professional detachment and personal desire.) Bush therefore spins connections, crisscrossing her philosophical construct. Set in counterpoint to Arcadia's deconstructions of the practice of modern war are the experiences of actual victims: Amir, who has fled Iran, and a Somali refugee named Basra (recalling the Iraqi city, a name altered in Western consciousness by the gulf war). Their losses, their dislocations, their slipping across borders, their altered identities, their real and pressing requirement for safety all act as a counterbalance to Arcadia's own exile and desires. These people and their needs become a moral testing ground. Through them, she will find an expiation of sorts, though not where she expects. Catherine Bush is in writerly love with the ways in which events oddly shadow and merge with one another. At the beginning of the novel, her narrator describes the rooms in the Center for Contemporary War Studies, noting how from within this ''carapace'' all manner of border crossing may take place, how the physical shell hides ''the telecommunication lines and fiber optic cable and complex binary codes that store our information and connect us to each other, to colleagues, and to conflicts around the globe.'' This too is the texture and infrastructure of the book, though the connections between Arcadia and Basra are at times a little strained, the cable pulled too tight, fraying at the ends. Arcadia's own trauma proceeds from a type of hyperaestheticism. Her Canadian lovers, notably Evan, belong to a foppish and self-consciously intellectual sophomoric world, populated with volumes of Wordsworth and Shelley, with poetic cosmology. (Bush does not judge this ardent posing, though the reader may experience a mild gritting of the teeth.) Hence the highly theatrical ritual of the duel. Basra's trauma proceeds from actual war, actual famine, actual danger -- and its alleviation requires action, not meditation. She needs to be more than an overly significant name, a cipher for Arcadia's angst, a means of showing once more that violence to a person, to a psyche, can take many forms. Again and again, the maw of violence, of harm, gapes open. Arcadia and Amir run from a gas explosion, a road rage incident -- from ordinary, unanticipated danger in the streets of London. Bush notes that glycerine may be used in sweetener or in dynamite. Arcadia's father will have strange internal violence visited upon him, having spent a lifetime using the products of the arms race, of potential Armageddon, for the putative greater good. The novel's codes are complex indeed. Though the territory of conflict is traversed with wide-awake, cliche-subverting intelligence, these connections do occasionally clunk; the parallels occasionally prove excessively neat. Bush could do with a little loosening up, a little humor even -- it nudges in occasionally, then is slapped away in favor of sterner morality. The exhilarating merit here is in the author's willingness to think, not merely to tell a story with a spot of seductive description along the way. When questioned about why she does what she does, Arcadia says: ''There are things I want to know. . . . Things I believe it's important to attempt to explain. I'd rather think about these things than not.'' So too, clearly, with Catherine Bush. The words of war have many uses.
 If elected as president, and dealing with foreign heads of state and officials, George W. Bush would have to make himself perfectly clear. Foreigners expect an educated person speaking in his native language to know the meaning of the words he uses and would translate his words literally. While Americans understand the gaffe of saying ''hold this nation hostile'' for ''hold this nation hostage'' and shrug it off, foreign leaders might be confused. If elected as president, and dealing with foreign heads of state and officials, George W. Bush would have to make himself perfectly clear. Foreigners expect an educated person speaking in his native language to know the meaning of the words he uses and would translate his words literally. While Americans understand the gaffe of saying ''hold this nation hostile'' for ''hold this nation hostage'' and shrug it off, foreign leaders might be confused. With a record of such substitutions as ''preserve'' for ''persevere'' (as in ''I appreciate preservation. This is what you do when you run for president. You've got to preserve''), can George W. Bush be trusted to speak for America clearly and effectively?
 The administration's calculated plan for making a decision about a limited missile shield in the election year 2000 -- drafted in part as political defense of Vice President Al Gore in his campaign for the presidency -- had begun to unravel even before it got very far. And it did so because of events that were largely out of the administration's control. In fact, Mr. Clinton's timetable on missile defense reflected a desire in part to protect Vice President Gore from Republican attacks that a Democratic White House was weak on defense, officials conceded. Republicans had hammered Mr. Clinton for not backing a missile shield, so he took a middle course that would proceed with tests while trying to preserve arms control agreements. Mr. Cohen first delivered his recommendation to the president more than a week ago, before Mr. Clinton's trip to Nigeria, Tanzania and Egypt. Administration officials said he had argued that contractors should begin work on the radar station in Shemya, Alaska, leaving open the possibility of completing a system at the earliest possible date should the next president -- either Mr. Gore or George W. Bush -- choose to do so.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Vice Pres Gore's running mate, is unabashed in praise of Pres Clinton's record, unlike Gore, who has spent much of his campaign trying to distance himself from Clinton and his foibles; Lieberman, who was first Democrat in Senate to chastise Clinton for his misbehavior in Monica Lewinsky scandal, has no such need, and praises Clinton's 'extraordinary record'; photo of Gore and Lieberman (M) These are not the words of Vice President Al Gore, who rarely mentions Mr. Clinton on the campaign trail. Mr. Gore has spent much of this campaign year trying to put distance between himself and a president whose record, foibles and outsize personality have made him a mixed blessing to his partner and political heir. These are not the words of Vice President Al Gore, who rarely mentions Mr. Clinton on the campaign trail. Mr. Gore has spent much of this campaign year trying to put distance between himself and a president whose record, foibles and outsize personality have made him a mixed blessing to his partner and political heir. No, the speaker is Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Mr. Gore's running mate, who was the first Democrat in the Senate to chastise Mr. Clinton for his sexual misbehavior and is sufficiently distant from Buddhist temples, Oval Office dalliances and Arkansas land deals that he does not feel the need to hold the president at arm's length. Mr. Clinton has hardly been a centerpiece of the senator's pitch, but in the weeks since his nomination, it has been clear that Mr. Lieberman feels far freer than Mr. Gore to embrace the president and claim bragging rights to the achievements of his administration. ''For the last eight years, Bill Clinton and Al Gore have led a fight to get tough on violent crime,'' Mr. Lieberman said on Monday at a union rally in Chicago. Earlier in the day, he had told a gathering of religious leaders, ''I'm very proud of this extraordinary record the Clinton-Gore administration has built up.'' On Tuesday in Anaheim, Calif., he told the Communications Workers of America that a strong economy and investments in technology were ''the kind of change Bill Clinton and Al Gore brought to America,'' citing their ''brilliant leadership.'' And on Thursday in Portland, Ore., he said, ''There's a lot for the president to be proud of.'' Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, played down what he conceded were differences in the two running mates' treatment of the president, but even in doing so, he referred to Mr. Clinton only indirectly. ''I do think the vice president acknowledges the great success of the last eight years,'' he said. ''Maybe not at every event. But what the vice president has been talking about mostly is about the future.'' What to do about Mr. Clinton has posed a dilemma throughout the campaign for Mr. Gore. The vice president has been an unusually influential second-in-command to a popular president during a time of enormous prosperity, but he has had difficulty being seen, as he proclaimed himself at the Democrats' convention in Los Angeles, as ''my own man.'' And his reputation for rectitude has been shaken by the investigation of fund-raising for the 1996 campaign and by association with Mr. Clinton's private behavior. The Gore campaign has frequently used current or former Clinton administration officials as surrogates in making his case to the reporters. And in Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Gore has a vehicle for boasting about his role in the administration, without doing so himself. For the Democratic faithful, at least, the praise of the president has been well received. Interviews with people at Mr. Lieberman's rallies  found that most agreed with Virginia Minarik, who said in Chicago, ''I'm glad he's not running away from Clinton like Gore is, because Clinton's been a great president.'' What few voters realize is that in 1992, before Mr. Clinton chose Mr. Gore as his running mate, he was closer to Mr. Lieberman.
 Letter from Frank Nicosia says Gov George W Bush's proposal to give families $1,500 toward private-school tuition will do little to help families who do not have additional $6,000 it would take to send their children to that school; drawing Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Claims to Federal Role in Education'' (front page, Aug. 30): George W. Bush's proposal to give families $1,500 toward private-school tuition will do little to help poor and middle-income families. If a private school's tuition is, say, $7,500 a year, it is unlikely that poor or even middle-income families will have the additional $6,000 to send their children to that school. Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Claims to Federal Role in Education'' (front page, Aug. 30): George W. Bush's proposal to give families $1,500 toward private-school tuition will do little to help poor and middle-income families. If a private school's tuition is, say, $7,500 a year, it is unlikely that poor or even middle-income families will have the additional $6,000 to send their children to that school.
 Those prices do not deter Eric Monserrate. Mr. Monserrate, 24, a truck driver living in Bushwick, enters his 1997 Honda Accord in car competitions. Since he bought the car three years ago, he has put at least $20,000 into customizing it.
 Vice Pres Al Gore has co-opted some of organized labor's rhetoric, including 'working families,' but Gore is steering clear of income gap--difference between what workers make and what CEO's at their companies earn--because that gap only widened on his and Pres Clinton's watch; last year, it took 100 million of lowest earning Americans to equal after-tax dollars of top 1 percent; another politically embarrassing fact is that bottom four-fifths of households took thinner slice of nation's economic pie last year than in 1977, because nine-tenths of growth in economic pie since then went to richest 1 percent of households; even labor leaders are not mentioning income gap as much, partly because that might hurt their preferred candidate; John J Sweeney, AFL-CIO president, says many forces spurring gap were beyond control of Democratic administration; photo (M) And now comes Vice President Al Gore, who has borrowed much of labor's class-edged, us-against-them rhetoric, with an eye to making America's steel-mill workers and truck drivers feel enthusiastic about his  candidacy. Mr. Gore rails against the powerful and declares himself the champion of working families. Intending to please the have-nots and the have-littles, Mr. Gore says he will oppose ''a huge tax cut for the wealthy at the expense of everyone else.'' In his embrace of labor, Mr. Gore plans to speak alongside Mr. Sweeney in Pittsburgh tommorow, Labor Day. But while co-opting some A.F.L.-C.I.O. rhetoric (Mr. Sweeney's favorite phrase is  ''working families''), Mr. Gore steers clear of the income gap, which only widened on his and President Clinton's watch. While the Clinton administration points to statistics showing that the gap has grown far more slowly than under Presidents Reagan and Bush, recent trends are still daunting. Last year, it took 100 million of the lowest earning Americans to equal the after-tax dollars of the top 1 percent. In 1977, it only took 49 million of the lowest earners to equal the top 1 percent. Mr. Sweeney praised the Clinton-Gore team for pressing for legislation that would reduce the income gap, both pre-tax and after-tax. He cited the administration's push for a higher minimum wage, more money for job training and billions of dollars for an expanded Earned Income Tax Credit. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. president added that he  expected Gov. George W. Bush to do considerably less than Mr. Gore to help middle-income and low-income Americans. Mr. Bush has repeatedly asserted that his proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut will do far more for the middle class than Mr. Gore's proposal for a smaller, focused tax cut. Last week Mr. Bush campaigned with a $40,000-a-year teacher and high school coach from Louisiana, Andrew Beechac,  who hailed Mr. Bush's tax proposal, saying: ''We all want tax relief, especially for my family and for middle America around the country. We really need this plan.'' Geoffrey Garin, a pollster who often advises the A.F.L.-C.I.O., predicted that workers concerned about the income gap would be unlikely to favor Mr. Bush. ''The concern about Bush among A.F.L.-C.I.O. members,'' he said, ''is that he will be a rich man's president and will have the kinds of policies that are designed to let the well-to-do have all the benefits of the economy. And they think Gore will be much more likely to spread the benefits around.'' As evidence that Mr. Bush's policies would widen the gap, labor leaders point to his proposal to allow individual states to opt out of any increase in the minimum wage beyond the current $5.15 an hour. Some unions -- most notably the Teamsters, one of the few not to endorse Mr. Gore -- are not willing to give the vice president a pass on the swelling income gap. For these unions, globalization and freer trade are among the biggest factors behind the widening gap. James P. Hoffa, the Teamsters' president, has often argued that trade liberalization measures, like the administration-backed China trade bill, encourage a flood of imports from low-wage countries and an exodus of American jobs. These developments, Mr. Hoffa said, and many free-trade economists acknowledge, help hold down blue-collar wages and thereby worsen the income gap.
 The roster of the Caucus Room's 65 shareholders includes Michael Brown, the son of the former Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown, as well as James Lake, the deputy campaign manager for the 1992 Bush campaign. It practically guarantees a full house nightly. And if political junkies watch the comings and goings of the private dining rooms carefully, they might just be able to figure out the behind-the-scene machinations that make Washington tick.
 Letter from Alan Zipkin comments on Maureen Dowd's Aug 30 Op-Ed column on seeming incongruity of Vice Pres Al Gore's 'angry populism' and yuppie lifestyle he seems to personify Re ''Yuppies Unite! Moats and Octopi for All!'', by Maureen Dowd (column, Aug. 30): While Ms. Dowd may delight in the incongruity of Al Gore's ''angry populism'' and the yuppie lifestyle he seems to personify, it is worth remembering that the rising tide has not lifted all boats. Re ''Yuppies Unite! Moats and Octopi for All!'', by Maureen Dowd (column, Aug. 30): While Ms. Dowd may delight in the incongruity of Al Gore's ''angry populism'' and the yuppie lifestyle he seems to personify, it is worth remembering that the rising tide has not lifted all boats.
 Latest Gallup Poll shows Vice Pre Al Gore and Gov George W Bush virtually tied, 46 percent for Bush and 45 percent for Gore; shows that voters think that Gore is smarter and better looking, but say Bush is better speaker and has better sense of humor (S)/ The latest presidential preference poll by Gallup, like most recent preference polls, has George W. Bush and Al Gore virtually tied, 46 percent for Mr. Bush and 45 percent for Mr. Gore. But this time Gallup had some other questions, too, and here's what voters really think: Mr. Gore is smarter and better looking but Mr. Bush is a better speaker and has a better sense of humor. The latest presidential preference poll by Gallup, like most recent preference polls, has George W. Bush and Al Gore virtually tied, 46 percent for Mr. Bush and 45 percent for Mr. Gore. But this time Gallup had some other questions, too, and here's what voters really think: Mr. Gore is smarter and better looking but Mr. Bush is a better speaker and has a better sense of humor. Although most men and women agreed that Mr. Gore was smarter, when it came to who was the better speaker, most men said Mr. Bush but women were closely divided between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. Women also were closely divided over who had the better sense of humor, while most men stuck with Mr. Bush. Roughly two of every three women said Mr. Gore was the most handsome. And men generally agreed, though two of every five insisted they had no opinion. Who would be the better dinner partner? Most men chose Mr. Bush while most women favored Mr. Gore. Frank Newport, Gallup's executive editor, noted that Mr. Gore has been working hard to change his wardrobe and his speaking style, while Mr. Bush has been forced to contend with the smartness issue. ''Voters certainly take into account these ephemeral, nonissue related measures,'' Mr. Newport said.
 It should be obvious why Al Gore strongly opposes vouchers: individual rights would be enhanced at the expense of government coercion.
