 Democratic activists say Vice Pres Al Gore has silenced much of grumbling among core Democratic constituencies about his centrist platform and running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, and generated unexpected level of enthusiasm; Gore has peppered stump speeches with populist anti-corporate language and focused on concerns of working Americans and middle-class families; many polls show Gore gaining strength among Democratic voters; even some Ralph Nader supporters say Gore's popularism has stolen some of Nader's thunder (M) In the three weeks since he faced open criticism at the Democratic National Convention about his centrist platform and his running mate, Vice President Al Gore has silenced much of the grumbling among core Democratic constituencies and generated an unexpected level of enthusiasm, political analysts and Democratic activists say. In the last week alone, Mr. Gore has picked up endorsements from two groups that had been considering sitting out the race, or even endorsing Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate: the Teamsters and Friends of the Earth, a liberal environmental group. And an array of polls shows that his support among Democrats has risen significantly in recent weeks, helping to sustain a postconvention bounce that many Republicans had expected to fade. In the three weeks since he faced open criticism at the Democratic National Convention about his centrist platform and his running mate, Vice President Al Gore has silenced much of the grumbling among core Democratic constituencies and generated an unexpected level of enthusiasm, political analysts and Democratic activists say. In the last week alone, Mr. Gore has picked up endorsements from two groups that had been considering sitting out the race, or even endorsing Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate: the Teamsters and Friends of the Earth, a liberal environmental group. And an array of polls shows that his support among Democrats has risen significantly in recent weeks, helping to sustain a postconvention bounce that many Republicans had expected to fade. As a result, some of Mr. Gore's loudest skeptics a month ago are now talking about how comfortable they are with his agenda, how confident they are about his chances and how enthusiastic they are about getting out his vote. ''What is clear to me is that our members desperately want Al Gore to get elected,'' said Amy Isaacs, national director of Americans for Democratic Action, a liberal advocacy group. ''Partly it is because they are afraid of George Bush, yes, but it is also because they believe in the core values Al Gore espouses.'' Robert B. Reich, a former secretary of labor in the Clinton administration who supported Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries and criticized Mr. Gore in the American Prospect last month, said of the vice president today: ''He's made all the right moves. He's shifted in exactly the direction he needed to go to make people more interested in him.'' Mr. Gore's populist style was on full display today as he toured a United Parcel Service warehouse in Atlanta where many of the workers were black and members of the Teamsters. Calling for an increase in the minimum wage and targeted tax cuts for middle-class families, Mr. Gore told 100 workers, ''I'm in this race for the families that are trying to pay the bills, the single parents, the working men and women.'' Many polls have shown Mr. Gore gaining strength among Democratic voters in the last month. A New York Times/CBS News survey held before the conventions showed him supported by 75 percent of self-identified Democrats, compared with Gov. George W. Bush's 86 percent support among Republicans. But after the Democratic convention, Mr. Gore's backing among Democrats jumped to 84 percent. The return of those Democrats to Mr. Gore's column has helped him pull even with Mr. Bush in many polls. At the same time, the vice president seems to be draining away some voters from Mr. Nader, in part because of a growing sense of optimism about Mr. Gore's chances, Democrats say. ''Before, it was, 'Well, he can't win, so we might as well go to Nader,' '' said Gloria Allred, a civil rights lawyer in Los Angeles who is a leader of the liberal wing of the California Democratic Party. ''But now that the race is narrowing, people are beginning to feel Gore does have a chance. And they are saying, 'We can make a difference. It's important to vote for him.' '' Aides to Mr. Nader said that the standing-room-only crowds he had been drawing, particularly in California and Oregon, belied polls showing him losing support. And they contend, much like the Republicans, that Mr. Gore's post-convention balloon will deflate as the campaign continues. But even some Nader supporters acknowledge that Mr. Gore's bashing of big oil and drug companies has stolen some of the Green Party candidate's thunder. To be sure, relations between liberals and Mr. Gore, a longtime leader of the party's centrist wing, are not entirely smooth. For instance, Representative Cynthia A. McKinney, a Georgia Democrat who has criticized the lack of black agents on Mr. Gore's Secret Service detail, asserted in a statement last month that the vice president's ''Negro tolerance level has never been too high.'' The statement was issued in response to a civil suit brought by three black Secret Service agents against the government. Ten black agents last week called on Mr. Gore to show ''moral leadership'' on the matter. But such potholes aside, the Gore campaign has been moving swiftly to consolidate his support among blacks and other core Democrats. On Saturday, some of his chief aides, including Donna Brazile, the campaign manager, will meet in Chicago with the Rev. Jesse Jackson to plot get-out-the-vote strategies in black and Hispanic communities. Mr. Jackson's son, Representative Jesse L. Jackson Jr., a Democrat from Chicago who had been critical of Mr. Gore during the Democratic convention, said today that the vice president's shift toward discussing ''working-family issues'' had eased liberal concerns about the ticket and its centrist platform. ''The ticket is talking more about expanding prosperity,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''When this campaign focuses on those issues, Al Gore wins.'' Some black Democrats and union officials had complained about Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate because Mr. Lieberman has been critical of affirmative action and has staked out centrist positions on school vouchers, military spending and Social Security. ''Among African-Americans, it has given Gore a real boost,'' said Assemblyman Roger Green, a black Democrat from Brooklyn who supported Mr. Bradley in the primaries, referring to Mr. Lieberman's selection. ''It demonstrated vision and courage about diversity.'' Many Democratic activists traced the origins of Mr. Gore's rise to his acceptance speech at the convention, in which he staunchly defended many traditional Democratic values, like workers' rights, abortion rights and affirmative action. But many of those party activists also warned that Mr. Gore's support among traditional Democrats could deflate if he abandoned his populist message.
 No longer. Today, Mr. Lieberman continually calls on the Almighty and asserts that religion is the only true basis for morality, a claim that makes us very uneasy here. George W. Bush excites derision among English commentators when he says God is his favorite philosopher, and so does Al Gore when he says he asks himself, ''What would Jesus do?''
 Gov George W Bush, addressing concerns that he is slipping in polls, adopts new, more accessible campaign style; campaigns in Springfield, Mo, holding sustained question and answer sessions with voters; Republican National Committee unveils its strongest commercial yet attacking Vice Pres Al Gore's credibility; photo (M) First thing this morning, Gov. George W. Bush stared out at a group of workers and said, ''I have a confession to make. I'm here to ask for your vote.'' He described how he had run for Congress from Texas in 1978 and ''came in second in a two-person race.'' A woman came up to him in his hometown afterwards and told him she had not voted for him. ''And I said, 'Well, why not?' '' Mr. Bush recalled, ''and she said, 'Because you didn't bother to ask for my vote.' '' First thing this morning, Gov. George W. Bush stared out at a group of workers and said, ''I have a confession to make. I'm here to ask for your vote.'' He described how he had run for Congress from Texas in 1978 and ''came in second in a two-person race.'' A woman came up to him in his hometown afterwards and told him she had not voted for him. ''And I said, 'Well, why not?' '' Mr. Bush recalled, ''and she said, 'Because you didn't bother to ask for my vote.' '' So today George Bush was asking. It was the debut of the more accessible style that the governor had promised as a way of addressing concerns among prominent Republicans and even some of his own aides that his campaign was slipping in the polls. For the first time since the Republican primaries, Mr. Bush held a sustained question and answer session with voters, running longer than some recent campaign events. At the same time the Republican National Committee unveiled its  strongest commercial yet against Vice President Al Gore in a drive to make voters doubt the Democrat's credibility. In the commercial a woman announcer speaks of Mr. Gore's pledge to overhaul the nation's campaign finance system and then runs through a litany of the indictments and unanswered Congressional subpoenas resulting from the campaign finance abuses of 1996 when the Democratic National Committee returned several million dollars in contributions because of questions about the money's origins. ''Al Gore's promising campaign finance reform,'' the announcer says. ''Can I believe him? Because of Gore's last fund-raising campaign, 22 people have been indicted, 12 convicted, 70 took the Fifth Amendment, and 18 witnesses fled the country.'' The advertisement then goes on to cast doubt on Mr. Gore's proposals for school accountability and ends, ''Just more politics from Al Gore.'' The juxtaposition of Mr. Bush's new style and the advertisement showed how the campaign is seeking to move ahead: plant questions about Mr. Gore's credibility and the validity of his promises and then showcase Mr. Bush in informal settings open and accessible and speaking of ''real plans for real people.'' Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said of the commercial: ''I think it highlights a fundamental question of the election and that is: if you can't trust the vice president's credibility on an issue like campaign finance reform, how you can trust his credibility on an issue like education reform?'' Mr. Bush's visit to the Marconi Communications company, about a half-hour's drive outside Pittsburgh, had been planned as a venue for Mr. Bush to speak in a swing state about his plan to divert some of the Social Security payroll tax into private investment accounts as a way to refashion the program for the retirement of the baby boom generation. In keeping with his decision to get closer to the people, Mr. Bush headed quickly to the company cafeteria, where he bought a cup of coffee and began greeting employees who applauded him from their tables. And after his prepared remarks to a group of employees, he took an array of questions, talking of his relations with the news media and with Democrats, his efforts to give the golden cheek warbler a place to nest on his Texas ranch, his tax policy and plans for education. His first questioner was almost inaudible, but it was clear that he did not think that journalists portrayed Mr. Bush fairly. ''I respect the media,'' Mr. Bush replied, but then he suggested that he would not dare say otherwise, noting, ''Of course, it's about 60 days before the election.'' When another man wanted to know about Mr. Bush's relations with Democrats, he spoke about working with Bob Bullock, the late Democratic lieutenant governor of Texas. ''We had a rocky relationship at times, but let me tell you how it ended,'' Mr. Bush said. He said he had gone on his very first campaign trip to Iowa and New Hampshire, ''and I came back and this good man was on his death bed and he asked me to eulogize him at his funeral. It was one of the most touching moments I've had in my life, frankly.'' Mr. Bush talked at length, gesturing emphatically, about his ideas to bring more testing and accountability in schools. ''It's kind of a long-winded answer,'' he said, ''but it's my passion. Thanks for the question.'' ''If we ever went into a recession -- which I certainly hope we do not do and I don't think we will -- I'm going to increase the pace of tax relief,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The best way to grow out of a recession is to accelerate tax relief to people.'' Later, Mr. Bush announced that he had won the endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police, and held an airport rally, opposing Mr. Gore's populist cry that the vice president is ''for the people, not for the powerful'' with some populism of his own. Mr. Bush showcased people who would get substantial tax cuts under his plan to cut taxes by $1.3 trillion, but little under Mr. Gore's tax cut plan. ''Now you tell me, Who's standing on the side of the people?'' Mr. Bush said. ''You tell me, Whose plan is a real plan with real solutions? It's our plan. It's our plan.''
 Bush Yields on Debates And Will Seek Compromise  Gov. George W. Bush abandoned his effort to impose his own schedule of presidential debates, and his campaign said it was prepared to sit down with aides to Vice President Al Gore to work out an agreement for debating under the auspices of a bipartisan commission. Mr. Bush held a sustained question-and-answer session with voters for the first time since the primary campaign. The Republican National Committee unveiled its harshest ad yet against Mr. Gore, in a drive to cast doubt on his credibility. Lieberman in Texas  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, campaigning in Gov. George W. Bush's state, painted a dismal picture of the Bush record on child health care and said Mr. Bush could not be trusted with the issue on a national scale.
 Gov George W Bush, responding to mounting criticism from prominent Republicans, abandons effort to impose own schedule of presidential debates and seeks accord with Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign on debating under Commission on Presidential Debates auspices; continues to oppose proposed Boston debate and wants to replace it with network-sponsored event (M) Gov. George W. Bush abandoned his effort to impose his own schedule of presidential debates today, and his campaign said it was prepared to sit down with aides to Vice President Al Gore to work out an agreement for debating under the auspices of a bipartisan commission. Mr. Gore's advisers responded that they were willing to meet with the Bush campaign. The Commission on Presidential Debates, the bipartisan panel that has been organizing the debates since 1988, said it had received a call today from Mr. Bush's campaign chairman, Don Evans, and immediately began trying to arrange a meeting with representatives of both campaigns next week in Washington. Gov. George W. Bush abandoned his effort to impose his own schedule of presidential debates today, and his campaign said it was prepared to sit down with aides to Vice President Al Gore to work out an agreement for debating under the auspices of a bipartisan commission. Mr. Gore's advisers responded that they were willing to meet with the Bush campaign. The Commission on Presidential Debates, the bipartisan panel that has been organizing the debates since 1988, said it had received a call today from Mr. Bush's campaign chairman, Don Evans, and immediately began trying to arrange a meeting with representatives of both campaigns next week in Washington. But the governor's decision did not appear to guarantee that Mr. Bush would sign off on the commission's original plan for three debates next month on college campuses in Boston, Winston-Salem, N.C., and St. Louis, all of which Mr. Gore has agreed to. Advisers to Mr. Bush continued to insist that while the campaign might agree to two of the commission's debates, it remained opposed to the Boston event and wanted to replace it with a network-sponsored debate, perhaps with CNN's Larry King as moderator. ''Everybody knows there have got to be two commission debates, and everybody knows there has to be an agreement soon,'' an adviser to Mr. Bush said. Aides to Mr. Bush repeated their position that Boston was not acceptable, because the debate was scheduled to be held on the University of Massachusetts campus adjacent to the John F. Kennedy Library, which honors a Democratic president. ''I can't think of any reason in the world why we'd do that,'' the adviser said. The Bush campaign announced the shift in the face of what aides to the governor described as mounting criticism from prominent Republicans, and a desire to put a distracting issue to rest. Mr. Bush made the proposal on Sunday night, challenging Mr. Gore to two network debates, one on CNN and one on NBC, in addition to one sponsored by the commission. Because the network debates were likely to attract far fewer viewers than the commission debates, which were to be broadcast on multiple networks and cable outlets, many Democrats accused Mr. Bush of trying to avoid wide exposure. And while Mr. Bush tried to use Mr. Gore's rejection of the idea to raise questions about the vice president's credibility, even some members of Mr. Bush's staff suggested that the strategy was not working. Nonetheless, Bush advisers sought today to shift blame for the collapse of their proposal to Mr. Gore, saying he had made it clear he would not attend a debate proposed by Mr. Bush for next week on a prime-time edition of ''Meet the Press'' on NBC. ''NBC News has told us that they have received a letter from Vice President Gore indicating that he will not attend the debate next Tuesday night,'' Mr. Bush's communications director, Karen P. Hughes, told reporters in a brief stop here. Ms. Hughes added that Mr. Gore's refusal came ''despite the fact that he had accepted that debate and said he will debate anytime, anywhere.'' NBC News and the Gore campaign disputed the suggestion by Ms. Hughes that the letter was news. Mr. Gore's aides announced days ago that the vice president would not participate. And Barbara Levin, an NBC spokeswoman, said the network has had that rejection letter from William M. Daley, the Gore campaign chairman, since Sunday, the day Mr. Bush unveiled his plan. Mark Fabiani, the Gore campaign communications director, said: ''We sent that letter within an hour of Governor Bush's press conference. We faxed it to Tim Russert at his home and at his office.'' Mr. Russert is the host of ''Meet the Press.'' After learning today that Mr. Bush had abandoned his plan, Mr. Daley said he welcomed the opportunity to meet with the governor's staff, but he seemed inclined to stick with the commission's original plan of three debates. Mr. Bush had contended that his proposal, which included the 90-minute debate in St. Louis sponsored by the commission, plus two 60-minute debates, on ''Meet the Press'' on Tuesday and ''Larry King Live'' on Oct. 3, was an effort to invigorate the debates. Mr. Gore, however, sought to characterize the proposal  as an effort to limit viewership. Two major networks left out of the Bush plan, ABC and CBS, announced that they would not carry debates on rivals' programs. There is precedent for holding two commission debates. Four years ago, one commission debate was canceled because President Clinton had a scheduling conflict. Still, even those close to Mr. Bush were hard-pressed to view the counterdebates as even a partial victory. Days after the plan was announced, the campaign began running a commercial criticizing Mr. Gore for not accepting the plan, which failed to move the vice president from his dismissal of the Bush proposal. And privately, some Democrats said today that they believed that the Republicans' ability to bargain over the debates was diminished by Mr. Bush's abortive plan.
 Reporters's Notebook article on presidential race notes Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush have picked nearly identical songs as their theme songs; Gore calls Dr David G Kline, neurosurgeon who operated on his son after boy was hit by car in 1989, to stage at campaign rally, New Orleans; photo (M) Some critics have complained that there's no difference between the two major parties. If music can be any indication, they may be right. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have picked nearly identical songs as their theme music for the presidential campaigns. Mr. Gore has chosen ''Let the Day Begin,'' a rock number by the Call. Mr. Bush uses ''We the People,'' which was written for his campaign by Billy Ray Cyrus. Both are anthems to workers and strivers, drivers and dreamers, Americans of all stripe, leaving no one behind or out. Some critics have complained that there's no difference between the two major parties. If music can be any indication, they may be right. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have picked nearly identical songs as their theme music for the presidential campaigns. Mr. Gore has chosen ''Let the Day Begin,'' a rock number by the Call. Mr. Bush uses ''We the People,'' which was written for his campaign by Billy Ray Cyrus. Both are anthems to workers and strivers, drivers and dreamers, Americans of all stripe, leaving no one behind or out. Although Mr. Gore fancies himself a music buff, he was not involved in the selection. He was busy writing his convention speech when a handful of aides sat down and systematically evaluated the available repertoire, including Tina Turner's hit,  ''Simply the Best.'' Greg Simon, a senior Gore adviser and onetime drummer with a band, said, ''It talks about all corners of society -- and you can dance to it.'' The campaign did not call the Call in advance to see if Mr. Gore could appropriate the tune, but Michael Been, the composer, has said in published reports that he has no objection. Gore's Son's Surgeon Hailed At a rally in New Orleans on Thursday night, Mr. Gore called Dr. David G. Kline to join him on the stage. Mr. Gore said vaguely that ''one of our children had a health issue'' and that Dr. Kline had come to the rescue. Dr. Kline flitted on and off the stage in the blink of an eye, without further explanation. Tracked down behind the stage later, Dr. Kline said he was the neurosurgeon who had operated on Mr. Gore's son, Albert III, in 1989 after he had been hit by a car in Baltimore and severely injured. ''After his acute care there, he needed reconstruction of the nerves in the right arm,'' said Dr. Kline, who is chairman of neurosurgery at Louisiana State University Medical School. Dr. Kline kept up with the Gores when their oldest daughter, Karenna, worked as an intern at The Times-Picayune. When Gore aides called him earlier this week to invite him to the rally in the French Quarter, Dr. Kline was not surprised. But he was when Mr. Gore called out his name to come up on the stage. He said he generally votes Republican and had contributed money to the Republican Party, but this time he planned to vote for Mr. Gore. With a new Republican commercial lambasting Mr. Gore for attending a fund-raising event at a Buddhist temple in 1996, Mr. Gore was asked in a radio interview today what lessons he might have learned from that experience. ''Have you learned anything?'' he was asked by WBRZ, the ABC radio affiliate in Baton Rouge, La. ''Oh sure,'' Mr. Gore responded. ''I support campaign finance reform, and I think it's obvious to one and all that it's needed now more than ever.'' Mr. Gore then headed to two fund-raisers for the Democratic National Committee in Atlanta, where he hoped to raise $1 million. Mr. Gore is to attend a string of multimillion-dollar fund-raisers next week. He hits Philadelphia on Tuesday, Boston on Wednesday, and New York on Thursday for a star-studded gala at Radio City Music Hall.
 At the end of an alley on a nondescript street, a political consulting firm with the unusual name of Aristotle International has compiled the nation's largest voter databank, the names of 150 million Americans registered to vote. And it is selling them to politicians like George W. Bush, Joseph I. Lieberman and John McCain in ways that many fear removes too much privacy from the voting booth. At the end of an alley on a nondescript street, a political consulting firm with the unusual name of Aristotle International has compiled the nation's largest voter databank, the names of 150 million Americans registered to vote. And it is selling them to politicians like George W. Bush, Joseph I. Lieberman and John McCain in ways that many fear removes too much privacy from the voting booth. With promises like that, it is not surprising Aristotle, which was started in 1983 by two brothers with the same middle name, has a client list that reads like a political convention: 45 senators, more than 200 members of the House, 46 Republican and Democratic state parties, and most major presidential candidates this year except Al Gore, whose campaign said it would not hire any firm whose practices could jeopardize the public's privacy.
 By staying in both races, Mr. Lieberman is hedging his bets in a way that benefits him, of course. But it hardly sends a signal of confidence about the future of the ticket he is sharing with Vice President Al Gore. Moreover, his dual candidacy could lead to a situation in which Connecticut chooses a Democratic senator in November but has a Republican installed by appointment. It could also lead to legislative contortions as Democrats in the State Capitol try to figure out a way to prevent Gov. John Rowland, a Republican, from filling the vacancy from within his own party should Mr. Lieberman go to Washington as vice president. At this point, only a few days after the traditional Labor Day kickoff of the fall campaign, there is still time for Mr. Lieberman to get off the ballot and let the two parties conduct a fair fight for his vacated seat. By staying in both races, Mr. Lieberman is hedging his bets in a way that benefits him, of course. But it hardly sends a signal of confidence about the future of the ticket he is sharing with Vice President Al Gore. Moreover, his dual candidacy could lead to a situation in which Connecticut chooses a Democratic senator in November but has a Republican installed by appointment. It could also lead to legislative contortions as Democrats in the State Capitol try to figure out a way to prevent Gov. John Rowland, a Republican, from filling the vacancy from within his own party should Mr. Lieberman go to Washington as vice president. At this point, only a few days after the traditional Labor Day kickoff of the fall campaign, there is still time for Mr. Lieberman to get off the ballot and let the two parties conduct a fair fight for his vacated seat.
 Mary Lamont letter on Sept 8 editorial urges George W Bush and Al Gore to seek to control prices of prescription drugs to be provided under Medicare George W. Bush and Al Gore have to guarantee some form of price controls to keep Medicare, and its beneficiaries, secure.
 Re ''Bush Planning to See Voters, and to Be Seen'' (front page, Sept. 8):  It's time for Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, as honorary chairmen of the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, to assert themselves forcefully and publicly in favor of maintaining the traditional three-debate format. America needs these debates, and the Carter-Ford team can help sway opinion to ensure that, at a minimum, we get them. Re ''Bush Planning to See Voters, and to Be Seen'' (front page, Sept. 8):  It's time for Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, as honorary chairmen of the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, to assert themselves forcefully and publicly in favor of maintaining the traditional three-debate format. America needs these debates, and the Carter-Ford team can help sway opinion to ensure that, at a minimum, we get them.
 Dr Herbert S Gross letter on Richard A Epstein's Sept 7 article agrees with his criticism of both George W Bush's and Al Gore's proposals to cover prescription drugs for elderly under Medicare and suggests alternative approach
 Re ''Bush Planning to See Voters, and to Be Seen'' (front page, Sept. 8): I do not recall that, until now, Colin L. Powell and H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the retired generals,  had ever criticized the state of our military readiness under President Clinton. We need retired generals who remain above politics. General Marshall, where are you now that we need you? Re ''Bush Planning to See Voters, and to Be Seen'' (front page, Sept. 8): I do not recall that, until now, Colin L. Powell and H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the retired generals,  had ever criticized the state of our military readiness under President Clinton. We need retired generals who remain above politics. General Marshall, where are you now that we need you?
 Andrew G Biggs letter dispputes Paul Krugman's stand in Sept 6 column that George W Bush's Social Security plan would inevitably cut benefits0 Paul Krugman (column, Sept. 6) asserts that George W. Bush's Social Security plan would inevitably cut benefits, since it ''will reduce the inflow of money into the Social Security system by $1.3 trillion over the next decade.'' He then asks ''if contributions are down, and benefits are not, where does the money come from?'' The answer is simple: from payroll tax surpluses. Paul Krugman (column, Sept. 6) asserts that George W. Bush's Social Security plan would inevitably cut benefits, since it ''will reduce the inflow of money into the Social Security system by $1.3 trillion over the next decade.'' He then asks ''if contributions are down, and benefits are not, where does the money come from?'' The answer is simple: from payroll tax surpluses.
 David G Paul letter on Sept 6 article scores George W Bush's Medicare plan, holding insurers will not compete to provide coverage to elderly Re ''Bush Spells Out Major Overhaul in Medicare Plan'' (front page, Sept. 6): Re ''Bush Spells Out Major Overhaul in Medicare Plan'' (front page, Sept. 6):
 Arnold L Cabasso letter on Richard A Epstein's Sept 7 article opposes proposals by George W Bush and Al Gore to subsidize drug costs for elderly under Medicare
 Correction of Sept 7 article on Vice Pres Al Gore's economic plan: Robert D Reischauer is Urban Institute president and formerly headed Congressional Budget Office A front-page article on Thursday about Vice President Al Gore's economic plan misstated the title of Robert D. Reischauer, who spoke of it favorably. He is president of the Urban Institute, not an analyst there. In some copies, the article misidentifed the office of which he is the former director. It is the Congressional Budget Office, not the Office of Management and Budget. A front-page article on Thursday about Vice President Al Gore's economic plan misstated the title of Robert D. Reischauer, who spoke of it favorably. He is president of the Urban Institute, not an analyst there. In some copies, the article misidentifed the office of which he is the former director. It is the Congressional Budget Office, not the Office of Management and Budget.
 Gov George W Bush, under attack by Vice Pres Al Gore for allegedly trying to duck debates and cut size of audience, faced similar charges from Garry Mauro, a Democrat, in 1998 Texas gubernatorial race (M) His Democratic opponent needled George W. Bush for months about being ''afraid'' to debate. The opponent said he would debate the Texas governor any time, anywhere. Mr. Bush hemmed and hawed. When the governor finally agreed to debate, his opponent accused him of trying to dictate terms that would reduce the size of the audience. His Democratic opponent needled George W. Bush for months about being ''afraid'' to debate. The opponent said he would debate the Texas governor any time, anywhere. Mr. Bush hemmed and hawed. When the governor finally agreed to debate, his opponent accused him of trying to dictate terms that would reduce the size of the audience. If the plot sounds as if it had been lifted from the debate squabbles between Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, think again. The Democratic opponent in question was Garry Mauro, and the election was the 1998 governor's race in Texas. ''Bush's position was he'd do it when the time was right,'' recalled Mr. Mauro, who is a chairman of Mr. Gore's Texas campaign. ''And the time was never right.'' Mr. Bush's aides now say that the governor always intended to debate -- a point that seemed less clear in 1998 -- and agreed to a single event late in the race when voters would be paying attention. But Mr. Bush did so only after his campaign was allowed to control when, where and how the debate was conducted, choosing the most remote city in Texas on a night when many people were attending high school football games. To some degree, Mr. Bush was simply playing the role of a popular incumbent reluctant to share a stage with a long-shot challenger. Despite leading in some polls by more than 50 percentage points, Mr. Bush exhibited the same caution toward debating that he does today, an approach that some now regard as a missed opportunity. Before the presidential campaign, Mr. Bush had participated in only two major debates, against Mr. Mauro in 1998 and against then-Gov. Ann Richards in 1994. Few people believed Mr. Mauro, a former Texas land commissioner, had any chance of unseating Mr. Bush. With little money for advertising, Mr. Mauro had pushed for debates, even accepting an invitation from a radio station to debate the governor inside the ball park of the Texas Rangers, the baseball team once run by Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush had rejected invitations from many organizations before he agreed to a debate in El Paso, sponsored primarily by the local newspaper, that would be held about three weeks before Election Day. ''The argument that we pushed was that if the governor planned to run for president, it would benefit him to have more than one debate under his belt,'' said Robert Moore, managing editor of The El Paso Times, who had courted the Bush campaign for several months. Mr. Mauro accused Mr. Bush of trying to orchestrate a debate that no one would watch. El Paso, he noted, was the only city in Texas in the mountain time zone. And by picking a Friday night roughly three weeks before Election Day, Mr. Bush had chosen a time that conflicted with high school football, an ardent passion across Texas. Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the governor chose El Paso because it had never been the site of a gubernatorial debate, and he wanted to emphasize the importance of voters in West Texas. Mr. Moore said the Bush campaign made several demands. First, he said, they rejected the format used in the lieutenant governor's debate, in which the candidates were asked questions by members of the audience, by a panel of journalists and then by each other. Instead, the Bush campaign insisted on a single moderator and asked Mr. Moore to fill that role. Mr. Moore  said the campaign insisted that the two candidates be seated at an oval-shaped table with himself in the middle. ''I would serve as a buffer that might prevent personal attacks,'' said Mr. Moore, who insisted on free rein to ask questions on any topic as well as follow-ups. ''They wanted a very controlled environment for the debate.'' Mr. Mauro said the Bush campaign also required that the cameras only be allowed to focus on the moderator and whichever candidate was answering the question as a way of avoiding unguarded reaction shots.  Mr. Bartlett said any prohibitions on the cameras ''doesn't ring a bell with me.'' Ultimately, the debate itself was considered something of a dud. Few people watched, and nearly everyone agreed it did not matter, and that, Mr. Mauro contends, is what Mr. Bush wanted all along.
 MORE MEDIA FOR BUSH  George W. Bush has agreed to permit media coverage whenever he is campaigning, as requested by 11 news organizations, including The New York Times, in a letter asking him to follow the practice of Al Gore and previous presidential nominees. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said yesterday that the Texas governor decided to allow the expanded pool coverage except when he moved around Austin or went to his ranch in Crawford, Tex., or elsewhere in the state. Vice President Gore allows pool coverage when he travels, but does not routinely have such coverage in Washington, Ms. Hughes noted. She said Mr. Bush made the decision on Wednesday, before receiving a letter for news organizations. A pool is a small group of reporters and photographers selected to represent the rest of the traveling press corps.
 Dr Martin C Rosner letter on Sept 6 article scores George W Bush's proposal to make health maintenance organizations and insurance companies central to his Medicare prescription drug plan It is incomprehensible that George W. Bush would make health maintenance organizations and insurance companies central to his prescription drug plan (front page, Sept. 6). Most Medicare recipients have rejected H.M.O.'s in favor of fee-for-service, and both consumers and companies are turning away from H.M.O.'s because of increasing premiums, financial failures and discontent with restriction of care. It is incomprehensible that George W. Bush would make health maintenance organizations and insurance companies central to his prescription drug plan (front page, Sept. 6). Most Medicare recipients have rejected H.M.O.'s in favor of fee-for-service, and both consumers and companies are turning away from H.M.O.'s because of increasing premiums, financial failures and discontent with restriction of care. Insurance companies have indicated their unwillingness to take part in a government-subsidized prescription drug plan as an economically undesirable venture. Why, then, does Mr. Bush endorse this course of action? Perhaps it is more of a tactical maneuver as a political spoiler rather than a genuine desire to improve the lot of the elderly.
 Mr. Roach says Al Gore and George W. Bush ''seem determined to spend a significant portion of the nation's budget surplus.'' And while he acknowledges the differences in how each would spend it, by proposing to spend primarily on health care and education, Mr. Gore aims at investing directly in human capital. Such overdue investments would likely result in long-term benefits in quality of life and productivity. The ensuing productivity gains are bound to stimulate sustainable economic growth. In contrast, the tax cuts proposed by Mr. Bush will have a much smaller and only indirect effect on improvements in education and health.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, campaigning in Houston, Tex, scores Gov George W Bush's record on children's health care in state; remarks reinforce his role as Democrat's leading attacker; photo (M) Venturing deep into Gov. George W. Bush's home state, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman today painted a dismal picture of Mr. Bush's record on children's health care, and said the governor could not be trusted with the issue on a national scale. ''Texas actually ranks 49th of 50 states in providing health insurance for kids,'' Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, said at a forum here. ''In this campaign, Governor Bush may say that he has a plan to improve children's health across America. But I think we have a right to ask, why hasn't he done it in Texas?'' Venturing deep into Gov. George W. Bush's home state, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman today painted a dismal picture of Mr. Bush's record on children's health care, and said the governor could not be trusted with the issue on a national scale. ''Texas actually ranks 49th of 50 states in providing health insurance for kids,'' Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, said at a forum here. ''In this campaign, Governor Bush may say that he has a plan to improve children's health across America. But I think we have a right to ask, why hasn't he done it in Texas?'' Mr. Lieberman and his running mate, Vice President Al Gore, have made health care a central issue of the campaign, promising to provide coverage for all of the nation's 11 million uninsured children by 2004 and prescription drug coverage for older people under Medicare. Buoyed by opinion polls showing that the public sees health care as a matter better handled by the Democrats, they have charged that Mr. Bush would endanger Medicare's financial stability and that his promises to improve health care are hollow. Today's remarks by Mr. Lieberman may have been the harshest yet in this campaign, reinforcing the role he is playing as the Democrats' leading attacker. He charged that under Mr. Bush, Texas had done a bad job of enrolling children in federally financed health care plans, and that the state had erected bureaucratic hurdles that make it hard for qualified people to get those benefits. He cited a ruling by a federal judge last month that Texas had failed to provide adequate care for children on Medicaid, the health program for the poor, in violation of a 1996 agreement with the Bush administration. The state is appealing. ''Governor Bush has just not made children's health coverage and care a priority,'' the senator said at the Magnolia Multi-Service Center, in a heavily Hispanic neighborhood here. ''More than 1.4 million children in Texas do not have health insurance.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, did not dispute the figures cited by Mr. Lieberman, but he said they stemmed from problems Mr. Bush inherited when he became governor in 1995. And he argued that the state found it hard to enroll people in benefit programs because ''there is a belief in Texas to scorn government assistance.'' Under Mr. Bush's predecessor, Ann Richards, a Democrat, ''We were 49th then, too,'' Mr. Bartlett added. ''The challenges in Texas are not something that are new in the last few years.''
 Since the June primaries, Mr. Franks, who is struggling to raise the money to mount an effective television advertising campaign, has called for debates with Mr. Corzine in all 21 counties in the state, much like Vice President Al Gore's call for a twice-weekly schedule of showdowns with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in the presidential contest. Mr. Corzine, who like Mr. Bush is seen as having more to lose in such encounters, has resisted them throughout his run for the Senate. During the primary campaign against former Gov. Jim Florio, Mr. Corzine refused to debate on any network television stations, while spending more than $12 million on commercials. He began running his first TV commercials of the general election campaign on Monday.
 Under withering criticism from doctors, patients and Gov. George W. Bush, the Clinton administration backed away today from a plan to cut Medicare payments for cancer drugs given to hundreds of thousands of patients in clinics and doctors' offices each year. Under withering criticism from doctors, patients and Gov. George W. Bush, the Clinton administration backed away today from a plan to cut Medicare payments for cancer drugs given to hundreds of thousands of patients in clinics and doctors' offices each year. On Tuesday, Governor Bush, the Republican nominee for president, cited the planned cuts to support his argument that the Medicare agency was ''rigid and sluggish and slow to change'' and posed ''a hazard to your health.''
 White House officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity and who worry that the image could cause problems for Vice President Al Gore, complained that the words ''photo illustration'' could not be read on The Daily News Web page.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed article deplores George W Bush's effort to duck presidential debates; holds he reveals self as entitled, spoiled brat and as man who wants to avoid confrontation at almost any cost; drawing (M) You can understand the young George W. Bush wanting to dodge Vietnam, as he did by joining the Texas Air National Guard, a k a the Champagne Unit. But what does it say that the middle-aged Mr. Bush was scared to go to Boston? Among the lame excuses the Bush campaign offered for its man's doomed effort to duck presidential debates was that one would take place adjacent to the John F. Kennedy Library. By this logic, Democrats should be able to veto any debate in the vicinity of Reagan National Airport, let alone the Lincoln Tunnel. You can understand the young George W. Bush wanting to dodge Vietnam, as he did by joining the Texas Air National Guard, a k a the Champagne Unit. But what does it say that the middle-aged Mr. Bush was scared to go to Boston? Among the lame excuses the Bush campaign offered for its man's doomed effort to duck presidential debates was that one would take place adjacent to the John F. Kennedy Library. By this logic, Democrats should be able to veto any debate in the vicinity of Reagan National Airport, let alone the Lincoln Tunnel. As you read this, Mr. Bush is negotiating the terms of his surrender to the inevitable -- he always folds in the end. But the weeklong debate about debates has already told us more about him than we may learn in any subsequent face-offs with Al Gore over prescription drug plans. Mr. Bush's behavior this week is not an anomaly in either his personal or political histories, but a ringing affirmation of both. The man has always ducked debates. In the primaries this year he pulled the same stunt on John McCain that he did on Mr. Gore -- initially turning down a California debate invitation, then abruptly accepting it once he thought Mr. McCain might not be able to appear. When Mr. Bush ran against Ann Richards for Texas governor in '94, his campaign turned down a debate invitation from ''Larry King Live,'' saying it was an unfair venue -- the flip side of this year's charade, when Mr. King's show was deemed an ideal forum by Mr. Bush because it suited his shell game. Even in his '98 re-election race, against a weak opponent nearly 50 points behind in the polls, Mr. Bush was a debate dodger. As Bill Minutaglio writes in his authoritative biography, ''First Son,'' the Bush people made sure the single debate was held in remote El Paso, ''the hardest city to get to in Texas,'' that it was moderated by one provincial reporter, that all tough journalists were banned from the TV studio, and that it was ''held on a Friday night in the middle of high school football season.'' It's never bothered me that Mr. Bush couldn't pass a pop quiz on the names of the leaders of Chechnya, Taiwan, India and Pakistan, but imagine if in a crisis he had to face these leaders in high-stakes negotiations -- or debate them in the media court of world opinion. A guy who at one point ducked verbal fisticuffs with Steve Forbes and Gary Bauer, and even argued for weeks over the format by which he'd break bread with a few gay Republicans, doesn't exactly inspire confidence in any High Noon showdown. The standard rap on Mr. Bush's debate phobia is that he's a lightweight who doesn't do his homework and is fearful of falling into malapropisms. But the real issue is more of character than intelligence. The character he has confirmed in the debate about debates is twofold: that of an entitled, spoiled brat who wants to play by his own rules or else take his feather pillow and go home, and that of a man who wants to avoid confrontation at almost any cost. Mr. Bush's sense of entitlement was woven into his debate strategy: he assumed every American could afford cable to watch CNN; he assumed NBC's ''Meet the Press'' would give him prime-time air if he showed up without Mr. Gore. And why shouldn't he make these assumptions? As many have chronicled, his name and family connections have always opened doors for him -- from his admissions to Andover and Yale to his sponsorship in the oil business to his participation (with relatively piddling capital) in the sweetheart partnership that bought and then sold the Texas Rangers for an eye-popping profit.  There's nothing illegal or immoral about this, but, like Mr. Bush's decision to opt for the National Guard over enlisting in the Air Force (or being drafted) during Vietnam, the pattern reveals a risk-averse, as well as a charmed, life. Whatever the opposite of battle-tested is, that's George W. Bush. (Brave fraternity pranks don't count.) ''He'll come to the presidency with a lighter resume than anybody has in at least a hundred years,'' wrote Nicholas Lemann in his New Yorker profile of the governor, noting that even 20th-century presidents-come-lately like Warren Harding and John Kennedy had previously served in public office 21 and 14 years respectively next to Mr. Bush's 6. Or as Ron Reagan Jr. scoffed less charitably to Lloyd Grove of The Washington Post last month, ''What is [Mr. Bush's] accomplishment? That he's no longer an obnoxious drunk?'' Yet even the fabled personal milestones of Mr. Bush's biography -- the private sins and contretemps that are supposed to have imbued him with the hard knocks and rough edges missing from his bland resume -- wilt under close scrutiny. Much has been made, for instance, of Mr. Bush's swearing off alcohol at age 40 while partying at the Broadmoor resort in Colorado; media hagiographers have inflated this exertion of will and spiritual forbearance into a profile in courage equivalent to wartime derring-do. (So much so that last week Matt Drudge tried to drum up a scandal by publicizing a 1992 wedding video allegedly depicting the governor falling off the wagon.) But by Mr. Bush's own account -- which is supported by neutral witnesses -- he was never a clinical alcoholic, never drank during the day (or every day), never needed to seek out A.A. or any other treatment. In other words, he was just an occasionally out-of-control country-club drinker who quit cold turkey after a bad hangover -- a far cry from those who face the far harsher challenge of conquering the crippling disease of alcoholism. It also turns out -- according to recent reportage by The Times's Nicholas Kristof -- that the one fearless confrontation in Mr. Bush's professional past is also inflated: He did not, as legend has it, fire John Sununu from his father's administration but only gave Mr. Sununu a stiff talking-to in the days before his departure. It's enough to make you wonder if all those fruitless rumors about Mr. Bush's alleged cocaine use were not floated by Bush enemies after all, but by his allies -- just to give him an aura of true grit. As far as I can discern, the only really daring move in Mr. Bush's entire life was to fire Bobby Valentine as manager of the Texas Rangers -- though Mr. Valentine has said that his dismissal took the form of an hourlong love tap rather than a boot administered by a decisive leader. All of which suggests that Mr. Bush is a nice guy -- which thus explains why his greatest successes have been as a cheerleader. He was not only head cheerleader at Andover, but both in oil and in baseball served the same function: he was the glad-handing salesman, the schmoozer, the p.r. front man who hit up investors for money and roused the fans while other executives actually made the crucial business decisions and ran the companies. For that matter, the less-than-powerful job of Texas governor has also been described as ''a cheerleader and p.r. person'' by Paul Rea, a Texas oil business pal of Mr. Bush's. A cheerleader or p.r. person, by definition, does not want to get into debates or risk angry confrontations with anyone. That's why Mr. Bush's juvenile wisecrack this week about The Times's Adam Clymer was completely in character. Though Mr. Bush and his campaign tried to spin the incident as an example of Trumanesque plain speaking, Truman would have confronted Mr. Clymer as directly as he famously did The Washington Post's Paul Hume rather than do so accidentally by stupidly speaking into an open mike. Is a professional cheerleader the kind of leader we want as president? In this untroubled time, maybe so. The debate debate behind him, a resurgently upbeat Mr. Bush vowed on Thursday that he would be nicer than ever and start campaigning more with ''real people'' in such real places as coffee shops and cafeterias. I assume by ''real people'' he means those of us who haven't had his easeful career path, who aren't given a free pass when we dodge our battles, who have had crises in life greater than one too many at the Broadmoor. To prove how compassionately he feels toward us all, Mr. Bush has of late taken to symbolizing his tax cut by handing out dollar bills. This gesture, too, is a striking revelation of character: here is a guy whose entire biography testifies to the unassailable proposition that money talks.
 After coming here to campaign at the request of Mark Nielsen, a Republican who is running for the House, Mr. Cheney, the party's vice-presidential candidate, found that Mr. Nielsen had also chosen today to release a new commercial that holds up three men as examples of honesty and integrity: former President George Bush, Senator John McCain of Arizona and Connecticut's own Senator Joseph I. Lieberman -- Mr. Cheney's Democratic rival. After coming here to campaign at the request of Mark Nielsen, a Republican who is running for the House, Mr. Cheney, the party's vice-presidential candidate, found that Mr. Nielsen had also chosen today to release a new commercial that holds up three men as examples of honesty and integrity: former President George Bush, Senator John McCain of Arizona and Connecticut's own Senator Joseph I. Lieberman -- Mr. Cheney's Democratic rival. The commercial even appropriates one of Mr. Cheney's stock phrases, which he repeats at nearly every event, about how he and his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, will ''restore honor and integrity to the White House.'' In the commercial, as the announcer intones, ''Today, when America wants leaders of honesty and integrity . . .'', the image on the screen is of President Bush, Mr. McCain and Mr. Lieberman. The Dallas Morning News reported on Mr. Cheney's skipped votes today, noting that he missed presidential and state primaries, runoffs, municipal and school board elections, and votes on constitutional amendments and a school bond issue. An aide to Mr. Cheney explained that he was out of town for this year's presidential primary and noted that Mr. Bush's main challenger, Mr. McCain, had already dropped out of the race by then. After he was tapped as Mr. Bush's running mate, Mr. Cheney switched his voter registration back to his longtime home state of Wyoming, because of the provision in the Constitution that is often interpreted as forbidding electors from voting for a presidential and vice-presidential candidate from the same state. Mr. Cheney voted in a primary election in Jackson, Wyo., last month, after the Republican convention. Mr. Cheney's voting record was seized on by the campaign of Vice President Al Gore. ''Cheney's poor voting record is just the latest find that Bush's examination of his background, including his big oil ties, was not too thorough,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. Mr. Cheney had been in charge of helping the Bush campaign screen potential running mates before he agreed to take on the job himself. That prompted a response from Mr. Cheney's communications director, Dirk Vande Beek. ''Secretary Cheney has voted in every general federal election for over 20 years,'' he said. ''He is a patriot and an avid participant in the political process. For the Gore campaign to try to make an issue of this is just one more example of their willingness to stoop to the politics of personal destruction and their reluctance to engage on the issues that really matter to the American people.''
 Certainly, comments by the candidates have made it seem so, as when Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, said that belief in Jesus had changed his life, and when Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, talked about the value of religious belief in public life. Certainly, comments by the candidates have made it seem so, as when Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, said that belief in Jesus had changed his life, and when Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, talked about the value of religious belief in public life.
 Consultants Corner Voter Market  Aristotle International, a consulting firm, has compiled the nation's largest voter databank -- the names of 150 million Americans registered to vote. And it is selling them to politicians like George W. Bush, Joe Lieberman and John McCain in ways that many fear removes too much privacy from the voting booth. Aristotle has a client list that reads like a political convention: 45 senators, more than 200 members of the House, state parties and every major presidential candidate except Al Gore, whose campaign says it will not hire any firm whose practices could jeopardize the public's privacy. [A1.]
 Photo of Gov George W Bush campaigning near Pittsburgh
