 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column scores Gov George W Bush's use of a vulgarity to describe Adam Clymer, a New York Times reporter who has written critically of Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney; says frat-boy talk undermines Bush's promise of a new civility in government (M) Here at The New York Times, we were exceedingly dismayed at the news that George W. Bush had called our redoubtable reporter Adam Clymer ''a major-league (expletive deleted).'' Here at The New York Times, we were exceedingly dismayed at the news that George W. Bush had called our redoubtable reporter Adam Clymer ''a major-league (expletive deleted).'' Al Siegal, our estimable arbiter of language, sent a memo to the editors on the political desk: ''Folks: If we have to refer to it again, let's call Bush's word a vulgarity, not an obscenity. It has nothing to do with sex. Nor is it profane, having nothing to do with religion or the deity.'' The Bushes have a fractious relationship with reporters because they have a bedrock belief in their own goodness. So they get deeply offended when reporters challenge their deeds, rather than simply accepting them as nice, decent people bred to rule. That's why they failed to fathom press criticism of Mr. Cheney for his nihilistic voting record on apartheid and Head Start. W.'s baptism into Washington politics in '88 was not based in policy; it was to make sure the Bush campaign was responsive to those who had been, in Junior's favorite phrase, ''loyal to all Bushes.'' Dick Cheney was loyal to all Bushes. That was the only litmus test that mattered to them. Journalists are not in a position to be loyal to all Bushes. W. was angry at Adam Clymer for an article in April reporting on Texas's abysmal health care record, and for a piece last week that rated the accuracy of a new Republican ad on prescription drugs ''zero'' on its central claim. The really troubling part of W.'s epithet was not the noun we are not allowed to print. The Bushes always resort to a little oil-riggers' swagger when they feel threatened. As in the father's ''kick a little (expletive deleted)'' line after his debate with Geraldine Ferraro. The Skull & Bones men feel more manly when they can play beef jerkies, crabbing about Harvard types from elitist, liberal institutions. Heaven forbid that anyone think the Bushies are just flighty preppies thriving on name and connections, looking for a splash more coffee. W. has built his whole campaign on that famous Bush breeding. As Dick Armey recently told The L.A. Times, ''George Bush is going to demonstrate a new axiom: Good manners make good politics.'' W. is at his least appealing when he's down. He's only lucky that Al Gore is at his least appealing when he's up. The vice president is letting that supercilious tone creep back.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column scores what he perceives as 'sly tricks' being employed Gov George W Bush to try to make his tax cut plan look less irresponsible than it is and his refusal to explain how his proposal for privatizing Social Security can sustain benefit levels with a reduced inflow of money to the system; asserts that Bush's call for alternative debate format is an attempt to escape having to answer questions about his economic proposals The commentariat seems shocked by George W. Bush's brazenness in the debate debate. Not only has he casually tossed aside the longstanding principle that the question of when and how the candidates will debate should not be a political issue; not only is he shamelessly insisting that 60 minutes of shmoozing with Larry King is the moral equivalent of 90 minutes of serious debate carried on all major networks; but then he turns around and accuses Al Gore of refusing to debate. What, ask my colleagues, makes him think he can get away with this? But to anyone who has followed Mr. Bush's pronouncements on economic policy issues -- that is, really looked at what he says, not at how what he says plays in the polls -- his attempt to pull a fast one on the debates comes as no surprise. Throughout the campaign Mr. Bush has counted on his personal charm to protect him from awkward questions about his economic proposals. Why shouldn't he imagine that he can do the same on this issue? The commentariat seems shocked by George W. Bush's brazenness in the debate debate. Not only has he casually tossed aside the longstanding principle that the question of when and how the candidates will debate should not be a political issue; not only is he shamelessly insisting that 60 minutes of shmoozing with Larry King is the moral equivalent of 90 minutes of serious debate carried on all major networks; but then he turns around and accuses Al Gore of refusing to debate. What, ask my colleagues, makes him think he can get away with this? But to anyone who has followed Mr. Bush's pronouncements on economic policy issues -- that is, really looked at what he says, not at how what he says plays in the polls -- his attempt to pull a fast one on the debates comes as no surprise. Throughout the campaign Mr. Bush has counted on his personal charm to protect him from awkward questions about his economic proposals. Why shouldn't he imagine that he can do the same on this issue? After all, most reporting accepts Mr. Bush's numbers on his tax cut, which his campaign likes to describe as costing the Treasury $1.3 trillion over the next decade, compared with a projected $2.2 trillion surplus. Few reporters have noticed that that comparison turns out to be full of sly tricks designed to make the tax cut look less irresponsible than it is. Oh, and almost nobody has noticed that Mr. Bush's headline number is also held down by a feature of his plan that will come as a rude shock if the plan ever becomes law: Millions of taxpayers won't actually get the tax cuts they think they have been promised, because they will end up paying the alternative minimum tax instead. But Mr. Bush's number games on taxes pale in comparison with his breathtaking audacity on Social Security. In case you have been in hibernation these last six months: Mr. Bush has proposed with great fanfare a partial privatization of Social Security, an idea that has its virtues (and its vices, but never mind that right now). But what is his plan? All we know is that he proposes to allow individuals to invest part of the money they currently contribute to Social Security, which will reduce the inflow of money into the Social Security system by $1.3 trillion over the next decade -- and that he insists he will not cut benefits. But if contributions are down, and benefits are not, where does the money come from? Mr. Bush hasn't said -- and he insists that he has nothing more to say. ''My position on Social Security is where it is,'' he declared a few days ago. Mr. Bush hopes, in other words, that he can cover up the absence of any actual plan to pay for his proposals with sheer bravado. And by and large he has been getting away with it. How many news reports have you seen explaining that he intends to bolster the Social Security system with stock market returns? Mr. Bush said he had a plan, and reporters assumed that he meant it -- missing the simple fact that he has never said a word about bolstering, that the only specifics we have heard from him will weaken, not strengthen, Social Security finances. And the public probably still believes his claim that he has a ''plan to save Social Security.'' So why, having gotten away with so much already, shouldn't Mr. Bush imagine that he can get away with snubbing the debate commission, and going on Larry King instead? A report in this newspaper quoted an unnamed Bush adviser as declaring: ''We're not stupid. We've been looking at this. Nobody knows who the commission is.'' In other words, we're not stupid, but the public is. And Mr. Bush's advisers apparently believe -- with history on their side -- that he can get away with just about anything if he does it with a twinkle in his eye and a grin on his face. Or maybe a smirk.
 The customer was Leon Fuerth, Vice President Al Gore's national security adviser, and he polished off a turkey sandwich and a side of cole slaw over a talk with two staff members that one of them described only as ''important.''
 Mr. Penelas, who is 38 and who at one time had been mentioned as a possible running mate for Vice President Al Gore, seemed destined for the national political stage as late as March.
 Editorial opposes Gov George W Bush's demand that three 90-minute televised debates between him and Vice Pres Al Gore be replaced by one such debate and two 60-minute appearances on Meet the Press and Larry King Live; says additional joint television appearance by the two candidates can be scheduled once the three debates sponsored by bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates are nailed down No events in a presidential campaign are more crucial to public involvement in the electoral process than the cycle of debates involving the major candidates in the fall. This week, however, Gov. George W. Bush is demanding that instead of three televised encounters sponsored by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates that has run the events since 1988, only one such debate take place, coupled with two other joint appearances with Vice President Al Gore -- one on ''Meet the Press'' and the other on ''Larry King Live.'' The problem with Mr. Bush's demand is that it needlessly junks a system that has been fair to both Republicans and Democrats, and it could greatly reduce the number of viewers likely to tune in. Mr. Bush's search for a safer debate environment also looks like a tactical loser for him, since it undercuts his declaration that he is ready for leadership in any and all circumstances. No events in a presidential campaign are more crucial to public involvement in the electoral process than the cycle of debates involving the major candidates in the fall. This week, however, Gov. George W. Bush is demanding that instead of three televised encounters sponsored by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates that has run the events since 1988, only one such debate take place, coupled with two other joint appearances with Vice President Al Gore -- one on ''Meet the Press'' and the other on ''Larry King Live.'' The problem with Mr. Bush's demand is that it needlessly junks a system that has been fair to both Republicans and Democrats, and it could greatly reduce the number of viewers likely to tune in. Mr. Bush's search for a safer debate environment also looks like a tactical loser for him, since it undercuts his declaration that he is ready for leadership in any and all circumstances. Mr. Bush's aides say he is pressing his proposal because he does not like the formats from previous elections, particularly the formal appearance of two candidates at lecterns. The Bush campaign argues that this setup and the looser ''town meeting'' format both play to Mr. Gore's strengths and that Mr. Bush would prefer sitting down at a table in a conversation between the two candidates and a respected moderator. But the presidential debate commission has said it would be amenable to discussions on format once everyone agrees to participate in the debates themselves. There is no reason the candidates cannot agree to have Mr. King or Tim Russert of NBC's ''Meet the Press'' moderate one of the commission's three debates, as Mr. Bush wants. In years past, the 90-minute debates have drawn from 50 million to 97 million viewers. Television experts say that a 60-minute debate on only one network, which Mr. Bush wants, would probably not draw more than 20 million viewers in prime time. That is too small a number for the debates to fulfill their historic purpose. Picking a single network, as Mr. Bush proposes, also opens the door for the kind of broadcast turf wars that the commission has been able to avoid. There is room, however, to indulge some of Mr. Bush's frivolous demands. If he continues to be uneasy about holding the first debate at a site near the John F. Kennedy Library in Massachusetts, Mr. Gore should agree to meet his opponent at a facility named for a Republican. As for the format issue, the ideal solution would be for Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to be allowed one format of their own choosing, and some sort of compromise on the third debate. But again, we would urge the Gore campaign toward maximum flexibility in making Mr. Bush comfortable. Where Mr. Gore should take a firm line, though, is in continuing to insist that Mr. Bush agree to the three commission debates with ''roadblock,'' or all-network, coverage. When those debates are set, then the candidates can do any number of additional debates on Mr. King's or Mr. Russert's show or anyplace else, for that matter. The public is served by more debates, not fewer -- and by preservation of the primacy of the Commission on Presidential Debates.
 Robert Krulwich, a ''Nightline'' correspondent, shows a group of teenagers a snapshot of Al Gore and draws a collective blank. Then he pulls out a photograph of Russell Simmons, a corporate executive. Instant recognition all around! If you do know who Al Gore is, you may not know that Mr. Simmons was one of the founders of Def Jam Records, the rap music label. He is also chairman of Rush Communications, whose holdings include Phat Farm. With these overlapping music and fashion franchises, you could call Mr. Simmons the C.E.O. of hip-hop. Robert Krulwich, a ''Nightline'' correspondent, shows a group of teenagers a snapshot of Al Gore and draws a collective blank. Then he pulls out a photograph of Russell Simmons, a corporate executive. Instant recognition all around! If you do know who Al Gore is, you may not know that Mr. Simmons was one of the founders of Def Jam Records, the rap music label. He is also chairman of Rush Communications, whose holdings include Phat Farm. With these overlapping music and fashion franchises, you could call Mr. Simmons the C.E.O. of hip-hop. In his three-part impressionistic series on hip-hop for ''Nightline,'' Mr. Krulwich almost immediately establishes himself as a Gore-recognizing fogy. He begins his wry report with the image of the rapper LL Cool J grinning from his limousine at his enthusiastic fans in New York, who include a fawning policeman. ''LL Cool J has been famous for 15 years, or that is what I'm told, because frankly I am not a rap fan and I am a little old,'' declares Mr. Krulwich. Later he says with puzzlement, ''If you're over 40, this world's a mystery.''
 ATTACKING BUSH ON GUNS -- Handgun Control Inc., a nonprofit lobbying group, will begin running a television advertisement in five swing states on Wednesday that sharply criticizes Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Handgun Control plans to spend more than $1 million on the effort, the largest in its history, said Joe Sudbay, the organization's political director. Mr. Sudbay said the commercial would initially run in Philadelphia, Cleveland, Detroit, Milwaukee and St. Louis, the largest cities in five of the most closely contested states. The 30-second spot, which is similar to one the group ran earlier, says Mr. Bush signed laws that allow Texans to carry concealed handguns. It then cuts to Kayne Robinson, first vice president of the National Rifle Association, saying that if Mr. Bush wins, ''We'll have a president where we work out of their office.'' ATTACKING BUSH ON GUNS -- Handgun Control Inc., a nonprofit lobbying group, will begin running a television advertisement in five swing states on Wednesday that sharply criticizes Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Handgun Control plans to spend more than $1 million on the effort, the largest in its history, said Joe Sudbay, the organization's political director. Mr. Sudbay said the commercial would initially run in Philadelphia, Cleveland, Detroit, Milwaukee and St. Louis, the largest cities in five of the most closely contested states. The 30-second spot, which is similar to one the group ran earlier, says Mr. Bush signed laws that allow Texans to carry concealed handguns. It then cuts to Kayne Robinson, first vice president of the National Rifle Association, saying that if Mr. Bush wins, ''We'll have a president where we work out of their office.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, objected to the portrayal. ''Governor Bush has said he will be the only one working out of the office,'' Mr. Bartlett said. FOCUS ON THE ECONOMY -- On a swing through Midwest battleground states, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut said yesterday that Democrats were the best stewards of the economy, while Republicans would return the government to huge deficits. Speaking to the breakfast crowd at a diner in Peoria, Ill., and at a forum in a St. Louis suburb, Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, said that Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, had promised tax cuts and new spending that would leave the federal government more than $1 trillion in debt. ''After their tax cuts, there's no money left over in the till, unless you're going to go back into deficit again,'' he said at Oakville Senior High School. And Mr. Lieberman called the Medicare prescription drug plan unveiled by Mr. Bush today unworkable. ''I don't know where Governor Bush is going to get the money,'' he said. ''There's nothing left after the big tax cut.''
 ''We want to do it in such a way that it doesn't cause major problems for Medicare,'' said Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader. ''The president wants to subsidize it for everybody. And he wants to do it, and Al Gore wants to do it, without any Medicare changes. That is a major problem. That's like putting more passengers on the Titanic as it's headed down.''
 Jonathan K Persoff letter on Sept 5 article cites threats to effective presidency posed by Gov George W Bush's 'whispered asides' It is indeed unfortunate that Gov. George W. Bush's whispered aside about a reporter for The New York Times went out over an unexpectedly open microphone (news article, Sept. 5). It is indeed unfortunate that Gov. George W. Bush's whispered aside about a reporter for The New York Times went out over an unexpectedly open microphone (news article, Sept. 5). It would be even more unfortunate if, as president, Mr. Bush made similar comments during delicate discussions with the Group of 8; trade talks with high officials of the Chinese government or nuclear weapons discussions with North Korea or Pakistan. One wonders how effective Mr. Bush would be as president if his ''whispered asides'' were frequently made public.
 Ad by Democratic National Committee attacking Gov George W Bush's record on children's health care appraised; photo The Democratic National Committee announced yesterday that it would begin running a new commercial tomorrow that takes a critical look at Gov. George W. Bush's record of providing health care for children in Texas. The 30-second spot is to run in nine states that Democrats and Republicans have focused on most heavily : Arkansas, Delaware, Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Washington and Wisconsin. The Democratic National Committee announced yesterday that it would begin running a new commercial tomorrow that takes a critical look at Gov. George W. Bush's record of providing health care for children in Texas. The 30-second spot is to run in nine states that Democrats and Republicans have focused on most heavily : Arkansas, Delaware, Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Washington and Wisconsin. ON THE SCREEN -- Video footage of Mr. Bush appears and dissolves. Cut to the faces of several young children. Then a gavel comes down and the words ''corrective action'' are superimposed on the screen. More shots of children are seen, followed by a final, scowling portrait of the governor. SCRIPT -- Announcer: ''George W. Bush has a plan for children's health care. But why hasn't he done it in Texas? Texas ranks 49th out of 50 in providing health coverage to kids. It's so bad a federal judge just ruled Texas must take immediate corrective action. The judge's findings: Bush's administration broke a promise to improve health care for kids. The needs of abused kids are neglected. Texas failed to inform families of health coverage available to a million children. The Bush record. It's becoming an issue.'' ACCURACY -- The spot's central accusation is the citation of a ruling by a federal court judge in Texas on Aug. 14. The judge, William Wayne Justice, ruled the state had failed to abide by a 1996 consent decree and provide appropriate health care for more than 1.5 million Texas children who were eligible for Medicaid. What the spot does not mention is that the ruling was based on a class-action suit filed on behalf of Texas children in 1993, two years before Mr. Bush took office. The data that puts Texas 49th in the nation comes from Texas newspaper articles in 1999 that said only Arizona had a lower percentage of children without health insurance. The Bush campaign calls the spot a serious distortion, saying that last year, the governor ''supported and signed'' a bill that provides health insurance to 423,000 Texas children. SCORECARD -- Much as the condition of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis's Massachusetts became a focus for Mr. Dukakis's Republican opponents in 1988, the eyes of Democratic advertising people will be upon Texas in 2000. Indeed, the commercial's closing line hints at more commercials of the kind to come. The Democratic spot is different in tone from the latest spot by the Republican National Committee, which, in a marked departure for this campaign, uses humor to take a swipe at Mr. Gore's character and play up the perception of him as a man who exaggerates his achievements. The effort in this new spot is to take on Mr. Bush on the issues, a form of attack that those who study political advertising say is often effective.
 Business lobbyists voiced cautious optimism that the Senate would reject all amendments, but remained unsure how the next two weeks would unfold. ''My sense is we're in good shape, but the difficulties lie in that the process will be uncertain,'' said Nick Calio, a bill supporter who was President Bush's top legislative aide on Capitol Hill.
 Robert A. Baruch Bush, a law professor at Hofstra University who helped design a training program for the 3,000 outside mediators in Redress, said the goal was to shift conversations between employees and their supervisors from destructive to constructive. ''If that happens,'' he said, ''it becomes a more open corporation, and then the parties themselves in most cases will be able to define what's bothering them and how to fix it.'' Resolution is a byproduct, he added.
 Excerpts from remarks by Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush announcing plans for revising Medicare (M) Following are excerpts from remarks prepared for delivery today by Gov. George W. Bush in Allentown, Pa., announcing his plans for revising Medicare: Following are excerpts from remarks prepared for delivery today by Gov. George W. Bush in Allentown, Pa., announcing his plans for revising Medicare: Vice President Gore talks about the ''people'' versus the ''powerful.'' For eight years, he has been the powerful, and, on health care, he has little to show for it. The vice president said he has been involved with every decision for the past eight years. And after eight years of his active involvement, 8 million more Americans are left without health insurance than in 1993 -- a 20 percent increase. Forty-four million Americans now have no health insurance; 2.4 million more children have no health insurance. And nothing has been done to reform Medicare or provide prescription drug coverage. Now the vice president has adopted the president's prescription drug proposal and has challenged America to compare our plans. I welcome the comparison, because there is a lot Vice President Gore isn't telling you. Here are the practical problems with Al Gore's plan: The Gore plan forces seniors into a government-chosen H.M.O. for their drugs -- and if you don't like the plan the Washington bureaucracy puts you into, too bad. You have no other options. For the majority of seniors, those who use less than $576 in prescription drugs a year, you will actually lose on the Gore plan: the combination of additional premiums and a high co-pay will force you to pay more than you get back in benefits. Some seniors may want different options -- a higher deductible on drugs, say, in exchange for vision coverage. Under the Gore plan, you're out of luck. You have only one choice: the one that government makes for you. The Gore plan gives seniors just one chance to buy into drug coverage -- at age 64 and a half. If you want coverage at age 67, or you change your mind, you're again out of luck. It's the Gore plan for life, or nothing at all. Even if the Gore plan passes, no one will get the full drug benefit for eight years. That's a detail you don't hear much in the vice president's speeches. . . .
 News analysis of major overhaul of health care proposed by Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush; plan to redesign Medicare and offer drug benefits to elderly puts him squarely in line with party's drive to reshape program by reducing role of government, increasing role of insurance companies and giving elderly people more choices (M) Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to redesign Medicare and offer drug benefits to the elderly puts him squarely in line with his party's drive to reshape the program by reducing the role of government, increasing the role of insurance companies and giving elderly people more choices. The proposal is also meant to serve an important political purpose: to fend off attacks by Democrats who contend that Mr. Bush has no true commitment to elderly people squeezed by rising drug costs. The elderly, long a key part of the Democratic coalition, are considered a crucial swing vote this year. Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to redesign Medicare and offer drug benefits to the elderly puts him squarely in line with his party's drive to reshape the program by reducing the role of government, increasing the role of insurance companies and giving elderly people more choices. The proposal is also meant to serve an important political purpose: to fend off attacks by Democrats who contend that Mr. Bush has no true commitment to elderly people squeezed by rising drug costs. The elderly, long a key part of the Democratic coalition, are considered a crucial swing vote this year. Like most Democrats, Mr. Gore sees Medicare as one of the greatest achievements of American social policy and basically approves of the course it has followed since its creation 35 years ago. Mr. Bush, by contrast, sees Medicare as a prime example of government regulation run wild. Mr. Gore offers a uniform, standardized package of benefits with the same premiums for most beneficiaries. Mr. Bush would subsidize a variety of health plans offering different drug benefits and charging different premiums and co-payments. On the surface, Mr. Gore's plan appears to offer more certainty, more security and more generous benefits. But the total cost to the government would be higher, and the Bush campaign asserted that under Mr. Gore's proposal ''half of all seniors will pay more in annual charges than they will receive in prescription drug benefits.'' And with his proposal today, which he outlined in a speech in Pennsylvania, Mr. Bush has set the stage for a reprise of the health care battles of the last decade, revolving around a fundamental question: which do voters fear more, the government or the insurance industry? Mr. Bush wants to make greater use of private industry, including insurers and health maintenance organizations, to deliver drug benefits and other medical services to the elderly. The government would still pay most costs, though, and would supervise insurers, approving or disapproving all plans. In essence, Mr. Bush envisions a large expansion of the role of H.M.O.'s, which now cover 6.2 million of the 39 million Medicare beneficiaries. Mr. Gore's approach relies more on the traditional Medicare program to deliver drug benefits. Under Mr. Bush's proposal, the government would pay at least 25 percent of the cost of premiums for drug coverage, even for the most affluent beneficiaries. Under Mr. Gore's proposal, the government would pay at least 50 percent. Under Mr. Gore's plan, the government would pay all pharmaceutical costs after a beneficiary had spent $4,000 out-of-pocket on drugs in a year. Mr. Bush says that under his proposal, the government would pick up all costs after a beneficiary had spent $6,000 on health care of all types. Both plans would subsidize part of the cost of prescription drug insurance for people who elect it. Mr. Gore would pump much more money into Medicare and drug benefits for the elderly in the coming decade. But Mr. Bush's plan would cost far more than a bill passed by the House in June to offer drug coverage to Medicare beneficiaries. Mr. Bush says his plan would offer assistance quickly because he would offer money to the states -- $12 billion a year for four years -- to provide immediate assistance to people with low incomes. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, described the difference this way: ''Governor Bush would provide seniors with options and choices. Vice President Gore focuses on a one-size-fits-all solution to the need for drug benefits.'' Donna E. Shalala, the secretary of health and human services, described the Gore plan's uniformity of premiums and benefits as a virtue. ''Under the Bush plan, there would be wide variations across country,'' she said, serving as spokeswoman for the Gore campaign. ''It simply is not a Medicare benefit. It's not available to everyone in every part of the country at the same price.'' Moreover, Dr. Shalala argued, ''George Bush suggests seniors have a big problem with the bureaucracy of the Health Care Financing Administration,'' the agency that runs Medicare. ''What they really have a problem with is the bureaucracy of H.M.O.'s.'' It is difficult to compare the Bush and Gore proposals. Mr. Bush would encourage Medicare beneficiaries to obtain drug coverage and other services through private health plans subsidized by the government. Mr. Bush did not specify the level of drug benefits that would be available under his proposal, nor did he specify the premiums and co-payments for which the elderly would be responsible. Those amounts could vary from one plan to another, he said. By contrast, under Mr. Gore's proposal, the government would specify a standardized package of benefits. Medicare would pay half the cost of each prescription, with no deductible. The maximum federal payment would be $1,000 for $2,000 of drugs in 2002, rising to $2,500 for $5,000 of drugs in 2008. Monthly premiums would start at $25 in 2002 and would rise to nearly $51 in 2009. A summary of Mr. Bush's plan, issued by his campaign, indicates that drug benefits would be offered to Medicare recipients in the original fee-for-service program, as well as to those in H.M.O.'s. All health insurers in Medicare, including government-sponsored plans, ''will have to offer an expanded benefit package, including outpatient prescription drug coverage,'' the document says. Mr. Fleischer said that under the Bush plan, ''the existing standard Medicare benefit package would be expanded for the first time to provide prescription drugs for those who remain in the fee-for-service program. You would not have to leave Medicare to get prescription drug benefits. But you would be free to shop around, choose and compare.'' Consumer advocates and Democrats were just as quick to criticize the Bush plan. Ronald F. Pollack, executive director of Families USA, a consumer advocacy group, said the record of H.M.O.'s and other private insurers in delivering drug coverage to the elderly was ''at best, spotty.'' Of the broader market-oriented changes contemplated by Governor Bush, Mr. Pollack said, ''We fear that this would wither away the fee-for-service system that five out of six seniors depend on today.'' Whether Mr. Bush's plan achieves its political purpose may depend less on its specific details than on how skillfully he marshals facts, figures and arguments in support of it -- in televised debates and in his ads. Prescription drugs loom large politically because they are a top concern of critical constituencies -- the elderly, and the generation aging just behind them. Republican strategists said that Mr. Bush's plan would change the debate, which had taken a toll in recent weeks on his support among older women. Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster who also works for the drug industry, said: ''Now, there's a legitimate debate about which plan is better. That's a very different debate, with significant merits on the side of what Governor Bush has introduced.'' But Democrats argued that Mr. Bush's plan had huge vulnerabilities.  The private sector marketplace that Mr. Bush envisions, Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster, said, was ''an abstraction and an unknown quantity that provides no comfort or reassurance to seniors.''
 Presidential campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore releases detailed economic blueprint for next decade, including new proposal for $300 billion hedge against overly optimistic budget projections; document also reiterates Gore's commitment to eliminate national debt and lists broad variety of socioeconomic goals; proposals detailed; photo (M) The Gore campaign today released a detailed economic blueprint for the next decade, including a new proposal for a $300 billion hedge against overly optimistic budget projections. The Gore campaign today released a detailed economic blueprint for the next decade, including a new proposal for a $300 billion hedge against overly optimistic budget projections. Mr. Gore's idea for a $300 billion  reserve fund -- money that would not be spent from the federal budget surplus -- is intended to be a cushion against shortfalls in projections by the Congressional Budget Office, which estimates a surplus of $1.8 trillion over the next decade, exclusive of the surplus reaped by the Social Security system. While the Gore and Bush campaigns both assume the $1.8 trillion projected by the C.B.O., the Clinton administration uses the more conservative estimate of the White House Office of Management and Budget: $1.4 trillion. ''If more conservative O.M.B. projections are met,'' the Gore blueprint says, ''this will allow an additional $300 billion of debt reduction. If unexpected costs materialize, this surplus resource will prevent us from going back to the days of big deficits, high taxes and deep spending cuts.'' Mr. Gore's plan otherwise synthesizes proposals that he has made over the last several months into a variety of national goals. He is to discuss it in a speech here on Wednesday, and details are being published in a 200-page book, unique in modern presidential campaigns in that it is essentially a budget proposal that will serve as an economic and political manifesto. The number-heavy and footnoted book, which was made available to The New York Times, underscores Mr. Gore's determination to supply specifics in his policy proposals. In that regard, it is intended to serve as a counterweight to the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, which the Gore camp regards as feather-thin on policy and based largely on personality. The plan, which Gore advisers denied was timed to offset Mr. Bush's proposal today to overhaul Medicare, was drafted for months with help from Clinton administration experts like Robert E. Rubin, former treasury secretary; Laura D. Tyson, former chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers; and Gene Sperling, President Clinton's top economic adviser. Mr. Rubin is to join Mr. Gore for the presentation here on Wednesday. The Gore campaign said its blueprint was the road to continued economic expansion. And realization of the goals that the vice president laid out, like reducing the poverty level to below 10 percent for the first time in history, and increasing the college graduation rate to 75 percent of high school graduates from the current level of 66 percent, depends on that  continued prosperity. The sum of Mr. Gore's spending initiatives, as presented by his campaign, is about $1.4 trillion, although  Republicans said it appeared to them that his proposals would mean new spending that totaled more than the  surplus of $1.8 trillion envisioned by the Congressional Budget Office. An analysis prepared by the Senate Budget Committee, headed by Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, said Mr. Gore had proposed such extensive spending that he would have to dip into Social Security to pay for his programs. The Gore campaign has also proposed targeted tax cuts that it says amount to $500 billion over 10 years.  But Republicans say these are illusory and so complicated that no one can be sure how much anyone would save. The Gore campaign said that its plan was sound and would eliminate the publicly held federal debt by 2012, while Mr. Bush's, it said, would leave the government $2.8 trillion in debt. Indeed, the centerpiece of the Gore plan is to eliminate the debt, through use of Mr. Gore's proposed reserve fund and the Social Security and Medicare surpluses. Mr. Gore would protect those surpluses by barring their use for any other purpose. The plan says that through increased productivity, a Gore administration could raise family incomes by one-third over the next decade. It estimates productivity growth at 2.8 percent a year, by paying down the debt, investing in biomedical research and computer technology, and opening more markets abroad. His plan says Mr. Gore would reduce the poverty rate to below 10 percent by 2004 from its current level above 12 percent. He would achieve this by raising the minimum wage, expanding the earned-income tax credit and creating more welfare-to-work programs. Women now earn 73 cents for every dollar earned by men, according to the Council of Economic Advisers. The Gore plan would cut that gap of 27 cents by almost half, to 14 cents, through various plans that provide training programs to move women into higher-paying, high-tech jobs and more loans to help women start their own businesses.
 Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to redesign Medicare and offer drug benefits to the elderly puts him squarely in line with his party's drive to change the course of the program by reducing the role of government and increasing the role of insurance companies. [A1.]
 Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush proposes fundamental overhaul of 35-year-old federal Medicare program that would encourage recipients to choose subsidized private health insurance plans that include prescription drug coverage; takes sharply different approach from Democratic rival Vice Pres Al Gore, who favors more money to shore up current Medicare system with addition of new government prescription drug benefit; $198 billion plan is modeled after bipartisan legislation on Capitol Hill and would be most sweeping overhaul of federal health insurance program for elderly since its inception; would create system in which private insurers compete with government to provide coverage for nation's 39 million Medicare beneficiaries, and government would cover full cost of drug coverage for low-income elderly; Bush praises Medicare as enduring commitment of country, but says it must be modernized for times; his proposals detailed; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush today proposed a fundamental overhaul of the 35-year-old federal Medicare program that would encourage recipients to choose subsidized private health insurance plans that include prescription drug coverage. Mr. Bush unveiled his Medicare plan at a center for the elderly in Allentown after weeks of pressure from Vice President Al Gore, who considers health care one of his strongest issues and who has relentlessly accused his rival of avoiding specifics. Gov. George W. Bush today proposed a fundamental overhaul of the 35-year-old federal Medicare program that would encourage recipients to choose subsidized private health insurance plans that include prescription drug coverage. Mr. Bush unveiled his Medicare plan at a center for the elderly in Allentown after weeks of pressure from Vice President Al Gore, who considers health care one of his strongest issues and who has relentlessly accused his rival of avoiding specifics. Mr. Bush's plan takes a sharply different approach from Mr. Gore's proposal. Mr. Gore would dedicate more money to shore up the current Medicare system and would then add a new government prescription drug benefit to the program. Mr. Bush's $198 billion plan, modeled after bipartisan legislation on Capitol Hill, would be the most sweeping overhaul of the federal health insurance program for the elderly since its inception. He would create a system where private insurers compete with the government to provide coverage for the nation's 39 million Medicare beneficiaries. He also pledged that the government would cover the full cost of drug coverage for the low-income elderly. He accused President Clinton and Mr. Gore of failing to seize the opportunity to reshape the system. ''On health care, my opponent offers the same tired, partisan ideas that have led our country nowhere,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His is the path of politics, the path of posturing, the path of least resistance. But it is not the path of leadership.'' Many of the details of Mr. Bush's plan would take time and experience to work out, because his plan would allow people to pick and choose from a wide array of private insurance packages. Mr. Bush's plan essentially builds on the expansion of managed care in Medicare that was required by the balanced budget act of 1997. In a system modeled after the health plan now offered to federal workers, the government would solicit various health insurance plans including prescription drug benefits from private companies and then allow people to select from an array of plans it approved or else remain in the current Medicare system. People would be free to buy the more generous plan at more cost to themselves. ''Some new benefits packages will be traditional fee-for-service,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Others may be networks run by doctors. All must offer the minimum Medicare benefits and can add additional services to compete for customers. You can choose to keep your current Medicare benefit exactly the way it is, or, if you decide,  you can add to it and you can improve it. It's your choice.'' Mr. Gore and an array of other Democrats immediately criticized the plan as one that did not provide meaningful enough subsidies to help many of the elderly purchase drug coverage, arguing that it would leave half those who need it without drug coverage. And they said the plan would force more people into health maintenance organizations at a time when many H.M.O.'s have been pulling out of the Medicare market. ''It leaves millions of seniors without any prescription drug coverage,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Middle-class seniors, nearly half of those who don't have coverage today, would not get coverage.'' He also charged that Mr. Bush had now proposed such a large tax cut and so many programs that he could not pay for the plan without causing a deficit, a contention the Bush campaign denied. To help people with drug costs, Mr. Bush would provide a sliding scale of subsidies, beginning with the full premium coverage for the low-income elderly to get a standard benefit package including drug coverage. A second group of elderly, with incomes between $11,300 and $14,600,  would get an unspecified partial subsidy for the cost of their coverage for prescription drugs. Because such an overhaul of the Medicare system could take years to set into law, Mr. Bush also offered a temporary four-year $48 billion plan to give grants to states to subsidize prescription drug coverage for the low-income elderly. And Mr. Bush also called for $40 billion to be restored to Medicare for payments to doctors, hospitals and health care providers that were reduced under the budget act in 1997. Mr. Bush's entry into the debate now sets up a sharp competition for the votes of the elderly concerned about health care. In a sign of just how intent the Democrats are to hold their traditional advantage on the issue, the Democratic National Committee said today it would begin running a commercial that seizes on a ruling by a federal district judge that Texas has violated a 1996 agreement to improve its Medicaid program for children. ''George W. Bush has a plan for children's health care. But why hasn't he done it in Texas?'' the  commercial asks. Texas is appealing the ruling. Mr. Gore came out with his own prescription drug plan months ago. Showing the philosophical differences between the two parties, it is more expensive than Mr. Bush's -- costing at least $253 billion over 10 years -- and it creates the prescription drug benefit inside the traditional Medicare program. His coverage for people with catastrophic drug costs would start after a beneficiary spent $4,000 on medicines. Mr. Gore's aides say the uniform nature of their plan is part of its appeal -- it would effectively give Medicare vast purchasing power and the ability to extract deep discounts from drug makers. A spokesman at the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, the Washington trade group, said the group's experts were still reviewing the details of Mr.  Bush's plan and could not say yet whether they supported it. Neil B. Sweig, a drug analyst at Ryan, Beck & Company, said Governor Bush's plan was clearly more favorable to the drug companies and to the companies' investors. Mr. Bush today, much like the drug industry, criticized Mr. Gore's plan as a step toward price controls. ''By making government agents the largest purchaser of prescription drugs in America,'' he said, ''by making Washington the nation's pharmacist, the Gore plan puts us well on the way to price control for drugs.''
 Vice President Al Gore plans to release today a detailed 200-page economic blueprint for the next decade. The plan calls for a $300 billion rainy day fund and the elimination of the national debt. The plan also sets forth a broad variety of socioeconomic goals, like increasing family income, reducing poverty and narrowing the gap in wages between men and women. Vice President Al Gore plans to release today a detailed 200-page economic blueprint for the next decade. The plan calls for a $300 billion rainy day fund and the elimination of the national debt. The plan also sets forth a broad variety of socioeconomic goals, like increasing family income, reducing poverty and narrowing the gap in wages between men and women. As much a political manifesto as it is a budget plan, the document reflects Mr. Gore's determination to supply specifics in policy proposals.
 The double-digit increases come at a time of rising concern in Washington and in the presidential campaign about health care costs, particularly for drugs in the Medicare program. Both Gov. George W. Bush, and Vice President Al Gore have proposed ways to add drug coverage for the elderly.
 When John McCain lost the New York Republican presidential primary last spring, he placed a large part of the blame on what he asserted was an illegal $2.5 million advertising campaign that attacked his environmental record and had been financed by two wealthy Texas brothers with close ties to Gov. George W. Bush, Mr. McCain's opponent. When John McCain lost the New York Republican presidential primary last spring, he placed a large part of the blame on what he asserted was an illegal $2.5 million advertising campaign that attacked his environmental record and had been financed by two wealthy Texas brothers with close ties to Gov. George W. Bush, Mr. McCain's opponent. Mr. Wyly and his brother Sam are longtime associates of Mr. Bush. Using a loophole in federal election laws, they financed television ads that attacked Mr. McCain's environmental record. The ads were placed by an independent committee, ''Republicans for Clean Air,'' and were widely criticized as inaccurately portraying the environmental records of Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain.
 Bush Prescription Plan Is Overhaul of Medicare  Gov. George W. Bush proposed an overhaul of the 35-year-old Medicare program that would encourage recipients to choose subsidized private health insurance plans offering prescription drug coverage and would also pay the full cost of drug coverage for the low-income elderly. Gore's Economic Vision  The Gore campaign issued an economic blueprint for the next decade, including a $300 billion rainy day fund, a commitment to eliminate the national debt and goals that included increasing family incomes, reducing poverty and narrowing the gap in wages between men and women.
