 Next week the Republican leadership in Congress is expected to try to override the president's veto of its other main tax bill this year, a tax cut for married couples. Republicans acknowledged that they would probably fail, but said that again highlighting Mr. Clinton's opposition to tax cuts would help them retain control of the House and help put Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in the White House. Vice President Al Gore opposed the estate tax bill passed by Congress, but has supported a smaller plan to reduce the tax on family-owned farms and businesses. Mr. Bush, who included repeal of the estate tax in his $1.3 trillion tax cut proposal, said in a statement today that if he is elected president, ''there will be no veto to override'' because he will ''sign the abolition of the death tax into law.''
 Bush Scoffs at Grumbling, But Moves to Recast Image  Gov. George W. Bush dismissed criticism from some Republicans over the direction of his campaign, but he also called himself ''the underdog'' and said he would restyle his campaign to put him in more intimate settings with voters. A poll by ABC News and The Washington Post had the race tied, with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore each attracting 47 percent, while a Gallup poll for CNN and USA Today put Mr. Gore in the lead, 47 percent to 44 percent. A rift has developed between the Bush organization and the Republican National Committee. Mr. Bush and some advisers signaled new flexibility on debates. Dark View of Bush's Plans  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said Gov. George W. Bush's economic plans would ''send us back down the drain of deficits, rising interest rates and rising unemployment.'' Bush Scoffs at Grumbling, But Moves to Recast Image  Gov. George W. Bush dismissed criticism from some Republicans over the direction of his campaign, but he also called himself ''the underdog'' and said he would restyle his campaign to put him in more intimate settings with voters. A poll by ABC News and The Washington Post had the race tied, with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore each attracting 47 percent, while a Gallup poll for CNN and USA Today put Mr. Gore in the lead, 47 percent to 44 percent. A rift has developed between the Bush organization and the Republican National Committee. Mr. Bush and some advisers signaled new flexibility on debates. Dark View of Bush's Plans  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said Gov. George W. Bush's economic plans would ''send us back down the drain of deficits, rising interest rates and rising unemployment.''
 Teamsters union endorses Al Gore for president; James P Hoffa comments on delay (S) Long after most other unions had backed Vice President Al Gore for president, the Teamsters' executive board gave him its endorsement yesterday. Despite the long wait, James P. Hoffa, the union's president, said the decision was easy. Long after most other unions had backed Vice President Al Gore for president, the Teamsters' executive board gave him its endorsement yesterday. Despite the long wait, James P. Hoffa, the union's president, said the decision was easy. Mr. Hoffa said he pushed his board to make the endorsement after he held extensive talks with Mr. Gore in the past few months and after the vice president began speaking on issues important to working families, something Mr. Hoffa said he had urged him to do. Mr. Hoffa denied suggestions by some political analysts that he was a fair-weather friend who had embraced Mr. Gore only after the vice president became the front-runner. Some labor officials said Mr. Hoffa, as the new leader of the Teamsters, also wanted to show that he was his own man and would not automatically join union leaders who heeded the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, John J. Sweeney, and quickly endorsed Mr. Gore. After Mr. Gore lobbied for the China trade bill last May, Mr. Hoffa sometimes sounded so angry with the vice president that there appeared to be little chance the International Brotherhood of Teamsters would back him. Mr. Hoffa attacked the China trade deal because it did not provide protections for workers and because he feared it would encourage American companies to transfer operations to China. But Mr. Hoffa said yesterday that Mr. Gore had given assurances on trade. He said Mr. Gore had indicated that he was far more likely than Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to pick judges and members of the National Labor Relations Board favorable to labor. He added that Mr. Gore had made no commitments on one of Mr. Hoffa's priorities: persuading the federal government to end 11 years of intensive supervision aimed at rooting out corruption in the Teamsters. One of Mr. Hoffa's aides said the Republican Party had vigorously wooed Mr. Hoffa. The aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the Republicans had promised to make Mr. Hoffa labor's main liaison with the White House and give him a say in labor-related appointments, if he endorsed Mr. Bush. Mr. Hoffa declined to criticize Mr. Bush, saying the Teamsters wanted to improve relations with Republican lawmakers. He said the Teamsters have endorsed several Republicans  who have often sided with labor, including Representatives Peter T. King of Long Island and Christopher H. Smith of New Jersey.
 George W Bush's current political woes have exposed serious rift with Republican National Committee on conduct of presidential campaign; top party officials are furious that Bush organization has rejected advice on matters like television commercials and debates; staff shuffles have followed fracas over party commercial questioning Gore's ethics; photo (M) The political troubles facing Gov. George W. Bush have exposed a serious rift between the Bush organization and the Republican National Committee over how best to conduct the presidential campaign. Several high-ranking officials at party headquarters here say they were furious that the campaign had shut them out and rejected their advice on things like television commercials and how Mr. Bush negotiates a schedule of debates with Vice President Al Gore. The political troubles facing Gov. George W. Bush have exposed a serious rift between the Bush organization and the Republican National Committee over how best to conduct the presidential campaign. Several high-ranking officials at party headquarters here say they were furious that the campaign had shut them out and rejected their advice on things like television commercials and how Mr. Bush negotiates a schedule of debates with Vice President Al Gore. One high-ranking party official official complained that the view from Austin, Tex., where Mr. Bush has his headquarters, has been that the party has nothing to add. Officials on both sides said that there had been some friction for months between officials in Austin and at the party but that it escalated two weeks ago when Mr. Bush himself ordered the party to shelve a 30-second commercial questioning Mr. Gore's ethics by using misleading information. Many Republican officials said the party had been unfairly blamed for championing the commercial, even though several Bush aides had pushed for it, as well. Some Bush aides, in turn, complained that the party did not have a better chain-of-command for reviewing and distributing advertisements -- and that it had already delivered the commercial to some television stations when the decision was made to pull it. After the controversy surrounding the pulled commercial, Bush campaign officials removed David Israelite, the party's political director, as coordinator of its advertising campaign. The campaign replaced him with Maria Cino, who was the Bush organization's political director during the primaries and who moved to the party in the spring as a deputy chairman. A Bush lieutenant said Mr. Israelite had been ''the center of the universe as far as the spots go,'' but that campaign officials prefer ''a broader group of people considering the options.'' One of the biggest complaints among party officials is that for months they were rebuffed in their efforts to keep Mr. Gore on the defensive by starting an early advertising campaign, as the Democrats did against Mr. Bush. Throughout the summer, Democrats spent $35 million on commercials promoting Mr. Gore or pounding Mr. Bush, while Republicans spent roughly $25 million. Some party officials said they had pressed for the campaign to approve a much more aggressive television blitz against Mr. Gore. But Bush officials said there was no need for Mr. Bush to begin attacking when he was enjoying a solid lead in the polls and when he was vowing to keep the tone of the campaign positive. Party officials also complained that members of the campaign high-command in Texas instructed them earlier in the year to stop staging events and putting out news releases intended to knock Mr. Gore off stride. Such efforts, these officials said, could have prevented the vice president from gaining ground. One party official said he had suggested that the party put on an anti-Gore event to help Mr. Bush regain momentum and capture attention in the press immediately after the Democratic convention. But, he said, the idea was dismissed by Bush aides in Austin. As is common for a presidential campaign, the Bush organization effectively seized control of the party after the primary season ended and installed some of its loyalists -- including Ms. Cino and Fred Meyer, the chief coordinator between the party and the Bush campaign -- at party headquarters. It left the chairman, Jim Nicholson, in place. Several people described Mr. Nicholson as a loyal partisan, and one of the few top party officials who has not complained about the Bush campaign. ''I'm not aware that there's very much concern,'' Mr. Nicholson said in an interview. ''In any campaign there are always certain personality conflicts. But there's even very little of that.'' Yet many party stalwarts who work closely with Mr. Nicholson went as far as to say that members of the tight-knit Bush high command in Austin were overly confident, even arrogant. A mocking phrase making the rounds among party officials here is ''Austin Knows Best.'' It is not unusual for such tensions to arise at a time when a candidate is watching his poll numbers sag, as Mr. Bush is. But many officials on both sides said the strains are deeper than usual, prompting one party official to say that Bush aides would likely investigate sources for this article. ''There will be witch hunts,'' he said. ''There will be victims.'' The tensions stand in marked contrast to the relationship between the Gore campaign and the the Democratic National Committee, which have worked closely together to mount a drive to discredit Mr. Bush. It should not be a surprise, perhaps, that Bush camp has not devoted more attention to party officials here. Mr. Bush has cast himself as an outsider and built his campaign in part on his disdain for Washington and politics as usual. Some people involved in the Bush operation and at the party cautioned that it was simplistic to characterize the rift as one between Austin and Washington. They noted, for instance, that there have been debates among officials in both places about how and when the party should begin broadcasting commercials attacking Mr. Gore -- and that those debates are ongoing. Ari Fleischer, a Bush campaign spokesman, brushed of suggestions of disputes, saying, ''We're all working together to win in November.''
 Reporter's Notebook on presidential race; Al Gore rarely mentions George W Bush on stump, leaving running-mate, Joseph Lieberman, to tear into policies and strategies, though not personalities, of Republican ticket (M) On a day the Democrats devoted to trumpeting their economic goals, Vice President Al Gore, speaking in Cleveland, never mentioned the Republicans. But in a speech on the same topic today at Southwest Missouri State University here, Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, spoke in dire terms of the economic plans of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee. Mr. Bush's proposals would ''send us back down the drain of deficits, rising interest rates and rising unemployment,'' Mr. Lieberman said. On a day the Democrats devoted to trumpeting their economic goals, Vice President Al Gore, speaking in Cleveland, never mentioned the Republicans. But in a speech on the same topic today at Southwest Missouri State University here, Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, spoke in dire terms of the economic plans of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee. Mr. Bush's proposals would ''send us back down the drain of deficits, rising interest rates and rising unemployment,'' Mr. Lieberman said. Mr. Lieberman has adopted the traditional role of the ticket's No. 2, taking the lead in attacking the opposition, allowing Mr. Gore to remain, if not above the fray, then less deeply mired in it. At every stop, Mr. Lieberman vows not to make personal attacks on Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, and so far he has not. But he has not hesitated to tear into their policies and strategies. ''He's running around signing a book of blank checks drawn on an account that his tax cuts have already depleted,'' Mr. Lieberman said today of Mr. Bush. On Monday, he lit into Mr. Bush much more strongly than Mr. Gore did for refusing to take part in two of the three debates proposed by a bipartisan commission, stopping just short of accusing Mr. Bush of being afraid to debate. ''I think that Governor Bush is making an end run around the established rules of presidential debates,'' he said. ''It's like one of the teams in the Super Bowl, a few weeks before the Super Bowl, saying, 'I don't want to play in that city, I don't want to play by those rules, and I don't want to play in front of so many people.' '' Democratic campaign officials acknowledge the difference between Mr. Lieberman's approach and Mr. Gore's but say it is not a result of any grand strategy. ''It's what they're comfortable with,'' one aide said. Instead of becoming agitated, Mr. Lieberman gently corrected the misimpression and reiterated the points he and Vice President Gore had made dozens of times. When Mr. Gore picked Mr. Lieberman as his running mate, the focus -- both in the news and in the senator's comments -- was on his being the first Jew nominated by a major party for national office. At every stop, Mr. Lieberman mentions that Mr. Gore ''volunteered for service in Vietnam.'' It seems an odd tribute, given that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman came to oppose United States involvement in the war, as did tens of millions of other Americans. Arnold Schmidt, a 49-year-old construction worker who heard Mr. Lieberman speak at a Labor Day festival in Detroit on Monday, said he was opposed to the war when it was under way and had not changed his views. But he cheered loudly at the mention of Mr. Gore's tour in the Army.
 George W Bush and aides send signals that they are willing to be flexible about debates with Al Gore, in reaction to Republican concerns that Bush needs to end debate over debates; advisers concede Bush has not succeeded with claim that Gore is breaking promise on debating anywhere (S) Amid Republican concerns that he needs to end the debate over debates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and several of his advisers sent signals today that they were willing to be flexible about the original position that they had outlined and that Vice President Al Gore had rejected. Mr. Bush had been seeking to cast that rejection as a reflection on Mr. Gore's credibility, asserting that the vice president was breaking a promise to debate anytime and anywhere. Amid Republican concerns that he needs to end the debate over debates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and several of his advisers sent signals today that they were willing to be flexible about the original position that they had outlined and that Vice President Al Gore had rejected. Mr. Bush had been seeking to cast that rejection as a reflection on Mr. Gore's credibility, asserting that the vice president was breaking a promise to debate anytime and anywhere. But a few of Mr. Bush's advisers conceded today that Mr. Bush had not made significant inroads with that argument, which the campaign made the centerpiece of a television commercial. ''I am confident there will be debates,'' Mr. Bush said in Detroit this morning. ''As to what they look like and where they are, it will be worked out in due course. Four days ago, Mr. Bush agreed to just one of three 90-minute debates that were proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates and guaranteed to be broadcast by all the major networks. Mr. Gore previously agreed to all three. Mr. Bush said that he also wanted to do two 60-minute debates sponsored by individual networks, an arrangement that would almost certainly shrink the television audience. He called for the first of those debates to take place next Tuesday, in Washington, on a special weeknight edition of the NBC news program ''Meet the Press.'' Today, several advisers said that the Bush campaign was considering whether to agree to a second commission debate if Mr. Gore would agree to the 60-minute network debates. The latter would have the kind of less formal setting in which Mr. Bush and his aides feel he shines, the advisers said. But Mr. Gore's advisers and officials with the debate commission said late today that they had not received any word from the Bush campaign that it was prepared to negotiate along these lines. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said, ''The governor has made no decisions on what he'll do. He's still going to hold Al Gore's feet to the fire.'' Mr. Fleischer was referring to Mr. Bush's plans to travel on Tuesday to Washington for the ''Meet the Press'' debate he has sought. But Mr. Gore has said he will not be there, and NBC has said it will not televise a show without both men. Earlier in the campaign, Mr. Gore had said he would debate Mr. Bush on the program, but that was before Mr. Bush had rejected two of the three commission debates. Mr. Gore's current position is that other debates should be added to, not substituted for, the commission's schedule. One Bush adviser said the signs that the Bush campaign might move from its original position reflected ''the realization that people didn't buy their debate strategy that Gore was hiding from debates.'' But another adviser said Mr. Bush was always prepared to move from his initial position, which reflected his preferences but was largely the opening bid in an inevitable poker game.
 Another aspect of reading for pleasure rather than purpose is that one encounters unexpected connections. The description of Vernon Presley, the singer's father, as a ''taciturn, suspicious man'' comfortable only in the family's ''private world'' rang a couple of bells. I remembered the description of Albert Gore Sr. in ''The Prince of Tennessee,'' by David Maraniss and Ellen Nakashima, as a man ''with that distant look in his eye.'' ''It's a mountain thing,'' observed a family friend, who purported to see the same Appalachian remoteness in Vice President Gore. What connections, if any, I wondered, could be drawn between the hereditary political prince and the self-invented king of rock 'n' roll, between a sort-of Tennessee mountaineer and a deep-dyed son of the Southern flatlands? To be sure, the younger men lived in an era when the outsider mentality that so powerfully shaped their Southern fathers -- both the ne'er-do-well Vernon Presley and the relentlessly striving Al Gore Sr. -- has been subjected to powerful forces of cultural nationalization, including, as it happens, rock music. Yet a literary visit to 50's Memphis -- to the white musicians in the Sun Records studios and the black blues shouters along Beale Street -- carries a message that can also be gleaned from a week's sojourn among the persistently laconic residents of modern-day Maine. Distinctive regional differences do endure as factors in a nation that may be getting smarter about celebrating and preserving them. Those differences seem interwoven somehow with the quintessentially American mystery of true genius emerging from as unlikely a place as East Tupelo, Miss.
 Their comments guarantee that senators will soon vote on legislation similar to the competing proposals offered by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore. Their comments guarantee that senators will soon vote on legislation similar to the competing proposals offered by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore. His proposal resembles a major element of a plan unveiled by Mr. Bush on Tuesday. Mr. Roth described his proposal as an interim measure to provide drug coverage ''outside the Medicare program.'' John S. Czwartacki, a spokesman for Mr. Lott, said tonight: ''Senator Lott strongly supports the effort to provide seniors in need with prescription drugs now. That's why he is a co-sponsor of the Roth bills. This is the first step in what Governor Bush has outlined as a two-step process. Ultimately, we want to see modernization of Medicare, with reforms to guarantee its long-term solvency.'' ''This fight is going to be conducted at every opportunity for the remainder of this session of Congress,'' Mr. Graham said. He is an architect of the Senate Democrats' proposal for Medicare drug benefits, which  resembles the plan developed by Mr. Gore and the Clinton White House over the past 20 months.
 While we should certainly have debates between the presidential candidates, they should not be limited to Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. The Democratic and Republican Parties receive campaign money from many of the same entrenched interests, and both have moved to the center, embracing policies to sway the swing voter.
 Robert Irie letter wonders how George W Bush would handle tense diplomatic negotiations as president if he does not have enough confidence to face Al Gore in campaign debate (S) It would be interesting to see how George W. Bush, as president, would handle discussions or negotiations with foreign dignitaries in sometimes tense and hostile environments if he doesn't have enough confidence to face a countryman in a neutral debate setting proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
 Tuesday also brought the first preview of ''The Best Man,'' Gore Vidal's 1960 political satire. At a dress rehearsal, Mr. Vidal took to the stage to trumpet the quality of this revival. ''I haven't changed a word,'' he said proudly. Whether that was wise remains to be seen. Tuesday also brought the first preview of ''The Best Man,'' Gore Vidal's 1960 political satire. At a dress rehearsal, Mr. Vidal took to the stage to trumpet the quality of this revival. ''I haven't changed a word,'' he said proudly. Whether that was wise remains to be seen.
 History and recent experience suggest that Gov. George W. Bush's plan to turn much of the administration of Medicare over to private insurance companies and health maintenance organizations (front page, Sept. 6) is a lose-lose proposition. History and recent experience suggest that Gov. George W. Bush's plan to turn much of the administration of Medicare over to private insurance companies and health maintenance organizations (front page, Sept. 6) is a lose-lose proposition. Taxpayers lose because Mr. Bush's plan will likely cost much more than traditional Medicare. A recently released government study concludes that in 1998, taxpayers spent $3.2 billion more on people enrolled in Medicare H.M.O.'s than if they had remained in traditional Medicare.
 BERKELEY: OFFICER KILLED IN CRASH -- An off-duty police officer died Wednesday after his motorcycle collided with a school bus carrying students home. The officer, Frank Podbielski, 33, who was the Tuckerton Police Department's traffic safety officer, was riding on Route 9 at 3:30 p.m., and struck the bus as it was turning onto Route 9 from Serpentine Road, said Officer Richard Bush of the Berkeley Police. None of the 14 middle school students were hurt, but 2 sought counseling yesterday, said Dr. Carol L. D'Zio, superintendent of the Central Regional School District. The crash is under investigation.
 The last time Vice President Al Gore talked Cuba policy -- about the fate of Elian Gonzalez, the young boy who was ultimately returned to Cuba over the objections of his Miami relatives -- it dominated campaign news for days. And so even the thought of Mr. Clinton and Mr. Castro making polite conversation is bound to be viewed with suspicion by Cuban-Americans already smarting from the Elian incident. Perhaps that explains why the White House spokesman, Joe Lockhart, when first asked about the encounter, said reports of a handshake were ''not true.'' Later, other officials said Mr. Lockhart had been insufficiently briefed. ''On background,'' one official said, ''I can confirm there was a handshake.'' Yesterday, when the White House spokesman finally confirmed that President Clinton and Mr. Castro had indeed shaken hands, he pointed out that President Bush had also come close to Mr. Castro several times, including at a conference in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. But the two apparently never spoke, and certainly never shook hands, according to reports at the time, although Mr. Bush applauded several times during a speech by Mr. Castro.
 Chavez: Brother Saddam, I couldn't agree more. Let's face it, I need the money now. Iran needs the money now. You need the money now. We all have soaring populations, we've all, frankly, destroyed the entrepreneurial middle class in our countries, and none of us want to go through the restructuring, deregulation or privatization required for globalization, because it would mean ceding power. So pushing up oil prices is our only means of economic survival. Bush and Gore say, how dare we raise prices? Oh, give me a break. I think we should propose this at our summit: We'll stop acting like a cartel if Microsoft stops acting like a monopoly. We'll cut the price of oil to its real production cost when Microsoft cuts the price of Windows 2000 to its real production cost. How's that? Saddam: Maybe it's time for a little October surprise. I've waited nine years to get revenge on George Bush. Now I'll get it on his son. Can you imagine if we make oil prices an issue in this U.S. election, with Bush Jr. and Cheney -- the embodiments of Big Oil -- running for office? Gore and Liebowitz, or whatever that Jewish guy's name is, will eat them alive.
 George W Bush dismisses criticism from some Republicans over direction of his presidential campaign, but calls himself underdog and says he will add more intimate gatherings with voters, sessions that disappeared after he defeated John McCain for nomination; Bush says that dropping into coffee shops and family homes will give 'better picture' of campaign that is now using slogan 'real plans for real people'; Bush reacts to concern within party that Al Gore is solidifying recent gains, although he waves off second-guessing; ABC News poll shows race now tied; Bush also suggests some give in his rejection of debates proposed by bipartisan commission; Bush lambastes Clinton administration on military issues, in appearance at Wright University in Dayton with retired generals Norman Schwarzkopf and Colin Powell; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush today dismissed criticism from some Republicans over the direction of his campaign. But he also called himself the underdog in the race and said he would restyle his campaign to include more intimate gatherings with voters. Mr. Bush and his aides said he would start appearing at town hall meetings again as early as next week. Such sessions disappeared in March after Senator John McCain dropped from the Republican race. Gov. George W. Bush today dismissed criticism from some Republicans over the direction of his campaign. But he also called himself the underdog in the race and said he would restyle his campaign to include more intimate gatherings with voters. Mr. Bush and his aides said he would start appearing at town hall meetings again as early as next week. Such sessions disappeared in March after Senator John McCain dropped from the Republican race. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said the Texas governor was also likely to start dropping into coffee shops and cafeterias and might begin to visit families to discuss how his tax cut plan would affect them. Asked why he wanted to hold such events, Mr. Bush said, ''Well, it's a  better picture.'' He said that if his unscripted encounters were mostly with reporters on his campaign plane, ''people don't get a sense of  my ability to relate to people. They don't get a sense that my plan has got real purposes for real people.'' Ms. Hughes repeatedly used a similar phrase, ''real plans for real people,'' making it clear that this was the Bush campaign's new slogan. Mr. Bush made his comments at an impromptu news conference on an airport tarmac in Detroit after prominent Republicans across the country expressed concern over the state of his campaign and after a series of national and state polls showed that Vice President Al Gore was solidifying the gains he had made after the Democratic National Convention. A poll released today by ABC News and The Washington Post found the race tied, with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore each attracting 47 percent. A Gallup Organization poll for CNN and USA Today found Mr. Gore leading Mr. Bush, 47 percent to 44 percent, a result that is also essentially a tie, since it is within the margin of error. While Mr. Bush said today that he would change some campaign events, he also waved off some of the second-guessing. ''That's Washington,'' he said. ''That's people getting ready to jump out of the foxhole before the first shell is fired.'' Mr. Bush used the military analogy on a day when he campaigned with two of the most prominent figures of his father's administration, Colin L. Powell, the former head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and J. Norman Schwarzkopf, who commanded United States troops during the Persian Gulf war of 1991. Both voiced support for Mr. Bush's contention that President Clinton had allowed the military to deteriorate, leaving it unprepared for post-cold-war conflicts. And Mr. Powell called Mr. Bush ''a man with a mission, a man with vision, a man who is committed to making sure the armed forces of the United States will always be the best.'' Many of the Republicans who had voiced concerns about the shape of the Bush campaign seemed particularly concerned about Mr. Bush's refusal to agree to debates sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. They said his stance had made him seem timid and had taken him into an unproductive fight over political process rather than issues. While he continued to criticize Mr. Gore for rejecting his offer for a different set of debates -- two of them shorter and to more limited audiences than the commission debates -- Mr. Bush for the first time gave some suggestion that there was give to his position. ''There will be debates,'' he said. ''I am confident there will be debates. As to what they look like and where they are, it will be worked out in due course.'' Mr. Bush even joked that he ''may go more alpha male coming down the stretch.'' That was a dig at Mr. Gore, who had a feminist author on his payroll last year, advising him how to dress and act like an alpha male. ''I'm under no illusions and neither should our supporters be -- it's going to be a tough contest,'' Mr. Bush said. Asked if he was the underdog, Mr. Bush jumped at the label. ''Yeah,'' he said. ''I'm the underdog. But I was the underdog when I first started.'' Mr. Bush's new campaign style is reminiscent of the retooling of his primary campaign in South Carolina in February after his drubbing by Mr. McCain in New Hampshire. Mr. Bush began holding town meetings, which had been his opponent's trademark. And he tried to appropriate Mr. McCain's reform mantle, calling himself a ''reformer with results.'' The events Mr. Bush and his aides were describing today, similarly echoed of the style of Mr. Gore, who has been holding town hall meetings, visiting teachers in their homes and stopping into coffee shops to talk to workers. Mr. Gore often talks of fighting for ''working people.'' Mr. Bush is now speaking of working for ''real people.'' Ms. Hughes said the governor and his aides had thought they were not being ''creative'' enough. She said the campaign had fallen into auto-pilot, simply using the rally formats that had worked so well for the governor on his ride into the Republican National Convention. She said Mr. Bush wanted to put a human face on his policy proposals by meeting with people and showing how they would benefit under his plans. The Gore campaign derided Mr. Bush's portrayal of himself as an underdog. ''This is a guy who raised $100 million in this campaign, a record, from the special interests -- the H.M.O's, the prescription drug companies and the big oil industry,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. ''It's Al Gore who has an agenda that represents the underdog and George W. Bush who has an agenda that represents the special interests.'' Mr. Bush's new style was not visible today, however, as he turned to military themes and showcased at his side Mr. Powell and Mr. Schwarzkopf. At Wright University here, under a banner proclaiming ''Respecting America's Military,'' Mr. Bush introduced the former head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Desert Storm commander, and each one gave him a strong endorsement as the best man to be commander in chief. Mr. Bush also hinted at stops across the day that should he be elected, he would name Mr. Powell to his administration. ''The general talked about being retired from public service,'' he said here, then glanced at Mr. Powell and added puckishly, ''If all goes well. . . .'' The crowd erupted in cheers and applause. Mr. Bush pledged that he would push for modernization of the military to meet the new threats in the world. Mr. Bush said that if elected, he would assemble a task force of military leaders to come up with a ''strategic plan'' for what the military of the future should look like. ''We know it's not going to look like the great American moment of Desert Storm and Desert Shield,'' Mr. Bush said. ''A military of the future is not going to be that heavy, and it's not going to be that hard to move.'' Today's events were designed to put the gulf war leaders at center stage in order to endorse the son of the man they served under. General Schwarzkopf called himself proud to ''stand up and endorse'' Mr. Bush. Mr. Powell lambasted the Clinton administration for hurting military readiness, a theme that Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney, who was defense secretary under President Bush, have been hitting hard. Mr. Cheney pressed the same theme in appearances at military contractors in New England. He recalled a telephone call he had made to former President Ronald Reagan after the gulf war, saying he had thanked Mr. Reagan for the money his administration had spent on the military. ''I ask myself,'' he said, ''is anybody going to call Bill Clinton or Al Gore in the future to thank them for what they did to the U.S. military? I don't think so.'' The Pentagon's spokesman, Kenneth H. Bacon, challenged several of the assertions Governor Bush made in his speeches today. Mr. Bacon said that the administration, along with Congress, had increased military spending by $150 billion over the next several years. That included an increase in spending on weapons and other equipment -- an area where Mr. Bush was sharply critical -- from $43 billion in 1998 to $60 billion today, as well as three straight years of pay raises. Mr. Bacon also noted that the number of troops qualifying for food stamps -- which Mr. Bush has often cited as evidence that the Clinton administration has neglected men and women in uniform -- had declined significantly. Mr. Bacon said that 19,400 service members, nine-tenths of 1 percent of the total, collected food stamps in 1991, when Mr. Bush's father was president and his running mate, Mr. Cheney, was secretary of defense. Today, Mr. Bacon said, 5,100 are on food stamps, or four-tenths of 1 percent of a smaller force.
 Editorial assesses Al Gore's economic platform; suggests that George W Bush, who criticizes Gore for outspending projected surplus, put forth equally detailed plan instead of asking public to rely on economists in his ideological camp Ronald Reagan turned ''tax and spend'' into a near-fatal label for traditional Democrats. One of President Clinton's big achievements has been to rebuild his party's reputation for budgetary restraint and fiscal discipline. Vice President Al Gore, with his carefully crafted economic plan, has been careful to preserve the political capital inherited from Mr. Clinton's success in reducing the federal debt. To be sure, the hefty document Mr. Gore released on Tuesday is as much a campaign manifesto as it is an economic blueprint. Indeed, by combining his previously proposed spending and tax-cutting ideas in one package, he directed attention to the stark differences between his policies and those of Gov. George W. Bush. What emerges is an economic program that is cautious almost to a fault, yet determinedly progressive in its general thrust. Mr. Gore has, properly, focused spending on families most in need. On the tactical level, Mr. Gore was smart to provide specifics, nearly 200 pages of them. Mr. Bush has so far refused to lay out his plans with equal precision, and his campaign advertisement saying that nearly 300 prominent economists endorse his general approach is not, in campaign terms, a totally satisfactory substitute for specific details. Ronald Reagan turned ''tax and spend'' into a near-fatal label for traditional Democrats. One of President Clinton's big achievements has been to rebuild his party's reputation for budgetary restraint and fiscal discipline. Vice President Al Gore, with his carefully crafted economic plan, has been careful to preserve the political capital inherited from Mr. Clinton's success in reducing the federal debt. To be sure, the hefty document Mr. Gore released on Tuesday is as much a campaign manifesto as it is an economic blueprint. Indeed, by combining his previously proposed spending and tax-cutting ideas in one package, he directed attention to the stark differences between his policies and those of Gov. George W. Bush. What emerges is an economic program that is cautious almost to a fault, yet determinedly progressive in its general thrust. Mr. Gore has, properly, focused spending on families most in need. On the tactical level, Mr. Gore was smart to provide specifics, nearly 200 pages of them. Mr. Bush has so far refused to lay out his plans with equal precision, and his campaign advertisement saying that nearly 300 prominent economists endorse his general approach is not, in campaign terms, a totally satisfactory substitute for specific details. Mr. Gore sets down 10 goals, including cutting poverty to an all-time low, eliminating federal debt by 2012, doubling the number of families with substantial savings, raising home ownership from its current 67 percent to 70 percent of the population by 2004 and college attendance rates from 66 percent to 75 percent by 2010. These goals are only loosely tied to the plan's specific provisions. The important directions are set by the big-ticket items. Over the next 10 years, the surplus is expected to exceed $4.5 trillion. Mr. Gore proposes to use about $3 trillion to reduce federal debt. By contrast, Mr. Bush's plan would reduce the debt by at most $1 trillion. Traditional Democratic liberals would much rather put this money into social programs, and we share a concern for the nation's unmet needs in health, housing and education. But debt reduction is clearly popular with centrist voters, who see it as a component of today's prosperity. Mr. Gore would be foolish to give away the Democrats' hard-won advantage on the issue of fiscal trustworthiness. The vice president would devote about $500 billion to ''targeted'' tax cuts, including a poorly designed tuition tax credit that will do more to enrich colleges than low-income families. But he also includes a $200 billion tax cut for retirement savings that heavily favors low-income families. He  proposes to increase tax credits for low-paid workers and to provide a refundable tax credit to offset child care expenses. Mr. Bush would devote about four times as much to tax cuts, reducing revenues by almost $2 trillion. About 40 percent of that would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of families. Mr. Gore's spending proposals are also designed to help low- and moderate-income families. He wants to spend $340 billion on prescription drugs for Medicare enrollees, with the largest subsidies going to poor families. He proposes to spend $50 billion on preschool programs for needy families and about $100 billion on health coverage for uninsured children. The design of these programs largely avoids election-year handouts to well-off voters. Mr. Bush has criticized Mr. Gore for outspending the projected surplus. True, Mr. Gore's proposals to subsidize drugs and retirement savings are likely to cost far more than he concedes. But the better way for Mr. Bush to press the economic policy debate is to publish an equally detailed plan instead of asking the public to depend on reassurances from economists in his own ideological camp.
 BUSH AND GORE VIRTUALLY TIED  In the first spate of post-Labor Day national polls, traditionally considered among the most important of the campaign season, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are locked in a tight race, with Mr. Gore retaining the momentum he gained after his party's convention and having made great strides among women, Democrats and independents. He also appears to have made considerable headway in turning around negative views of his personality and demeanor. In addition, he maintains an advantage on the issues. One poll has Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush absolutely tied, one has a virtual tie, and one has Mr. Gore leading but by a margin well within the margin of error. A poll of 810 likely voters by ABC News and the Washington Post shows Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush at 47 percent each. A Gallup Organization poll of 750 likely voters for CNN and USA Today has Mr. Gore leading 47 percent to 44 percent. And a Zogby poll of 1,001 likely voters shows a six-point lead for Mr. Gore, 46 percent to 40 percent. All three polls have margins of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points and were taken Monday through Wednesday. BUSH AND GORE VIRTUALLY TIED  In the first spate of post-Labor Day national polls, traditionally considered among the most important of the campaign season, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are locked in a tight race, with Mr. Gore retaining the momentum he gained after his party's convention and having made great strides among women, Democrats and independents. He also appears to have made considerable headway in turning around negative views of his personality and demeanor. In addition, he maintains an advantage on the issues. One poll has Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush absolutely tied, one has a virtual tie, and one has Mr. Gore leading but by a margin well within the margin of error. A poll of 810 likely voters by ABC News and the Washington Post shows Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush at 47 percent each. A Gallup Organization poll of 750 likely voters for CNN and USA Today has Mr. Gore leading 47 percent to 44 percent. And a Zogby poll of 1,001 likely voters shows a six-point lead for Mr. Gore, 46 percent to 40 percent. All three polls have margins of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points and were taken Monday through Wednesday. LIEBERMAN IN TEXAS  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut ventured deep into Bush country yesterday, showing up in Houston, and he plans to return on Monday, signaling the Democrats' new-found confidence and boldness to campaign in a state they have almost no hope of carrying. Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, plans to hold a campaign forum in Houston on Friday on children's health care, an event that will no doubt include a few digs at George W. Bush's record on the subject as governor of Texas. On Monday, Mr. Lieberman will be the draw at a Democratic National Committee fund-raising luncheon at the home of Thomas J. Meredith, the former chief financial officer of Dell Computer and now the managing director of Dell's venture capital unit. The Democratic  committee expects to raise $500,000 at the lunch. Vice President Al Gore's campaign aides concede that he has no chance of winning Texas, but they note that an opponent's home state can be a useful forum for attacks, as Michael S. Dukakis learned in 1988, when Mr. Bush's father showed up in Massachusetts to lament water pollution in Boston harbor.
 Vice Pres Al Gore is relying on expertise, advice and support of Clinton cabinet members like Robert E Rubin, former treasury secretary who appears with Gore to endorse his economic plan; others helping campaign include Lawrence Summers, Erskine Bowles, Laura D'Andrea Tyson and Gene Sperling; photo of Gore at stop in Scranton (M) Vice President Al Gore may be trying to rid himself of President Clinton, but he is making no attempt to escape from the Clinton cabinet. Vice President Al Gore may be trying to rid himself of President Clinton, but he is making no attempt to escape from the Clinton cabinet. Nowhere was this more evident than in Cleveland on Wednesday, when Mr. Gore delivered a major speech laying out his vision of the economy for the next decade. At his side was Robert E. Rubin, who, as Mr. Clinton's former treasury secretary and one of the most respected figures who have played a role in the current prosperity, is regarded as the administration's economic superstar. Mr. Rubin provided not only his presence and reputation to vouch for Mr. Gore's ability to keep the economy sound. He helped put in place the fundamental principles -- chiefly, paying down the debt and heeding the bond market -- that underpin Mr. Gore's own economic plan. Mr. Rubin was not the only Clinton appointee helping Mr. Gore on his economic blueprint. The list of brainstormers reads like a who's who of the Clinton administration's economic elite -- Lawrence H. Summers, the current treasury secretary; Erskine B. Bowles, Mr. Clinton's former chief of staff; Laura D'Andrea Tyson, former chairwoman of Mr. Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers; and Gene Sperling, the president's top in-house economic adviser. The degree to which Clinton appointees are campaigning on behalf of the vice president is rare in modern political history and reflects the confluence of several factors: Mr. Clinton's serious investment in getting Mr. Gore elected; Mr. Gore's need to have people with policy expertise and marquee names vouching for his participation in important decisions within the Clinton administration; the desire by the cabinet members themselves to use to the fullest their waning months in the limelight and, perhaps for some, a desire to improve their chances of appointment to a Gore administration. Having cabinet-level experts at his disposal is an enormous advantage of incumbency, and Mr. Gore has not been shy about using it. While Mr. Gore is deeply familiar with policy details, his ability to call forth the armies of the administration to speak on his behalf have bolstered one of the central tenets of his candidacy -- that he is, as Bill Clinton has often argued, the most qualified person in history to run for the presidency. Greg Simon, a senior Gore adviser, said the campaign was thrilled to be able to showcase the cabinet. ''We've had the most stable cabinet of any recent administration, so these are people who have become authorities,'' he said. ''There's no substitute for having Bob Rubin talk about economic prosperity or Donna Shalala talk about health or Andrew Cuomo talk about inner cities. Each of these people is a shining star.'' He also said that the cabinet's campaigning for Mr. Gore was a benefit of his having been so involved in the administration. ''This isn't a situation where you have a vice president and cabinet warring among itself, the way Johnson and Kennedy did, or an office kept in the dark, the way Quayle was,'' he said. ''You have a vice presidential staff that was fully integrated into all the cabinet agencies.'' Marshall Wittmann, a conservative policy analyst at the Hudson Institute, said that the extent to which current and former members of the administration were working for Mr. Gore appeared ''unprecedented.'' Moreover, he said, Mr. Gore's election would provide some ''vindication'' of Mr. Clinton's mixed tenure. This is a tricky area for Mr. Gore to navigate. On the one hand, he says he is not running for a third Clinton term, and he has sought to close the Clinton chapter of his career. For months, Mr. Gore has routinely relied on Mr. Clinton's political appointees to advance his cause. Mr. Rubin even stumped with him in New Hampshire last winter. Many have been with the Clinton administration for years and are seen not so much as auditioning for a Gore administration but as making themselves more marketable for the private sector as the end of the Clinton era nears. Virtually the entire cabinet has participated in one form or another in the Gore campaign. Most commonly, they are hosts for conference calls with reporters. Frequent conference-callers are Dr. Shalala, the secretary of health and human services, who conducted one on Tuesday to critique Gov. George W. Bush's plan for prescription drug coverage. A few days before, Dr. David A. Kessler, former head of the Food and Drug Administration and now dean of the Yale School of Medicine, took part in a conference call to preview a week of Gore speeches on health-care issues. A few days later, Ms. Tyson, who had served on the 1999 Medicare Commission, conducted a conference call to discuss Mr. Gore's plan to save Medicare. Alexis M. Herman, Mr. Clinton's secretary of labor, has been one of the most visibly involved in Mr. Gore's campaign, particularly in his efforts to reach out to black voters. She and Rodney Slater, the transportation secretary, who is also black, were on hand to brief reporters when Mr. Gore addressed the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People last month in Baltimore. Ms. Herman also played an advisory role as part of Mr. Gore's  vice-presidential screening committee and is part of the team working out the debate schedule. One of the most striking examples of Mr. Gore's reliance on the Clinton cabinet was his selection earlier this summer of William M. Daley, Mr. Clinton's commerce secretary, as his campaign chairman to replace the ailing Tony Coelho. Dr. Shalala, the health secretary, is one of the cabinet members most actively campaigning for Mr. Gore. She says she is doing so because she believes in Mr. Gore's proposals and admires his wife. ''It's both a personal commitment to them and a real commitment on my part to the programs,'' she said in an interview. She said she had made it clear that she was not interested in a job in a Gore administration. Moreover, she said, she just flat-out loves politics. One of those who seemed to be trying openly to parlay his position into a Gore administration was Bill Richardson, Mr. Clinton's energy secretary. He was widely considered a possible vice-presidential running mate for Mr. Gore until problems within his department's purview derailed him.
 While the motivation, timing and political wisdom of the sweeping proposal by George W. Bush has been soundly attacked with reason, he does have a point in trying to schedule a debate before the Olympics start next Friday. In his curt dismissal of Mr. Bush's proposal for a debate next week, Al Gore (along with, naturally, the commission) has pointed out that only NBC would carry it, while all the broadcast networks have agreed to carry the prime-time debates proposed by the commission. Those so-called prime-time ''roadblocks'' by the broadcast networks, supposedly reserving uniform times for the commission's debates, may turn out, however, to be a bit less than advertised. Major League playoff games are scheduled on NBC during two of the commission's four debates, and on Fox on the other two nights.
 Shuffleboard players at senior center in Baltimore are emphatic that Medicare system can be expanded or improved but not overhauled, suggesting that Gov George W Bush may have trouble selling his plan among very people who depend on system now; photos (M) The shuffleboard players here at the John T. Booth Senior Center all have a horror story or two about how they, a friend or a relative has been saddled with crushing prescription drug costs. And so they are thrilled that the issue has moved center stage in the presidential contest between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore. The shuffleboard players here at the John T. Booth Senior Center all have a horror story or two about how they, a friend or a relative has been saddled with crushing prescription drug costs. And so they are thrilled that the issue has moved center stage in the presidential contest between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore. If there was one political lesson to be gleaned from a 90-minute conversation this morning with 15 retirees in this working-class neighborhood of modest row houses, it might be this: Mr. Bush could have trouble selling his plan for redesigning the Medicare system among the very people who depend on the system now. In a speech on Tuesday, Mr. Bush called for retooling the 35-year-old system to encourage the use of private insurance plans, some of which would provide prescription drug coverage. By breeding competition among private insurers for the Medicare market, Mr. Bush contends, costs will be lowered and elderly people will have more choices. To help people with drug costs, he proposed subsidizing the premiums of the low-income elderly. Mr. Bush also vowed to modernize what he called a ''rigid and sluggish and slow to change'' Medicare bureaucracy that he said increasingly poses ''a hazard to your health.'' To be sure, Mr. Bush's proposal for prescription drugs sounded appealing to members of the group, even though most of them already have supplementary insurance plans that cover most of their prescription drug costs. But his attacks on the bureaucracy did not resonate with them. Only one woman could offer a complaint: she had been improperly billed for an X-ray. But after several phone calls, the matter was worked out to her satisfaction. (While Mr. Bush's proposal would make participation in private health plans voluntary, its goal would be to encourage more people to join H.M.O.'s, which now cover 6.2 million, or 16 percent, of the 39 million Medicare beneficiaries.) Evelyn Hemmeter, 71, said, ''Some people have the same doctors for like 15, 20, 30 years and they aren't going to switch and go to another doctor after they've been with that doctor for that many years.'' Several people also questioned whether Mr. Bush's plan for greater competition was realistic, noting that several H.M.O.'s, some in the Baltimore area, have pulled out of the Medicare system in recent years, citing low reimbursement rates from the government. The group, most of whom said they were Democrats, seemed more comfortable with Mr. Gore's plan, though it would cost more than Mr. Bush's: $253 billion over 10 years compared with $198 billion. That plan would create a voluntary prescription drug benefit inside the traditional Medicare program. Beneficiaries would pay monthly premiums, but like Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore would subsidize coverage for the low-income elderly. Unlike Mr. Bush, the vice president would offer a uniform, standardized package with the same premiums for most beneficiaries. ''If you want the best, you have to pay,'' said Ms. Hemmeter, referring to Mr. Gore's more expensive plan. ''And I want the best.'' Several people in the group said Mr. Gore's populist attacks on ''big drug companies'' struck a chord with them.
