 Public Lives column; Walter Cronkite discusses making voice-over for revival of Gore Vidal's The Best Man; Chita Rivera joins cast of Cole Porter's Anything Goes; Thomas O'Brien, 8, is two millionth visitor to Rose Center for Earth and Space at American Museum of Natural History; Cheryl Ladd to make her debut in Annie Get Your Gun; photo (M)
 Editorial in series, Campaign 2000, examines approaches to gun control espoused in presidential campaign by Republican Gov George W Bush and Democrat Vice Pres Al Gore; notes despite horrible crime statistics resulting from easy access to guns, Americans are still allowed to buy and keep unlimited arsenal of firearms with few restrictions and little governmental regulation; says Bush's reliance on Congress to take lead on issue suggests nothing will be done if he becomes president; says presidential leadership and passion will be crucial if there is any hope of enacting new forms of gun control (M) The massacre at Columbine High School and multiple killings in schools, workplaces, restaurants and other public places have brought home to voters the need for stricter, more consistent gun control laws. Yet Congress has been shamelessly servile to the demands of the National Rifle Association, refusing to approve even the most modest measures that might help curb gun violence. On this central public safety issue the two presidential candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, have very different records and agendas that will determine whether meaningful controls are achieved in the next administration. The massacre at Columbine High School and multiple killings in schools, workplaces, restaurants and other public places have brought home to voters the need for stricter, more consistent gun control laws. Yet Congress has been shamelessly servile to the demands of the National Rifle Association, refusing to approve even the most modest measures that might help curb gun violence. On this central public safety issue the two presidential candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, have very different records and agendas that will determine whether meaningful controls are achieved in the next administration. Mr. Gore has embraced many of these proposals -- pushing strongly for licensing for gun owners, closing the gun show loophole, banning the sale of cheap ''junk guns'' that are so often used in crimes, enacting a three-day waiting period, a one-gun-a-month rule and various child safety provisions. Mr. Bush seems to be softening his pro-gun stance, but his record in Texas has been one to gladden Charlton Heston's heart. In 1995 he signed a law that made it legal for Texas residents to carry concealed weapons, and in 1997 he expanded that law to allow concealed weapons in churches and hospitals unless those institutions expressly prohibit weapons on their premises. Last year Governor Bush signed a law making it extremely difficult for cities in Texas to bring lawsuits against gun manufacturers. Such suits by many cities around the country have been instrumental in putting pressure on Smith & Wesson, the nation's largest gun manufacturer, to agree to alter the way it makes and markets guns. Mr. Bush opposes licensing and registration, a three-day waiting period on purchases, and limiting purchases to one gun a month. On the campaign trail and in his literature, he emphasizes tougher enforcement of existing laws, although he does say he will not push for a nationwide version of Texas's concealed weapons law. He says he would accept some type of background check at gun shows, and that he would sign a mandatory trigger lock requirement if Congress put such a measure on his desk.
 Universal prekindergarten is the educational issue du jour. Vice President Al Gore made it part of his presidential platform, and the Republican presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has a program for poor children in his state.
 Another podesta.com associate is Heather Barbour, daughter of the former chairman of the Republican Party and adviser to Gov. George W. Bush, Haley Barbour.
 As lawmakers return from the recess that began before the national political conventions, they confront a new political calculus. When they left in July, George W. Bush was ahead in the presidential polls. Now Vice President Al Gore appears to have closed the gap. On the big issues of social policy, meanwhile, Democratic leaders in Congress, the White House and the Gore campaign appear to be working in concert and framing a unified message. But some Republican Congress watchers said that the Bush campaign had tried to keep Congressional Republicans at arms length. ''Clinton, Gore and Gephardt have message coordination, particularly on prescription drugs, Medicare and H.M.O. reform; Republicans don't,'' said Marshall Wittman, director of Congressional relations at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative research institution. ''Bush is almost implicitly running against Republicans on Capitol Hill.'' The heated debate between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore over prescription drug benefits reduces the chance that Congressional Republicans and Democrats will resolve their differences there. While the full House has passed a version providing subsidies to private insurers that cover some drug costs, the Senate Finance Committee has not voted on a bill. ''I don't think it's going to work this time,'' said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, who is chairman of the Senate Republican campaign committee. ''It's going to help Governor Bush because he will demonstrate that he's the guy who can reach across party lines and govern. It will illustrate the Clinton-Gore administration's inability to govern on a bipartisan basis. Let them do it.''
 Various privatization proposals have been floated in Congress over the years, but none have made any progress. A plan that the Clinton administration sent to Capitol Hill in 1994 as part of Vice President Gore's campaign to reinvent government never got out of committee, even though the House was still controlled by Democrats at the time. ''I told him I'll do all I can to kill this idea,'' Representative James L. Oberstar, a Democrat from Minnesota who was then head of the House Transportation Committee's aviation subcommittee, recalled in a recent interview, referring to Mr. Gore.
 Friends of the Earth, environmental group that had endorsed Bill Bradley in Democratic primaries and seriously flirted with supporting Ralph Nader in general election, reluctantly decides to endorse Vice Pres Al Gore (S) The Friends of the Earth, an environmental group that had endorsed Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries and seriously flirted with supporting Ralph Nader in the general election, has decided to endorse Vice President Al Gore, officials with the group said. The endorsement, which will be announced in Oregon on Tuesday, provides another sign that Mr. Gore is moving swiftly to consolidate his support in the Democratic Party's liberal wing, much of which had balked at supporting him up until just a few weeks ago. The Friends of the Earth, an environmental group that had endorsed Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries and seriously flirted with supporting Ralph Nader in the general election, has decided to endorse Vice President Al Gore, officials with the group said. The endorsement, which will be announced in Oregon on Tuesday, provides another sign that Mr. Gore is moving swiftly to consolidate his support in the Democratic Party's liberal wing, much of which had balked at supporting him up until just a few weeks ago. Friends of the Earth, considered the most left-leaning of the three national environmental groups that endorse candidates, has in the past sharply criticized Mr. Gore and the Clinton administration on a variety of issues, including their support for fewer restrictions on global trade and their failure to do enough to slow global warming. Brent Blackwelder, president of Friends of the Earth, said in an interview on Sunday that the organization's political action committee had agonized over whether to support Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, because he shared their views on trade and many other major issues. By comparison, the group said in a statement, it ''knows the environmental disappointments with Gore.'' But Dr. Blackwelder said the organization concluded that endorsing Mr. Nader would be tantamount to helping to elect Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee. And he said Mr. Gore's environmental positions were far better than those of Mr. Bush, which he asserted would ''plunge us into a dark age'' of environmental policy. In particular, Dr. Blackwelder asserted that Mr. Gore would spend more money on environmental programs, select more environmentally concerned judges for the federal bench and appoint more environmentally conscious administrators to federal agencies than Mr. Bush. Though Friends of the Earth is relatively small and has little money to invest in campaigns, it is potentially influential with liberal voters. Dr. Blackwelder said he and other leaders of his group would be traveling to swing states where Mr. Nader has been running strong, including Oregon, Washington, New Mexico and Michigan, to encourage potential Nader voters to support Mr. Gore. The League of Conservation Voters and the Sierra Club, the two other national environmental groups that publicly support national candidates, have already endorsed Mr. Gore.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, declared a ''Jesus Day'' in his state. Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee, has described himself as a born-again Christian who often asks himself, ''What would Jesus do?'' ''Jesus Day in Texas -- how hard is that?'' Ms. McNeely said laughing, adding that it was scarcely a profile in religious courage for Mr. Bush to issue such a proclamation in a state with so many evangelical Christians. ''Is he going to go to San Francisco, to Manhattan, and say, 'Rah, rah, Jesus.' If he does, then I'll be impressed.'' ''It's against church teachings,'' Ms. Loper said; ''it can't be any clearer.'' She said she would be voting for Mr. Bush. He said he would be voting for Mr.  Gore. He critcized Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore for making statements that ''smacked of the cult of Jesus,'' appeals that he said risked dividing the American public.
 People in Ohio expect a lot of attention at election time, as befits their standing as residents of a swing state. There was a certain amount of hurt feelings the other day when George W. Bush flew here for a fund-raiser at the home of a wealthy friend and didn't stop to do any campaigning. In New York, we're used to the idea that Mr. Bush and Al Gore see us as the motorcade route between La Guardia Airport and the Hilton banquet hall. Wham, bam, traffic jam. But Ohio needs more tender handling. A deeply unscientific survey of conservative Catholic senior citizens on the western side of Cincinnati suggests the most popular guy on either ticket is Joe Lieberman. ''I liked him even better before he got partisan,'' said one of the men. The male Republicans seem happy enough with Mr. Bush, but the women are disappointed they can't fall in love with him the way they did with Ronald Reagan. Mr. Bush had better hang around next time he swings through. The signs are not all good.
 Stephen S Roach Op-Ed article examines proposals by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush for spending budget surplus, which is expected to total approximately $4.5 trillion over next decade; says that if either gets his way, political economy of 1990's could be turned inside out, era of fiscal restraint would be over and days of fiscal expansion would be back; drawing (M) As we head full force into the presidential campaign, one thing is certain. George W. Bush and Al Gore both seem determined to spend a significant portion of the nation's budget surplus. The surpluses are now expected to total about $4.5 trillion over the next decade, and the economic programs of both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore could absorb as much as half that amount. If the Social Security balance is stripped out of the 10-year budget projections, the candidates then propose to spend virtually all of the remaining surplus. As we head full force into the presidential campaign, one thing is certain. George W. Bush and Al Gore both seem determined to spend a significant portion of the nation's budget surplus. The surpluses are now expected to total about $4.5 trillion over the next decade, and the economic programs of both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore could absorb as much as half that amount. If the Social Security balance is stripped out of the 10-year budget projections, the candidates then propose to spend virtually all of the remaining surplus. They would spend the projected budgetary windfall in different ways. The Bush plan is far more focused on tax relief. The Gore plan is heavily skewed toward spending on health care and education. But these differences are less important than the common thrust of their budget policies. A savings-short America now gets this money from two sources -- the federal government's savings (that is, the surplus) and capital from abroad. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are, in effect, proposing to eliminate one of the two major sources of saving that America must now rely on.
 Executives of ABC and CBS, television networks snubbed by Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush in plan to impose his own schedule of televised debates, say they will not carry debates sponsored by rivals, as Bush proposal throws work of Commisson on Presidential Debates into turmoil; Bush plan is unveiled after intense negotiations with officials of six cable and broadcast networks, and after commission announced in January plans for three 90-minute debates in October on college campuses which Vice Pres Gore quickly endorsed; Bush plan includes debate in St Louis but would replace two others with encounters on NBC's Meet the Press and CNN's Larry King Live; calls for 60-minute forums; Bush says Gore, who has rejected proposal, is ducking debates and is reneging on promise to debate him at any time; Gore camp accuses Bush of trying to tailor debates to his own liking, then blaming Gore for rejecting them; commission asks officials of both campaigns to attend meeting in Washington to work out agreement under which Bush would consent to its schedule; was created in 1987 by Democrats and Republicans to avoid squabbling over debates; no candidate has gone as far as Bush in efforts to circumvent its work (M) Two television networks that were left out of Gov. George W. Bush's plan to impose his own schedule of debates declared yesterday that they had no intention of carrying presidential debates sponsored by rival networks. The Bush proposal, announced on Sunday after intense negotiations with officials of six cable and broadcast networks, has thrown into turmoil the work of the Commission on Presidential Debates, the panel created in 1987 by the Democrats and Republicans to avoid squabbling over the debates. Since the creation of the panel, no candidate has gone so far to circumvent its work. Two television networks that were left out of Gov. George W. Bush's plan to impose his own schedule of debates declared yesterday that they had no intention of carrying presidential debates sponsored by rival networks. The Bush proposal, announced on Sunday after intense negotiations with officials of six cable and broadcast networks, has thrown into turmoil the work of the Commission on Presidential Debates, the panel created in 1987 by the Democrats and Republicans to avoid squabbling over the debates. Since the creation of the panel, no candidate has gone so far to circumvent its work. But campaigning yesterday, Mr. Bush said that by rejecting his proposal, Mr. Gore was ducking debates and going back on his word to face off with him at any time. [Page A22.] The Gore camp countered that Mr. Bush was trying to tailor the debates to his own liking, then blame Mr. Gore for rejecting them. Janet Brown, the commission's executive director, said the panel had asked officials of both the Bush and Gore campaigns to a meeting in Washington this week to work out an agreement under which Mr. Bush would consent to the commission's schedule. In January, the commission announced its plans for three 90-minute debates in October on college campuses in Boston, Winston-Salem, N.C., and St. Louis, a plan that Vice President Al Gore quickly endorsed. On Sunday, Mr. Bush unveiled his own proposal, which would include the debate in St. Louis but would replace the others with encounters next week on a prime-time edition of ''Meet the Press'' with Tim Russert on NBC, and on Oct. 3 on CNN's ''Larry King Live.'' Mr. Bush's plan calls for 60-minute forums. But executives of ABC and CBS, two of the networks that Mr. Bush turned down, made it clear that they would not devote air time to what they viewed chiefly as promotional opportunities for Mr. Russert and Mr. King. Aides to Mr. Bush said they remained convinced that if pressure were brought to bear on the vice president to appear with Mr. Bush on the two programs, other networks would be compelled to put the debates on the air. ''I do suspect that if Al Gore were to show up on 'Meet the Press,' '' said one top Bush official, ''all the networks, with their dedication to public service, would be hard-pressed not to cover it.'' It was clear that many of the networks were feeling slightly uncomfortable over any role they may be playing in subverting the work of the debate commission. Privately, some broadcast journalists expressed outrage at what they viewed as the networks' allowing themselves to be used by the Bush campaign. Nevertheless, CBS was among the networks that made a pitch to Mr. Bush for a debate. Mr. Heyward explained, however, that a debate on ''Face the Nation'' had been offered, but only if the commission's plan fell apart. NBC has found itself in the position of being championed by the Bush campaign over the debate issue. In an e-mail message to reporters yesterday, Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman, said Mr. Gore was now ''backpedaling'' from a commitment made months ago to debate on ''Meet the Press.'' ''Governor Bush believes the first debate should allow for more than just sound bites; it should feature an in-depth discussion of the issues and have tough questioning,'' Mr. Fleischer wrote. ''Having the first debate on 'Meet the Press' will allow such an exchange.'' Mr. Wheatley, however, brushed aside any suggestion that the Bush campaign was using NBC as a means of undoing the commission. He added that scheduling the program in September would be a service to viewers. While previous candidates, including President Clinton in 1996 and Mr. Bush's father in 1992, have tried to tinker with the format or scheduling of the debates, none before have tried to set up debates without it. For the commission, the Bush plan is a potentially serious disruption of its mission. ''All the debates have been in communities, on campuses, or in towns,'' Ms. Brown said. ''These are the single set of political events that the public still thinks belongs to them. We believe taking them to communities where thousands of young people can participate is a very good thing that can't take place if you do two debates in television studios.'' Ms. Brown said she hoped to be able to convince Mr. Bush's aides that the commission plan is an enhanced version of the proposal they have offered. ''We think campuses are preferable to studios,'' she said, ''and we believe that six networks are preferable to one or two.''
 Spurned Networks Express No Interest in Rival Debates  The ABC and CBS television networks, which were left out of Gov. George W. Bush's presidential debates proposal, said they had no intention of carrying debates sponsored by rival networks like NBC and CNN. The Bush proposal, announced on Sunday after negotiations with officials of six cable and broadcast networks, has thrown into turmoil the work of the Commission on Presidential Debates, the panel created in 1987 by Democrats and Republicans to avoid squabbling over debates. Since the creation of the panel, no candidate has gone so far to circumvent its work. The panel's executive director said she still hoped to negotiate an agreement under which Mr. Bush would consent to the commission's schedule. Mr. Bush derided Vice President Al Gore for rejecting his debate proposal during a Labor Day campaign swing through two hotly contested states, Illinois and Michigan. Mr. Gore, accompanied part of the way by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, concluded a 28-hour campaign swing that included stops in Pennsylvania, Michigan, Florida and Kentucky. The Friends of the Earth, an environmental group that endorsed Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries and considered supporting Ralph Nader in the general election, has decided to endorse Mr. Gore, officials of the group said. Spurned Networks Express No Interest in Rival Debates  The ABC and CBS television networks, which were left out of Gov. George W. Bush's presidential debates proposal, said they had no intention of carrying debates sponsored by rival networks like NBC and CNN. The Bush proposal, announced on Sunday after negotiations with officials of six cable and broadcast networks, has thrown into turmoil the work of the Commission on Presidential Debates, the panel created in 1987 by Democrats and Republicans to avoid squabbling over debates. Since the creation of the panel, no candidate has gone so far to circumvent its work. The panel's executive director said she still hoped to negotiate an agreement under which Mr. Bush would consent to the commission's schedule. Mr. Bush derided Vice President Al Gore for rejecting his debate proposal during a Labor Day campaign swing through two hotly contested states, Illinois and Michigan. Mr. Gore, accompanied part of the way by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, concluded a 28-hour campaign swing that included stops in Pennsylvania, Michigan, Florida and Kentucky. The Friends of the Earth, an environmental group that endorsed Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries and considered supporting Ralph Nader in the general election, has decided to endorse Mr. Gore, officials of the group said.
 In addition, Mr. Eve's son Eric, who ran Vice President Al Gore's primary campaign in New York State, is now helping his father's re-election effort.
 Democratic presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore and running mate Sen Joseph I Lieberman make campaign stops in five cities--Flint, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Tampa, Louisville--in 24 hours on Labor Day; seek to ally ticket with working families (M) Vice President Al Gore's 28-hour spurt over Labor Day across five cities provided several distractions, all of which contributed to the picture that the campaign wanted to present of a hard-working, energetic candidate on the move. Vice President Al Gore's 28-hour spurt over Labor Day across five cities provided several distractions, all of which contributed to the picture that the campaign wanted to present of a hard-working, energetic candidate on the move. It also afforded Mr. Gore an effortless way to show his human side. He reminisced with firefighters in Tampa, Fla., over mushroom omelets about an uncle who was a firefighter and used to take young Al to see the fire engines. ''Everyone called him Uncle Punk, except me,'' Mr. Gore recalled. And he talked about the time his furnace exploded and he had to call the fire department, another everyman adventure that Mr. Gore enjoyed imparting. Many of the events involved food, and Mr. Gore seemed to eat at every stop. And as the hours grew wee, so did Mr. Gore's grip on his accent, which veered toward the homespun, as in: ''I'll be durned if we're going to go back to the old ways.'' It ended tonight here at the Motor Speedway. In between, Mr. Gore, with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, his running mate, at his side for part of the trip, hit Flint, Mich., Tampa, and Pittsburgh. Their message was one of alliance with working families -- and against the tax cut proposed by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, whose name was rarely mentioned. As Mr. Gore put it to about 1,000 people who showed up at the Tampa firehouse before dawn: ''If you give all that surplus away in the form of a giant tax cut mainly to the wealthy, you're going to have the top 1 percent get richer and richer, and maybe there's some benefit to that. We're not against people getting rich; everybody wants to be, I guess. But look at the public investment. How can we stand by if the rich get richer and the poor get poorer, and the public investment in schools and hospitals and the environment and libraries all are falling into disrepair and decay? We need to start looking out after the middle-class families.'' Later, at the Hurley Medical Center in Flint, Mr. Gore spoke sorrowfully of the recent death of Joe Abraham, the head of the local union of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. The togetherness of the two has been striking over the last several days. They tend to wear similar outfits (khakis and sports shirts, then jeans and polo shirts), and Mr. Lieberman knows his place. He introduces Mr. Gore, they hug heartily, then he moves to the background and sits still, a reassuring presence. Mr. Lieberman, who has criticized the Hollywood culture, spoke with some authority today in praising Tipper Gore for leading a push for warning labels on music. ''Long before it became fashionable, Tipper led the battle to protect our children from a lot of the violence and vulgarity in the popular culture,'' he said. And Mr. Gore covered nicely for Mr. Lieberman on Air Force Two around 2 a.m., when Mr. Gore was chirpily telling groggy reporters about his many all-nighters (including two in a row in 1998 to write his father's eulogy). ''He's reflecting,'' Mr. Gore replied. Mr. Gore agreed. ''I knew he was a man of faith when I picked him,'' he said. ''I believe in what he is saying, we share commitment to the separation of church and state, but what he is saying is right for this country.'' ''It's right for the American people,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and you bet we're going to keep on saying it.''
 POLKA AND KIELBASA -- Dick Cheney danced the polka with a Polish beauty queen, spoke a little Polish and dished out a few plates of kielbasa and stuffed cabbage in Chicago yesterday. Mr. Cheney, whose campaign style has sometimes been described as aloof in recent weeks, shed his motorcade and rode the El to the Taste of Polonia festival. At the festival, he greeted the crowd in Polish. ''Sto lat,'' Mr. Cheney said, or ''May you live 100 years.''  Then he spoke about his role as the secretary of defense under President George Bush. ''We were proud to work with all of you to help bring down the wall and free the peoples of Eastern Europe,'' he said, to applause. POLKA AND KIELBASA -- Dick Cheney danced the polka with a Polish beauty queen, spoke a little Polish and dished out a few plates of kielbasa and stuffed cabbage in Chicago yesterday. Mr. Cheney, whose campaign style has sometimes been described as aloof in recent weeks, shed his motorcade and rode the El to the Taste of Polonia festival. At the festival, he greeted the crowd in Polish. ''Sto lat,'' Mr. Cheney said, or ''May you live 100 years.''  Then he spoke about his role as the secretary of defense under President George Bush. ''We were proud to work with all of you to help bring down the wall and free the peoples of Eastern Europe,'' he said, to applause.
 Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush campaigns in Illinois, Michigan and Pennsylvania on Labor Day; derides Democratic nominee Vice Pres Al Gore for rejecting his demand for three hand-picked debates; photo (M) Declaring ''it's time to elect people who say what they mean,'' Gov. George W. Bush swept through two hotly contested states today and derided Vice President Al Gore for rejecting his proposal for three handpicked debates. As the presidential campaign entered the critical period that begins on Labor Day, Mr. Bush hammered away at Mr. Gore's honesty and credibility, tying him to some of the evasions of the Clinton years. Before a pompom- and placard-waving crowd in the Chicago suburbs, Mr. Bush recalled Mr. Gore's defense for making fund-raising calls from his White House office in 1996 -- that ''no controlling legal authority'' barred such activity. Declaring ''it's time to elect people who say what they mean,'' Gov. George W. Bush swept through two hotly contested states today and derided Vice President Al Gore for rejecting his proposal for three handpicked debates. As the presidential campaign entered the critical period that begins on Labor Day, Mr. Bush hammered away at Mr. Gore's honesty and credibility, tying him to some of the evasions of the Clinton years. Before a pompom- and placard-waving crowd in the Chicago suburbs, Mr. Bush recalled Mr. Gore's defense for making fund-raising calls from his White House office in 1996 -- that ''no controlling legal authority'' barred such activity. ''It's time to get rid of all those words like 'no controlling legal authority,' '' Mr. Bush said, campaigning in shirt sleeves with his running mate, Dick Cheney, at his side. ''We need plain-spoken Americans in the White House.'' A day after Mr. Bush rejected a schedule set up by the Commission on Presidential Debates, a bipartisan group that has sponsored debates since 1988, and put forth a plan of his own, he recounted how Mr. Gore had once said he would debate ''anytime, anywhere.'' ''All of a sudden, the words about 'anytime, anywhere' don't mean anything,'' Mr. Bush said, calling Mr. Gore's rejection of his debate proposal ''an interesting example of kind of the Washington doublespeak.'' Mr. Bush repeated, ''It's time to get some plain-spoken folks in Washington, D.C.'' The throngs gathered in a schoolyard in Naperville, Ill., began chanting, ''No more Gore. No more Gore.'' Mr. Bush went on: ''When we tell you something, we mean it. When we say we're going to do something, we're going to do what we say. That's what America hungers for. America wants leadership that lifts its spirits.'' Mr. Gore and his aides rejected Mr. Bush's proposal on Sunday, saying the Republican nominee was trying to limit viewers, instead of accepting the three 90-minute debates proposed by the commission, which would be broadcast by all three major television networks. Two of Mr. Bush's suggested hourlong appearances would be on talk shows that rival networks have said they would not broadcast. Mr. Bush did agree to one presidential debate sponsored by the commission. Mr. Gore's camp, of course, has a different view of the debate issue. Mr. Gore has frequently said he would debate anytime, anywhere, and his campaign has boasted that he has accepted more than 40 debate offers, without qualification. But on Air Force Two early today, Mr. Gore said he had accepted the debates only on the condition that Mr. Bush accept the three debates sponsored by the commission. ''I said some time ago, the condition is we have to have the commission debates,'' Mr. Gore said. Later this morning on NBC's ''Today'' show,'' Matt Lauer, the co-host, said to Mr. Gore that he had not set such a condition in July when he accepted a debate offer from Tim Russert of ''Meet the Press,'' a program that Mr. Bush has also agreed to debate on. ''Well,'' Mr. Gore replied, ''back in March I suggested we debate twice a week and get rid of all the TV commercials, but he's turned all that down. But here's the point, Matt. This is not about what is best for George W. Bush or what is best for Al Gore. It's about what's best for the American people.'' Mr. Bush started off the day with the rally at Naperville North High School. While waiting to speak, he leaned over to his running mate, Dick Cheney, and used an obscenity to describe a New York Times correspondent, Adam Clymer, who was in the crowd. Mr. Bush, his aides said, thought he was speaking privately. But his words were picked up by a television microphone, though they were barely audible to the crowd.  Asked later about the comment, Mr. Bush said, ''Well, I regret that a private comment I made to the vice-presidential candidate made it to the public airwaves.'' When asked if he wanted to apologize, Mr. Bush repeated that he was sorry the comment had been heard. Mr. Bush's director of communications, Karen P. Hughes, said of Mr. Clymer, ''There's been a series of articles that the governor has felt have been very unfair.'' Joseph Lelyveld, the paper's executive editor, said: ''This is at least Adam's eighth campaign. He knows what he is doing. His work is both fair and accurate. The Times has never heard from the Bush campaign about Adam. If they have a complaint, they should convey it to us and we will review it as we do all serious complaints about our coverage.'' Mr. Gore's campaign pounced on the incident to portray Mr. Bush as mean-spirited. A spokesman for Mr. Gore, Mark Fabiani, said that Mr. Bush had ''portrayed himself as a person who wants to change the tone and has broken his promise twice, with negative ads and by using an expletive in referring to a New York Times reporter.'' Mr. Bush's rally in Naperville began a Labor Day swing through Illinois, Michigan and Pennsylvania, all states that President Clinton carried four years ago. Recent polls have shown Mr. Gore pulling ahead in all three. At the rally, a spirited crowd hoisted placards with slogans like ''Hunters for Bush.'' Mr. Bush then marched in a Labor Day parade led by fire trucks with sirens wailing. Later, he spoke at the peach festival here in Romeo. He kept the appearance brief, but once again needled Mr. Gore for refusing to debate ''anytime, anywhere.'' ''You see, that must all depend on what the definition of 'anytime,' is,'' Mr. Bush said, in an allusion to President Clinton's use of the word 'is' when questioned about his affair with a White House intern. ''Or maybe that depends on what the definition of 'anywhere' is.'' On Tuesday Mr. Bush plans to give out more details of a prescription drug plan while barnstorming across Pennsylvania. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said he was focusing on swing voters and noted that Romeo was in Macomb County, a Detroit suburb that is the original home of the so-called Reagan Democrats. Time and again today, Mr. Bush tied his Democratic rival to Washington and to big government, saying: ''My opponent and the folks up in Washington want to empower bureaucrats and make the health decisions for America. They want more power in Washington. They want the planners and deciders, the folks that are telling you how to think, in power.'' Mr. Bush also contrasted his and Mr. Gore's approaches to tax cutting and the federal surplus. Mr. Bush has proposed a sweeping tax cut of $1.3 trillion across 10 years while Mr. Gore has called for tax cuts of less than half that and more spending on social programs like college education and home health care. To dramatize his points, Mr. Bush held up four dollar bills, and ticked off how he would use a projected federal surplus of $4 trillion over a decade. Just two weeks ago, Mr. Bush stumbled over his explanation as he made similar remarks. Today, too, he initially seemed uncertain. And when Mr. Bush got to his tax cut, he handed one of the dollars to a man in the crowd.
