 Gore Says Prosperity Will Fuel Economic Goals  President Al Gore offered his economic vision for the future, a book-length plan that hinged on optimistic fiscal forecasts and offered a mountain of detail. He said the 10 economic goals he outlined were attainable, given the nation's current prosperity, including cutting poverty below 10 percent, raising the level of home ownership and creating 10 million new high-technology jobs. Several Teamsters officials said the executive board would vote today to endorse Mr. Gore, despite the union's often-expressed anger at his support for the China trade bill. The officials cited Mr. Gore's populist turn, his pledge to help working families and his promise to negotiate worker protections in trade agreements. Gov. George W. Bush said Mr. Gore's campaign promises would consume the entire $4.6 trillion federal surplus projected for the next decade. Mr. Bush's accusations were a mirror image of the Gore campaign's own assertions that it is the Republican candidate who is threatening the surplus because of Mr. Bush's proposal to enact a $1.3 trillion tax cut over 10 years, and his spending programs. Prominent Republicans say they worry that the Bush candidacy has floundered, allowing Vice President Gore to build on his velocity from the Democratic convention. The stalemate continued over the Bush and Gore campaigns' differing proposals for debates. The shows and networks chosen by Mr. Bush have never reached even half as many viewers as the least-watched previous debate. Editorials: The Bush prescription drug plan; Congress takes up defective tires; for Assembly and Civil Court judge.  Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.
 Teamsters officials say union board is set to vote to endorse Vice Pres Al Gore for president; say president James P Hoffa is pleased by Gore's shift to more pro-working class agenda (M) The International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the most powerful union to withhold a presidential endorsement, will vote today to support Vice President Al Gore, several Teamster officials said yesterday. The officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the union's 24-member board would vote in Washington to endorse Mr. Gore, despite the union's often-expressed anger at the vice president over his support for the China trade bill. The International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the most powerful union to withhold a presidential endorsement, will vote today to support Vice President Al Gore, several Teamster officials said yesterday. The officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the union's 24-member board would vote in Washington to endorse Mr. Gore, despite the union's often-expressed anger at the vice president over his support for the China trade bill. The Teamsters officials said their union's president, James P. Hoffa, was pleased about Mr. Gore's populist turn, his pledge to do more to help the nation's working families and his promise to negotiate worker protections in future trade agreements. Mr. Hoffa, these officials said, is also happy that Mr. Gore is increasingly talking about the importance of making it easier for unions to organize additional members. ''It's because Gore moved at the convention and since the convention to have a more pro-working class kind of agenda,'' one Teamster official said. ''He's become increasingly believable as someone who cares about these issues.'' For the Gore campaign, the Teamsters' endorsement is expected to be especially important in the swing states of the Midwest, where the Teamsters were founded and where they still have a powerful presence. One Teamsters official said Mr. Gore would speak on Sept. 17 at a meeting of the union's political action coordinators in Las Vegas. After the United Auto Workers endorsed Mr. Gore last month, the Teamsters, with 1.4 million members, was the one large union still on the sidelines, often giving the impression that it would remain neutral. Mr. Hoffa lavished praise on Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, for his criticism of growing corporate power and unfettered global trade. Mr. Hoffa also seemed happy to be wooed by the Republican Party. One Teamster official said the executive board had decided to endorse Mr. Gore after an internal poll showed that 90 percent of the union's leaders across the country preferred Mr. Gore, while only 10 percent backed the other presidential candidates. Several officials said internal polls of the rank and file also showed solid majority backing for Mr. Gore. One Teamster leader said the general view among the union's officials was that Mr. Gore, despite his position on China, was far closer to Mr. Hoffa and the union's positions on the minimum wage, Social Security, the right to organize and other issues than was Gov. George W. Bush, the  Republican presidential nominee. Douglas Hattaway, a Gore campaign spokesman, said, ''Of course,  we'd like their endorsement, but we haven't heard word of anything.'' Ari Fleischer, a Bush campaign spokesman, said, ''Regardless of whatever the official endorsement is, we're confident the governor will enjoy the support of many of the rank-and-file workers.'' Teamster officials said Mr. Gore had made no promise whatsoever about ending the supervision in exchange for the Teamsters' backing.
 Defense lawyers expressed concern that Gov. James S. Gilmore III, a Republican close to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential candidate, might choose to ''split the baby'' politically and keep Mr. Washington in prison as part of a 30-year sentence in an assault case  not connected to the murder. Typically, the assault conviction by itself would have merited parole by now, they noted.
 Editorial says Gov George W Bush's proposal to provide prescription drug benefits as option under comprehensive Medicare reform may or may not make drug coverage more accessible in future; says Bush's plan is inferior to Vice Pres Al Gore's because it relies on uncertain action by states and private sector, and would leave too many people without coverage for now Gov. George W. Bush announced a proposal on Tuesday to provide prescription drug benefits as an option under comprehensive Medicare reform. But since he does not expect such reform to happen anytime soon, he wants state governments to deal with the problem while a new White House task force works out the details of future reforms. Mr. Bush, like Vice President Al Gore, hopes to court elderly voters with a plan to help pay for the escalating costs of drugs. But unlike Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush would not create a universal drug benefit for all retirees under Medicare. Instead he lays out a rough Medicare reform plan, with few details, that may or may not make drug coverage more accessible in the future. The Bush plan is inferior because it relies on uncertain action by states and the private sector, and would leave too many people without coverage for now. Gov. George W. Bush announced a proposal on Tuesday to provide prescription drug benefits as an option under comprehensive Medicare reform. But since he does not expect such reform to happen anytime soon, he wants state governments to deal with the problem while a new White House task force works out the details of future reforms. Mr. Bush, like Vice President Al Gore, hopes to court elderly voters with a plan to help pay for the escalating costs of drugs. But unlike Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush would not create a universal drug benefit for all retirees under Medicare. Instead he lays out a rough Medicare reform plan, with few details, that may or may not make drug coverage more accessible in the future. The Bush plan is inferior because it relies on uncertain action by states and the private sector, and would leave too many people without coverage for now. Mr. Bush takes a complicated two-track approach. He would first create a four-year transitional program that places the onus on states to provide drug coverage for the elderly while the federal government works on comprehensive Medicare reform. He would provide $48 billion over four years to help states pay for full drug coverage for retirees with incomes below 135 percent of the poverty line, or about $12,000 a year for an individual. Those earning up to 175 percent of the poverty level, about $15,000 a year, would get a partial subsidy. Mr. Bush is far less specific about how drug coverage would work in the long term, leaving the details to a task force that would be convened next year. He would not create a universal drug benefit that would be available to all the elderly at the same cost. Instead he would rely primarily on private insurers. Low-income people would be heavily subsidized, as under the Gore plan. But Mr. Bush's plan does not spell out a minimum drug benefit package or maximum premiums for middle- and higher-income retirees. Instead, government would help pay 25 percent of their drug coverage premiums. Mr. Bush says he wants to spend an additional $110 billion over 10 years to modernize Medicare by having private insurance plans compete against traditional fee-for-service Medicare. Presumably, many of those plans would provide drugs as an optional benefit. Mr. Bush hopes that as more retirees choose these plans, fewer will be left without drug coverage. But achieving that goal is uncertain. Without a new Medicare drug program, people who stay in fee-for-service Medicare would still have to buy separate drug coverage on the private market. In that respect, the Bush plan faces the same problem as the flawed bill that passed the House in June. That plan relies on private insurers to sell prescription drug policies. Yet many insurers have said they will not be able to offer affordable policies even with a subsidy because only people with high drug expenses would buy the coverage. Mr. Gore's plan does not have this problem because his program would offer uniform drug coverage to all the elderly at $25 a month, without relying on private insurers to sell affordable policies. Mr. Bush's reform proposal does add an interesting element to the debate. He says he would use the $6,000 cap that would initially apply to drug expenses for all out-of-pocket Medicare costs as part of long-term reform. This is a positive proposal, provided he identifies a way to pay for it.
 But the tax plan Mr. Lazio promoted again today was not precisely what he first proposed two weeks ago, his aides acknowledge. The aides have offered some new details on the plan since then, the effect being to lower the plan's potential cost. Those changes occurred as some of Mr. Lazio's economic assumptions were challenged by some independent analysts, and after Mrs. Clinton's aides said he underestimated the plan's price tag so he could distance himself from the $1.3 trillion tax cut proposed by George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate. Several elements of Mr. Lazio's tax cut plan are under fire from analysts and Democrats, who contend that their costs are significantly understated. From a political perspective, this is more than just a bookkeeping dispute because Mr. Lazio has gone to some lengths to distinguish his plan from the $1.3 trillion plan offered by Mr. Bush, putting the cost of his own plan at $776 billion over 10 years. Mr. Flood said that his campaign stood by its estimates, suggesting the different views were nothing more than customary disputes between Congressional Democrats and Republicans over numbers. If Mr. Lazio were to accept the Congressional figures, the cost of his plan would clearly jump over $1 trillion, complicating his efforts to distinguish himself from Mr. Bush and providing Mrs. Clinton with a clearer target.
 Analysis of Vice Pres Al Gore's economic blueprint, which reignites debate with Gov George W Bush about who can better apportion projected federal budget surplus; cites difference in approach to economic management and use of surplus between Democrats and Republicans and their candidates; sees Gore, while presenting self as fiscally responsible, also sketching vision of activist government willing to take on big problems, vision Bush opposes; table compares ways in which Gore and Bush would use budget surplus (M) In releasing a detailed economic blueprint today, Vice President Al Gore reignited a debate with Gov. George W. Bush about who can better apportion the projected federal budget surplus without driving the government back into the red and running the good economy off the rails. In releasing a detailed economic blueprint today, Vice President Al Gore reignited a debate with Gov. George W. Bush about who can better apportion the projected federal budget surplus without driving the government back into the red and running the good economy off the rails. Mr. Bush for the most part represents conservative orthodoxy, with a heavy emphasis on tax cuts, keeping politicians from getting their hands on too much money and relying on individuals and markets to solve problems and strengthen the economy. After spending much of the past several months campaigning as a corporation-bashing populist fighting for working families, Mr. Gore presented himself today as the embodiment of fiscal responsibility, brushing aside the Bush camp's accusations that he is a recklessly big-spending liberal. Mr. Gore emphasized his willingness to take some money out of contention for either tax cuts or additional spending, vowing to set aside $300 billion of the projected surplus over the next 10 years in case the  surplus does not materialize as projected. The 191-page document released today by Mr. Gore was written largely by economic advisers closely associated with the Clinton administration's emphasis on keeping the budget balanced and paying off the national debt. They included Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary, who colleagues said has sometimes been uncomfortable with Mr. Gore's recent populist emphasis; Gene Sperling, the White House economic policy adviser; Erskine B. Bowles, the former White House chief of staff; and Laura D'Andrea Tyson, a former White House chief economist and policy adviser. Those advisers generally see the strong economy as Mr. Gore's best weapon, and reducing the debt as the best way of keeping interest rates low and stimulating the investment the economy needs to remain the world's most competitive. Yet even as he presented himself as a man of economic prudence, Mr. Gore sketched a vision of an activist government willing to take on big problems. The document he released today sought to spell out for voters, with considerable specificity, how Mr. Gore would seek to harness continued prosperity on their behalf. Incomes would rise by a third, Mr. Gore promised. The poverty level would decline to less than 10 percent, from 12.7 percent. College attendance and graduation rates would increase. Income-tax rates on families making the median income would fall. The disparity between what men and women earn would be reduced by 50 percent. Mr. Gore described not just the goals, but the programs and policies he said would be necessary to achieve them, from paying off the national debt to spending $115 billion more on education in the next decade and establishing a new retirement savings program at a cost of at least $200 billion. The current business expansion is already the longest the nation has ever enjoyed. Should the combination of healthy growth, low unemployment and higher productivity continue for another eight years -- by no means a certainty, even if the president, Congress and the Federal Reserve make all the right choices -- many if not all of Mr. Gore's goals could be within reach. Should the economy hit the rocks, they could come back to haunt a President Gore. Eight years ago, Bill Clinton offered an economic policy agenda titled ''Putting People First.'' It was praised for, if nothing else, being detailed and concrete about his plans and priorities. In its original form, it was a few dozen pages long, an airy pamphlet alongside Mr. Gore's chart-laden presentation. Mr. Bush has not pulled his proposals together in a comprehensive document. But his campaign released a detailed accounting of his tax and spending plans today, right down to his proposed spending increase for aid to historically black colleges and universities ($900 million over 10 years). Mr. Bush counterpunched hard, citing support for his approach from conservative, Nobel Prize-winning economists like Milton Friedman, and asserting that Mr. Gore's long list of initiatives would blow a hole in the budget. But Mr. Gore's camp is happy to have the campaign fought over economic management issues, seeing that as ground on which Mr. Gore is both comfortable and right. Mr. Gore left little doubt about how he wants to put prosperity to work, but some of his more ambitious goals were vaguely defined.
 Prominent Republicans express unease about way Gov George W Bush is handling himself lately, saying he seems either defensive, bumbling, weary, detached or peevish; cite several missteps, including Bush's refusal to go along with debate schedule proposed by bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, making him look timid and diverting attention from issues he would be better off discussing; others say Bush is letting himself get dragged too deep by Gore into bogs of policy debate, where Gore is at his best; some Republicans say Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as running mate has been disappointment, especially compared with Gore's running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, who has helped energize Democratic ticket (M) Prominent Republicans around the country, including several who advise Gov. George W. Bush, say they are worried that his candidacy has floundered in recent weeks, allowing Vice President Al Gore to build on his velocity from the Democratic convention in a way that they never expected. While none of these Republicans expressed panic and all said that Mr. Bush could reverse the trend, they acknowledged puzzlement, frustration and even some distress about the strides that Mr. Gore has made, a degree of progress that they said went beyond an inevitable tightening in polls. Prominent Republicans around the country, including several who advise Gov. George W. Bush, say they are worried that his candidacy has floundered in recent weeks, allowing Vice President Al Gore to build on his velocity from the Democratic convention in a way that they never expected. While none of these Republicans expressed panic and all said that Mr. Bush could reverse the trend, they acknowledged puzzlement, frustration and even some distress about the strides that Mr. Gore has made, a degree of progress that they said went beyond an inevitable tightening in polls. ''There's no doubt about it: There's real worry about the general state of things,'' said William J. Bennett, the former secretary of education, who has advised Mr. Bush from time to time. ''There's nervousness that was not there before.'' In interviews during the past several days, leading Republicans on Capitol Hill, at state capitals and even at the Bush headquarters in Austin, Tex., raised concerns beyond poll numbers. Many of them expressed unease about the way Mr. Bush has handled himself, saying that in the last two and a half weeks there had been too many instances when he seemed either defensive, bumbling, weary, detached or peevish. And there have been too many missteps, several Republicans said. For starters, some cited Mr. Bush's refusal to go along with the debate schedule proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, saying his reluctance had made him look timid and was diverting attention from issues that he would be better off discussing. Others said Mr. Bush was letting himself get dragged too deep by Mr. Gore into the bogs of a policy debate, where the vice president is at his best. Still others said that Mr. Bush's choice of Dick Cheney as a running mate had produced scant excitement on the campaign trail but significant damage in the news media, manifest in weeks of questions about the financial details of Mr. Cheney's retirement package from Halliburton, the energy services company he served as chief executive. Several Republican officials said they had serious reservations about the party's tongue-in-cheek TV commercial broadcast last week that challenged Mr. Gore's truthfulness and political consistency. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, dismissed the worries about the state of the governor's candidacy, so dominant for most of the year. Indeed, to some Republicans, Mr. Bush began the process of correcting his campaign this week. On Tuesday, he moved aggressively to neutralize Mr. Gore's advantage on the critical issue of health care by releasing his own plan to give prescription drug benefits to the elderly. And Mr. Bush has engaged Mr. Gore much more forcefully in his comments and oratory. But Republicans said that the combination of Mr. Gore's surge and Mr. Bush's stumbles had made Mr. Gore, for perhaps the first time in the 2000 presidential race, the front runner. Many said they were unnerved by voter surveys showing that Mr. Gore -- who for months trailed in the polls -- had pulled even or ahead of Mr. Bush nationally and in some important states like Florida, Pennsylvania and Missouri, where campaign officials had long predicted victories. ''Everybody expected a bounce, but not nearly as much as this,'' said Representative Fred Upton, a Michigan Republican, referring to Mr. Gore. And, he said, it had significantly altered the mood of Republicans in his state, a crucial battleground. Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, who has campaigned with Mr. Bush in his state for the past three days, said: ''I'm at a loss to explain the rather significant change in the polling numbers.'' While Mr. Ridge said he was confident Mr. Bush would recover, he said, ''We've got to go a little bit more on the offensive.'' He added of Mr. Gore, ''This guy's tough.'' In fact, in the nearly three weeks since the end of the Democratic convention, Mr. Gore has been constantly on the offensive. First he declared himself the candidate of the little guy and portrayed Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney as beholden to big oil and drug companies; then he relentlessly attacked Mr. Bush over tax policy and health care. At the same time, Mr. Gore has managed to use the favorable attention he received during the convention -- even the much publicized kiss he planted on his wife, Tipper, before his acceptance speech -- to give life and personality to his stiff and uninteresting stereotype. A Republican official closely involved in the Bush campaign said that Mr. Bush's aides had readjusted their expectations for a spate of new polls that are to be released in the next few days. As recently as two weeks ago, the official said, Mr. Bush's aides were forecasting that these polls would show the race in a dead heat. But there was now a feeling inside the Bush camp that Mr. Gore might have, on average, a 3-to-5-point advantage, the official said. A Washington-based adviser to the Bush campaign said: ''Today, I think anybody forced to wager on the race would have to bet on Gore.'' In the interviews, Republicans of all ideological stripes were hardly unified in dispensing advice for Mr. Bush, or in gauging the health of his candidacy. Several said that Mr. Bush was merely being buffeted by cyclical forces, which might change several times again before Election Day. Others said that Mr. Bush's position on debates made at least as much sense to voters as Mr. Gore's. But some concerns about Mr. Bush's campaign were mentioned time and again. For example, several Republicans said that Mr. Bush still needed to be more aggressive in explaining his proposal for a tax cut of $1.3 trillion over 10 years, more than double the size of the cut planned by Mr. Gore. Mr. Specter and other Republicans said it was a mistake for the Bush campaign to sign off on a Republican Party commercial that poked fun at Mr. Gore for appearing at a Buddhist temple fund-raiser. Mr. Cheney was also cited by many Republicans as a disappointing choice for Mr. Bush's running mate, especially compared with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who has helped energize the Democratic ticket. Some Republicans also said that despite his proposal for debates this week, Mr. Bush was unwise to make an issue of the format for his televised encounters with Mr. Gore. ''He is proposing debates that will arguably reach fewer people,'' said a Bush adviser. ''You can't sell a Chevy and say it's a Cadillac.'' In addition, several Republicans said, Mr. Bush has at times failed to muster the sunny geniality and bravado that have always been his strongest suits. He has fumbled with his mathematical figures and his words. In an interview late last week, at a time when he might be expected to be as pumped up by the gathering frenzy as ever, Mr. Bush instead grew prematurely reflective and slightly teary as he mulled over what he said was the greatness of American democracy. At a news conference on Sunday, as he showed snippets of videotape to support his accusation that Mr. Gore was backing out of an agreement to debate anytime and anywhere, he tapped his foot and occasionally pursed his lips. The next day, Mr. Bush, who prides himself on discipline, was caught uttering a vulgarity to describe a reporter into a microphone. While many political analysts said that the incident would cause no major damage, others said it could feed into perceptions of Mr. Bush as insufficiently experienced or mature for the task at hand. ''There was a period right before and during the Republican convention where it looked like Bush would sail away with this,'' said Senator Peter Fitzgerald of Illinois. ''We've all come back to reality.'' Representative Joe Scarborough of Florida said: ''The campaign actually started yesterday in earnest. If Bush was going to have a problem, he picked the right time to have it.'' Bill Paxon, a former House member who is an adviser to the campaign, said Republicans who expected Mr. Bush to be ahead now were guilty of ''Alice in Wonderland'' thinking. ''I believe that it's going to be a tight race to the finish,'' he said. ''But I am as confident of victory as I was six month ago. George W. Bush is going to be the next president.''
 Wrangling over presidential debates intensifies; Vice Pres Al Gore continues to insist that Gov George W Bush accept independent commission's debate schedule; Bush vows to show up for debate he helped set up on Meet the Press television program regardless of whether Gore appears; NBC says it will cancel show unless both candidates accept (M) The wrangling over the presidential debates intensified yesterday, as Vice President Al Gore continued to insist that Gov. George W. Bush accept an independent commission's schedule of debates, while Mr. Bush vowed to show up next week for a television debate he helped to set up regardless of whether Mr. Gore was there. ''I'm going to Washington, you bet,'' Mr. Bush said on NBC's ''Today'' show, in response to a question about his proposed debate on ''Meet the Press'' with Tim Russert on Tuesday at 10 p.m. Eastern daylight time. ''It's on my schedule. And I hope he's there. After all, it was on Mr. Russert's show, where he clearly said that he would show up if I showed up, and I'm showing up.'' The wrangling over the presidential debates intensified yesterday, as Vice President Al Gore continued to insist that Gov. George W. Bush accept an independent commission's schedule of debates, while Mr. Bush vowed to show up next week for a television debate he helped to set up regardless of whether Mr. Gore was there. ''I'm going to Washington, you bet,'' Mr. Bush said on NBC's ''Today'' show, in response to a question about his proposed debate on ''Meet the Press'' with Tim Russert on Tuesday at 10 p.m. Eastern daylight time. ''It's on my schedule. And I hope he's there. After all, it was on Mr. Russert's show, where he clearly said that he would show up if I showed up, and I'm showing up.'' But NBC officials said there would be no edition of ''Meet the Press'' on Tuesday if Mr. Gore was not on hand. All the maneuvering has left the staging of any debates up in the air. The Commission on Presidential Debates, a bipartisan group that has been running the candidate showdowns since 1988, has a longstanding invitation to both contenders to appear in three debates on college campuses in October, an offer Mr. Gore accepted months ago. On Sunday, Mr. Bush countered with his own  plan, which included one of the 90-minute commission debates but replaced the others with one-hour forums on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' next week and CNN's ''Larry King Live'' on Oct. 3. The commission has invited the campaigns to meet to settle their differences, but thus far only the Gore campaign has agreed to. Mr. Gore, who denounced Mr. Bush's offer as an effort to duck the commission debates because he was trying to limit the viewers, has said he is amenable to debating on the two programs. But he added that Mr. Bush must first consent to the commission's debates, which traditionally are broadcast live across the spectrum of major broadcast and cable news networks. But Mr. Bush's plan would make it impossible for the candidates to adhere to the commission's schedule, because the date for the proposed encounter on Mr. King's program -- Oct. 3 -- is the same as the first commission debate, at the University of Massachusetts in Boston. Aides to Mr. Bush last week had expressed particular opposition to that debate, because of the university's proximity to the John F. Kennedy Library, an institution honoring a Democratic president. Asked whether CNN had been made a party, perhaps unwittingly, to efforts to scuttle the Boston debate, CNN said that it was the candidates who had the power over the schedule and that the Bush campaign itself chose the Oct. 3 date. ''They are in control of when and where they debate,'' said Christa Robinson, a CNN spokeswoman. ''What CNN did was put an offer on the table that did not have a specific date on it.'' But, she added that no debate would occur without Mr. Gore's participation. The degree to which Mr. Bush is pushing his counterproposal was underscored yesterday, when the Bush campaign introduced a new commercial taunting the vice president for not accepting Mr. Bush's debate plan. ''When it was politically convenient, Gore said he'd debate 'anytime, anyplace, anywhere,' '' an announcer says, concluding, ''If we can't trust Al Gore on debates, why should we trust him on anything?'' The commercial drew an immediate condemnation from the Gore campaign, which contended that it was Mr. Bush who was practicing debate avoidance. ''It's just the latest act of political chicanery,'' said Chris Lehane, the Gore campaign press secretary. ''The bottom line is, he's bobbing and weaving and dodging by not putting the debates before the largest number of people possible.'' Mr. Bush's alternative plan drew complaints from other corners. Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee for president, sent letters to all the major cable and broadcast networks yesterday, asking that he be included in any debates they show. Mr. Nader wrote that the inclusion of him and the Reform Party candidate Patrick J. Buchanan would, among other things, make the debates more entertaining.
 Presidential debates held on networks and days proposed by Gov George W Bush would almost surely be seen by smallest audience ever for presidential debates; shows and networks Bush chooses have never reached even half as many viewers as least-watched previous debate; debates Bush proposes would be first presidential debates not carried by more than one network (M) If the presidential debates were held on the networks and days chosen by George W. Bush, the Republican candidate, they would almost surely be seen by the fewest number of people ever to have watched them. The shows and networks chosen by Mr. Bush have never reached even half as many viewers as the least-watched previous debate. That took place four years ago, when the second Clinton-Dole debate -- carried by the three major networks and CNN -- reached a total of 36.3 million viewers. The ratings were diminished by the competition from the Fox network, which that night chose to broadcast a Major League Baseball playoff game. If the presidential debates were held on the networks and days chosen by George W. Bush, the Republican candidate, they would almost surely be seen by the fewest number of people ever to have watched them. The shows and networks chosen by Mr. Bush have never reached even half as many viewers as the least-watched previous debate. That took place four years ago, when the second Clinton-Dole debate -- carried by the three major networks and CNN -- reached a total of 36.3 million viewers. The ratings were diminished by the competition from the Fox network, which that night chose to broadcast a Major League Baseball playoff game. Still, that audience represents more than twice the viewers of CNN's ''Larry King Live'' the night in 1993 when Al Gore debated Ross Perot about the North American Free Trade Agreement. That debate reached 16 million viewers, by far the most-watched night ever for the  program. It is also about nine times as many people who saw Mr. Gore debate Bill Bradley on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' last December, which reached 4.71 million viewers, the most-watched political event for that program in this election season. Mr. Bush has chosen those programs as substitutes for two debates set by the Commission on Presidential Debates, which would have been broadcast by all the networks. In 1988, two Bush-Dukakis debates reached 65.1 million and 67.3 million viewers. The most-watched debate of all time was the only debate of the 1980 campaign, between Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter, which reached more than 80 million people.
 Vice Pres Al Gore outlines series of social and economic goals he says are attainable given nation's current prosperity, and he presents mountain of supporting detail intended to make Gov George W Bush's financial plan pale in comparison, speech, Cleveland State University; speech reflects shift in language and approach for Gore, who now speaks of 'middle-class families' rather than 'working families'; Gore's booklength economic blueprint reignites debate with Bush over whose plan can best manage projected budget surplus over next decade without ruining economy; Bush says Gore's many spending promises would eat through surplus; Gore, hoping to deflect such perception, pledges to set aside $300 billion as hedge against overly optimistic fiscal projections; photo (M) Unveiling a book-length plan that hinges on optimistic fiscal forecasts, Vice President Al Gore today offered his economic vision for the future, painting an image of a prosperous middle class that enjoys higher incomes, with more home ownership, more high-tech jobs and more people going to college. Unveiling a book-length plan that hinges on optimistic fiscal forecasts, Vice President Al Gore today offered his economic vision for the future, painting an image of a prosperous middle class that enjoys higher incomes, with more home ownership, more high-tech jobs and more people going to college. Mr. Gore outlined a series of social and economic goals that he said were attainable given the nation's current prosperity, and he presented a mountain of supporting detail that his campaign hopes will make Gov. George W. Bush's financial plan pale in comparison. The speech reflected a shift in language and approach for Mr. Gore, who has in recent days replaced the ''working families'' he courted so assiduously during the Democratic National Convention last month with ''middle-class'' families. ''The Gore-Lieberman economic plan,'' he said, ''has one guiding purpose: to help the middle-class families who have always been America's purpose and pride, the people who pay the taxes, bear the burdens and live the American dream.'' In his convention speech Mr. Gore used the phrase ''working families'' nine times. In today's speech, , he used ''middle-class'' 12 times and ''working families'' only once. The release of Mr. Gore's economic blueprint reignited a debate with Mr. Bush over whose plan can best manage the projected budget surplus over the next decade without ruining the economy. [News Analysis, Page A26.] Mr. Bush wasted little time yesterday attacking the plan, saying Mr. Gore had made so many spending promises that he would eat through the surplus. To deflect such perceptions, Mr. Gore included in his glossy, 191-page plan a pledge to set aside $300 billion as a hedge against overly optimistic fiscal projections. Aside from the rainy day fund, Mr. Gore's plan is largely a synthesis of many specific programs he has described over the last several months. But today was the first time the vice president had drawn all of these stray threads together into a broader theme. Mr. Gore said his 10 goals were to: eliminate the debt by 2012; protect the Social Security and Medicare surpluses; double the number of families that have more than $50,000 in savings; reduce income taxes on the typical family to the lowest level in 50 years; raise family income by a third over the next decade; enable seven in ten families to own their own homes; increase the number of people who go to college; reduce poverty to below 10 percent for the first time since poverty statistics were kept in 1959 (it was 12.7 percent in 1998); cut the gap between wages earned by men and women; and create 10 million new high-tech jobs. The economic blueprint that Mr. Gore offered today is a road map of middle-class life. It envisions expanded income in continuing boom times, with more people going to college and working in well-paying, high-tech jobs. Mr. Gore's focus on the middle class is something of a turn away from the more combative populist language he has relied on for weeks. It reflects, in part, the arrival of a new pollster, Stanley Greenberg, who has written extensively about the middle class and helped Bill Clinton capture that broad swath of voters in 1992. Mr. Gore's advisers said he had deliberately used the phrase ''middle class'' in this speech because he was also talking about reducing the number of people in poverty and wanted to distinguish between the two. Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster who at one time advised Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, on word choice and language, said that Mr. Gore appeared to have moved deliberately away from ''working families'' to the ''middle class'' to broaden his reach. Mr. Luntz said that voters perceived ''working families'' as applying to young couples and excluding people who were retired or about to retire. This is a huge block of voters who are especially important because they tend to go to the polls in larger numbers than younger people. He said focus groups with voters he has conducted for MSNBC have found that the phrase ''working families'' was working against Mr. Gore, not only because of its connotations of youth, but also because of its suggestion of class distinctions that Americans are loath to acknowledge. Mr. Gore's plan, particularly the goal of raising family income by a  third over the next decade, assumes an annual growth rate in incomes of 2.9 percent -- a fairly ambitious goal,  although the most recent figures available show that from 1997 to 1998, median family income grew 3.3 percent, to $46,737 from $45,262. Mr. Gore's budget advisers acknowledged that the country had never sustained such growth over a 10-year period. Mr. Gore told his audience to ''read my plan,'' a pointed reference to the infamous pronouncement by former President George Bush, father of Mr. Gore's current rival, who told voters, ''Read my lips: no new taxes.'' ''My plan wasn't built on cross-your-fingers economics that says we can give more to the people who already have the most and then just hope the benefits trickle down to the middle class,'' Mr. Gore said, again contrasting himself with the Reagan-Bush era. To demonstrate a fiscally conservative approach, Mr. Gore said his $300 billion rainy-day fund would be a hedge against overly optimistic surplus projections. ''If today's economic forecasts fall short, this new reserve fund will guarantee that we will not have to cut education or health care,'' Mr. Gore said. ''And unlike the promises made on the other side, we won't be running deficits and endangering America's prosperity.'' He said that Mr. Gore's goals would essentially ''fall in his lap'' if the economy continued its expansion, and that these goals appealed to most voters. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT  Correction:  September 9, 2000, Saturday  A front-page article on Thursday about Vice President Al Gore's economic plan misstated the title of Robert D. Reischauer, who spoke of it favorably. He is president of the Urban Institute, not an analyst there. In some copies, the article misidentifed the office of which he is the former director. It is the Congressional Budget Office, not the Office of Management and Budget. A front-page article on Thursday about Vice President Al Gore's economic plan misstated the title of Robert D. Reischauer, who spoke of it favorably. He is president of the Urban Institute, not an analyst there. In some copies, the article misidentifed the office of which he is the former director. It is the Congressional Budget Office, not the Office of Management and Budget.
 Gov George W Bush's commercial attacking Vice Pres Al Gore's credibility on issue of presidential debates assessed (M) Gov. George W. Bush's campaign announced yesterday that it would begin running a new commercial attacking Vice President Al Gore's credibility on the issue of debates. The 30-second spot is to run in select markets in some, but not all, of the 17 closely contested states where the Bush campaign is already running commercials. But campaign officials declined to name the states. Gov. George W. Bush's campaign announced yesterday that it would begin running a new commercial attacking Vice President Al Gore's credibility on the issue of debates. The 30-second spot is to run in select markets in some, but not all, of the 17 closely contested states where the Bush campaign is already running commercials. But campaign officials declined to name the states. ON THE SCREEN -- Video footage of Mr. Bush seated comfortably in a chair, looking relaxed in a blue shirt with an open collar. Cut to shots of Mr. Gore appearing more tense as he is being interviewed on two television shows. Closes with the words, ''If we can't trust Al Gore on debates, why should we trust him on anything,'' superimposed on a black screen. SCRIPT -- Female announcer: ''Labor Day weekend, Governor Bush accepts a record five national debates. March 14, Al Gore says he'd debate on CNN. July 16, Al Gore said he'd debate on NBC. When it was politically convenient, Gore said he'd debate 'anytime, anyplace, anywhere.' Now that Governor Bush has accepted, Gore says 'unacceptable.' Does Al Gore now mean debates depend on his meaning of 'anytime, anywhere?' If we can't trust Al Gore on debates, why should we trust him on anything?'' ACCURACY -- The spot ignores the broader context of the debate over debates, and in many ways distorts it. Mr. Gore has agreed to all three of the 90-minute, prime-time debates organized by the Commission on Presidential Debates, a bipartisan group that has been running debates since 1988. Mr. Bush has agreed to appear in only one commission debate and proposed joint appearances with Mr. Gore on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC and on CNN's ''Larry King Live.'' Both of those appearances would be 60 minutes long and, unlike the commission debates, would not be covered by all three networks. Mr. Gore contends that Mr. Bush is trying to reduce the number of people who can watch the debates and says he will not appear in any of Mr. Bush's proposed forums until the governor agrees to the three commission debates. But Mr. Bush contends that the vice president has backed away from his pledge to debate Mr. Bush ''anytime, anywhere.'' SCORECARD -- Mr. Bush's campaign is trying to fit the scuffle over debates into his broader attack on Mr. Gore's character and honesty. The line about ''his meaning of anytime, anywhere,'' is a sly reference to President Clinton's defense regarding his relationship with a White House intern: ''It depends on what the definition of is is.'' But this commercial could also remind voters that Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, is the one trying to sidestep the commission debates, and in that way underscore Democratic contentions that he is afraid to go one-on-one with the vice president before the largest possible national audience.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column says Gov George W Bush's plan to overhaul Medicare was probably prompted by polls showing that Vice Pres Al Gore was scoring points with his prescription drug proposal; says Bush's better-late-than-never plan would turn many certainties of Medicare over to whims of profit-oriented insurance companies and health maintenance organizations; suggests that Bush is following through on Republicans' decades-long dream of thoroughly undermining Medicare (M) George W. Bush has come up with a plan to overhaul Medicare. George W. Bush has come up with a plan to overhaul Medicare. Now comes Mr. Bush, the G.O.P.'s affable front man for the likes of Trent Lott, Dick Armey and Tom DeLay, and he's suddenly got a plan to fix Medicare. This is the same Mr. Bush whose own state of Texas has not bothered to comply with a 1996 consent decree requiring it to provide appropriate health care services to more than 1.5 million children who were eligible for Medicaid. Mr. Bush's proposed renovation of Medicare includes a prescription drug benefit. That applause you hear is coming from the executives of the drug companies and the insurance industry. They like Mr. Bush's plans. Which should tell you something. A prescription drug benefit was not always a cornerstone of Mr. Bush's presidential campaign. Health care was hardly his strong point, or even a matter of major interest to him. But polls seemed to show that Vice President Al Gore was scoring points by pressing hard for his prescription drug proposal, which would be part of the existing Medicare program and would provide greater benefits to more people. It makes a difference whether the drug benefit is contained within an expanded Medicare program (Mr. Gore's proposal) or is farmed out via subsidies to private insurers, as Mr. Bush wants. Ron Pollack, the executive director of Families USA, a nonpartisan, nonprofit advocacy group for health care consumers, discussed this in an interview yesterday: Mr. Bush's attempt at a better-late-than-never plan, especially one that would turn so many of the certainties of Medicare over to the whims of profit-oriented insurance companies and health maintenance organizations, has many longtime health care advocates worried. The fear is not only that this is not in the best interest of the nation's elderly, but that the compassionately conservative Mr. Bush is following through on the Republicans' decades-long dream of thoroughly undermining Medicare.
 A wave of environmental and consumer legislation followed the sustained growth of the 1960's. And George Bush was aptly dubbed ''the regulatory president'' by Jonathan Rauch, the author of ''Government's End: Why Washington Stopped Working'' (Public Affairs, 1999), because of the new spate of environmental and employment regulations that topped off the growth of the 1980's. Deregulation, by contrast, began after the troubled economy of the 1970's.
 Interview with Candace Bushnell, whose new book is Four Blondes; she has found romance in London with tephen Morris; photos (M) I JUST hope I don't pick up a fake English accent,'' Candace Bushnell said, reaching for a glass of Champagne. It was proffered by a dapper butler on hand one evening to serve her and some 25 British and American guests cocktails and blinis laden with caviar. The setting was Cranley Lodge, the London pied-a-terre of her English boyfriend, Stephen Morris, where Ms. Bushnell now makes herself at home. I JUST hope I don't pick up a fake English accent,'' Candace Bushnell said, reaching for a glass of Champagne. It was proffered by a dapper butler on hand one evening to serve her and some 25 British and American guests cocktails and blinis laden with caviar. The setting was Cranley Lodge, the London pied-a-terre of her English boyfriend, Stephen Morris, where Ms. Bushnell now makes herself at home. Like the main character in ''Single Process,'' a novella in her new book, ''Four Blondes'' (Atlantic Monthly Press), Ms. Bushnell appears to have found love at last with a suave gent after years of exasperation with the dating game in New York. Since the couple began cavorting romantically 15 months ago, Ms. Bushnell has been sharing his home in London. Mr. Morris, a venture capitalist with a taste for the high life, spends three months a year in England. ''London's like New York -- there's a lot of funny, fun girls here,'' Ms. Bushnell said. One of them is Imogen Edwards-Jones, a columnist for The Times of London. With a flourish, Ms. Edwards-Jones entered Cranley Lodge clutching a copy of her own new book, ''My Canape Hell.'' (''It's about a girl on a downward spiral in celebrity hell London,'' she said.) The two women embraced with theatrical effusiveness. For all the withering precision with which she chronicles the glittering lives of semicelebrities, social aspirants and moneyed folk, Ms. Bushnell, 41, appears to relish being part of the world she makes seem so harrowing. Although Mr. Haslam sought her opinion, Ms. Bushnell had limited input. She doesn't do decor (even though her parents took her antiquing almost every Sunday of her childhood, she said) but she makes an effort to be spectacularly decorative. Ms. Bushnell greeted the guests in a mohair micro-miniskirt with sequins, and glittery knee-high boots by Jimmy Choo, enthusiastically inhaling Marlboro Lights and shaking a professionally coiffed golden mane. She now flies business class and relishes shopping sprees (but not in London -- ''You find yourself buying a little pair of sweat pants, and it's like $200,'' she said). And she gives imaginative gifts. For Christmas, she commissioned a painting from Lady Theresa Chipman -- a painter who is the sister of the Duke of Rutland, as well as the former lead singer in a rock band. Lady Theresa is also an ex-New York nightclubbing pal of Ms. Bushnell. The subject of the painting? Mr. Morris. And the painting is proudly displayed in the Chelsea living room. Ms. Bushnell says that Universal executives have been urging her to make some characters seem more mature, sincere and to have them exude noble intent. ''I was trying to do it, but I got stuck,'' Ms. Bushnell admitted. ''Then I realized, I don't do noble. I do shallow and superficial.'' ''It's just not a big deal, being married here,'' Ms. Bushnell marveled. ''It's not this horrifying thing that it is for men in New York. Here, they don't have the attitude of the old ball and chain. If you're married, it doesn't mean you're home every night with your spouse. There's less of that 'Oh my God he's out, what is he doing?' syndrome.'' ''Emotionally, I think it's healthier to live with other people,'' Ms. Bushnell said. ''If I am working alone in the country, I feel like I'm going crazy after a few days.'' Since Mr. Morris's business activities frequently take him to Australia and all over Europe, Ms. Bushnell explained, the couple try to schedule weekends together in Connecticut or flying visits to London. ''English guys are fun,'' Ms. Bushnell said. ''They're more relaxed and less afraid of being themselves and being vulnerable. Most of the English men I know are willing to poke fun at themselves. It's less of a macho culture. You don't meet guys here who go to the gym every day. Men here just don't care.'' Ms. Bushnell's appreciation for restraint -- at least in men -- seems to have been instilled when she was growing up in Glastonbury, Conn. ''I'm from New England,'' she said. ''We're kind of cold.'' ''Nonsense,'' Mr. Morris countered, grinning. ''It's a shack in the woods.'' Well, hardly. But its cozy slip-covered sofas and threadbare Yankee chic are a far cry from the bijou glitz of his designer beige-and-gray bachelor pad in London. For the Connecticut house, Ms. Bushnell picked the vintage fabric for the living room curtains at a local antiques store with the risible name R. T. Facts, then just threw the fabric over the curtain rods. ''Yeah, I say, I'm going to sew them some day, but I really don't sew,'' she said. On a sunny Sunday afternoon, Ms. Bushnell wandered around in a bathing suit and red-and-white striped men's shirt, leading this reporter on a tour. ''Henry Kissinger lives up here, and we share the same plumber,'' she said. ''But that's as close as I've got to him.'' As she passed through the chaotic kitchen, the casually dressed Mr. Morris gave her a fulsome wink and offered her a beer glass full of Champagne. ''I always drink Champagne on Saturdays and Sundays,'' Ms. Bushnell said, as if imparting the secret of the miracle diet that keeps her slender and cheerful. On reaching the abandoned vegetable patch, which has weeds taller than her 5-foot-6-inch frame, Ms. Bushnell issued a confession. ''I'm not much of a gardener and I can't decorate,'' she said, sounding apologetic. ''I'm so bad at it. I'm just so lucky that Sara is my roommate, because she's great at all that stuff. I'm the kind of person who after 15 minutes in a place doesn't notice the furniture. I don't really notice my environment.'' For all the time she spends in the country, Ms. Bushnell seems quintessentially urban, making no claims to being domesticated. Asked why he fell for Ms. Bushnell, Mr. Morris laughed. ''It's not her chicken wings, I'll tell you that,'' he said.
 GORE GAINS IN MISSOURI -- Thanks in part to postconvention gains among women, Vice President Al Gore has caught up with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in Missouri, a swing state in which he had been trailing. The results of the poll, conducted last Thursday and Friday for The Kansas City Star by Mason-Dixon Polling and Research, found that 45 percent of 621 registered voters favored Mr. Gore and 41 percent favored Mr. Bush, a spread that technically left the race a dead heat because the margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points. Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee, had 2 percent, and Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party had 1 percent. In a Mason-Dixon poll conducted July 6 to 10, before the Republican and Democratic conventions, Mr. Gore trailed Mr. Bush by 11 points, 48 percent to 37 percent. GORE GAINS IN MISSOURI -- Thanks in part to postconvention gains among women, Vice President Al Gore has caught up with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in Missouri, a swing state in which he had been trailing. The results of the poll, conducted last Thursday and Friday for The Kansas City Star by Mason-Dixon Polling and Research, found that 45 percent of 621 registered voters favored Mr. Gore and 41 percent favored Mr. Bush, a spread that technically left the race a dead heat because the margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points. Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee, had 2 percent, and Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party had 1 percent. In a Mason-Dixon poll conducted July 6 to 10, before the Republican and Democratic conventions, Mr. Gore trailed Mr. Bush by 11 points, 48 percent to 37 percent. FLORIDA VOTES AS EXPECTED -- There were no surprises in Tuesday's primaries in Florida that picked Democratic and Republican candidates to compete for the Senate seat being vacated by Connie Mack, a Republican who is retiring. As expected, Representative Bill McCollum easily won the Republican primary, capturing 82 percent of the vote, and the state's insurance commissioner, Bill Nelson, coasted to a win in the Democratic primary, taking 77 percent of the vote. But the fall contest is expected to be one of the most competitive in the country. Democrats say Mr. Nelson has a real chance because Mr. McCollum, who had been counting on riding Gov. George W. Bush's coattails, no longer is assured of a good ride. ''Given Governor Bush's refusal to participate in the three debates proposed by the Commission on Presidential Debates, your refusal raises questions about whether the leaders of the Republican Party really want any honest discussion of the issues this year,'' Mr. Gephardt wrote. John Feehery, Mr. Hastert's press secretary, said Mr. Hastert was busy doing his job. ''He is a legislator, not a debater,'' Mr. Feehery said.
 Gov George W Bush, campaigning across Midwest, attacks Vice Pres Al Gore's economic program, holding his campaign promises would devour entire projected federal budget surplus; Bush campaign publishes newspaper advertisement quoting six Nobel laureates and nearly 300 other economists lauding Bush's fiscal approach; Bush speaks to American Legion national convention, Milwaukee; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush opened a new line of attack against his Democratic rival today, accusing Vice President Al Gore of making so many promises in this campaign that he would devour the entire $4.6 trillion federal surplus projected for the next decade. Mr. Bush chose to fight on the economy and fiscal policy on a day when Mr. Gore unveiled an ambitious and detailed economic blueprint and called for the creation of a $300 billion rainy day fund to be set aside as an emergency source of money if the economy slows down. Gov. George W. Bush opened a new line of attack against his Democratic rival today, accusing Vice President Al Gore of making so many promises in this campaign that he would devour the entire $4.6 trillion federal surplus projected for the next decade. Mr. Bush chose to fight on the economy and fiscal policy on a day when Mr. Gore unveiled an ambitious and detailed economic blueprint and called for the creation of a $300 billion rainy day fund to be set aside as an emergency source of money if the economy slows down. The Bush campaign took out a full page advertisement in some regional editions of USA Today quoting six Nobel laureates and nearly 300 other economists praising Mr. Bush's approach to fiscal policy. The Texas governor also seized on an analysis released by Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee, who said the cost of the vice president's programs could be as high as $906 billion more than he has estimated. ''I want America to add up all the promises my opponent has made,'' Mr. Bush told a crowd at an early morning airport rally in Scranton, Pa. ''All the promises over the course of this campaign. He has the easy style of campaigning. Go to one community and make a promise here, go to another community. When you add it all up, he's spent the entire surplus on bigger government. He won't admit it.'' Mr. Bush stood before a large blowup poster of the USA Today advertisement and used it to contrast his economic plan with Mr. Gore's. ''My plan has been endorsed by these Nobel prize winners and leading economists,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His plan has been endorsed by Bill Clinton.'' Mr. Bush's accusations were a mirror image of the Gore campaign's own assertions that it is the Republican candidate who is threatening the surplus because of his proposal to enact a $1.3 trillion tax cut over 10 years, and his spending programs. When Mr. Bush unveiled a $198 billion plan on Tuesday to change the Medicare system, Mr. Gore said, ''There is no money to pay for it if you give away all of the surplus in the form of a giant tax cut for the wealthy.'' At every campaign rally Mr. Bush is now featuring blue-collar families who he says would receive large reductions under his tax cut plan but would get little to nothing from Mr. Gore's proposals for smaller, more targeted tax cuts for such expenses as college education or home health care. ''We trust you with your money,'' Mr. Bush told crowds today as he promoted his tax cut in Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Indiana. ''We trust you to make decisions with your lives. We don't trust bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. We don't believe in planners and deciders making decisions on behalf of America.'' At another airport rally here he appropriated Mr. Gore's theme of helping ''working families'' and  thundered, ''Guess which plan is on the side of the working people? It's our plan. It's our plan.'' Mr. Bush's turn to economic themes today was echoed by his running mate, Dick Cheney, who campaigned before a chamber of commerce in Wilmington, Del. Mr. Cheney said he believed that the economic policies of President Ronald Reagan should get a strong measure of credit for the booming economy of the last eight years. Answering a question from a member of the audience, Mr. Cheney compared Mr. Bush's tax cut proposal to Reagan's own income tax cuts of two decades ago, saying it was ''exactly what we did to get this prosperity begun in the first place, back in the early 80's under President Reagan.'' Later, speaking to reporters, Mr. Cheney said that the boom was created by 20 years of strong leadership of the Federal Reserve Board, reductions in military spending after the cold war and the tax policies of President Reagan and even those of President George Bush. The Senate Republican analysis  found, for example, that Mr. Gore's proposals would overshoot the available surplus by as little as $27 billion over 10 years if the costs of Mr. Gore's spending plans are assumed to be at the low end of credible estimates. If the costs of the spending plans are assumed to be at the high end of estimates, Mr. Gore's budget would be in the red by as much as $906 billion over 10 years, the report said. For example, the report noted that Mr. Gore says his plan to increase retirement savings would cost $200 billion over 10 years, while other estimates put the cost at as much as $750 billion. The Gore campaign dismissed the report as partisan. The Bush campaign says that the governor's own plan leaves a $265 billion surplus. But John Cogan, an economics adviser to Mr. Bush, acknowledged today as he briefed reporters on Mr. Gore's spending, that the Bush figures do not account for the costs of deploying a missile defense system, but only for research and development. Mr. Bush has called for a far more robust system than the one that President Clinton had been contemplating at a cost of $60 billion. Mr. Cogan argued that Mr. Bush could offset the cost with other military spending savings. Mr. Bush also appeared today before the national convention of the American Legion, where he repeated calls for better military preparedness and better health care for veterans. Before he spoke, Alan Lance, the national commander, told the veterans' group that Mr. Gore had declined to appear before it because of a scheduling conflict. Mr. Lance said the vice president had offered a substitute, but was turned down because it ''isAl Gore Jr. who is running for president of the United States, not a substitute.''
 William Safire Op-Ed column on need to protect private, personal information now easily obtained over Internet; says several bills being considered in Congress would limit such easy access; notes presidential candidates George W Bush and Al Gore have responded to groundswell against invasions of privacy with their own suggestions; says voters should examine which man's party is serious about privacy issue before casting ballot in November (M) So do presidential candidates. George W. Bush was first to specify his support of ''opt-in,'' requiring sellers to seek informed consent of buyers before trading in personal information. And Al Gore, standing beside Amy Boyer's parents, said, ''I will make it a federal crime to buy or sell anyone's Social Security number.''
 John E Colbert letter, commenting on September 2 article, says Gov George W Bush dodges obvious test of his presidential skills by trying to avoid impartial debates set up by bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates Re ''Bush on Issues and Tactics in the Presidential Race'' (interview excerpts, Sept. 2): Re ''Bush on Issues and Tactics in the Presidential Race'' (interview excerpts, Sept. 2): George W. Bush runs attack ads against Al Gore's character after promising he would not. Mr. Bush dodges one obvious test of his presidential skills by trying to avoid the impartial debates set up by the Commission on Presidential Debates, while he demands that states lose federal funds if schools don't give standardized tests to students and publish the results. In these and other instances, Mr. Bush insults the intelligence of the American voter.
 Andrew M Wong letter, commenting on September 6 editorial on disagreements between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore over staging of presidential debates, says 'song-and-dance' routine practiced by both parties every four years is waste of time and detracts from candidates' ability to address issues that confront electorate
 Kevin W Williams letter, commenting on September 5 article, says Gov George W Bush's unilateral rejection of presidential debate format prepared by bipartisan commission does not advance image of candidate who purports to be consensus-builder willing to work with others to achieve best outcome Re ''TV Networks Jilted by Bush Won't Take Part in 2 Debates'' (front page, Sept. 5): The debate over presidential debates has given the American people some insight into the kind of president that George W. Bush would be.  He has indicated that if elected president, he would move forward with missile defense, despite opposition from Russia and allies of the United States. Re ''TV Networks Jilted by Bush Won't Take Part in 2 Debates'' (front page, Sept. 5): The debate over presidential debates has given the American people some insight into the kind of president that George W. Bush would be.  He has indicated that if elected president, he would move forward with missile defense, despite opposition from Russia and allies of the United States. Now, Mr. Bush unilaterally rejects the debate proposal prepared by a bipartisan commission in favor of his own plan. Do these actions really seem like the actions of someone who purports to be a consensus-builder willing to work with others to achieve the best outcome?
 Ray Lurie letter queries whether Gov George Bush's use of vulgarity in referring to New York Times reporter is indicative of how Republican presidential team hopes to restore dignity to Oval Office if elected You report (news article, Sept. 5) that George W. Bush used a vulgarity in referring to a reporter for The New York Times and that his running mate, Dick Cheney, concurred. Is this how the Republican team hopes to restore dignity to the Oval Office? You report (news article, Sept. 5) that George W. Bush used a vulgarity in referring to a reporter for The New York Times and that his running mate, Dick Cheney, concurred. Is this how the Republican team hopes to restore dignity to the Oval Office?
