 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on which presidential candidate better understands ordinary working stiffs; notes that both Democrats are poor, but also career politicians who have held office almost since puberty; recalls that George W Bush, about as successful at driling oil wells as Al Gore is at investing, got wealthy friends to help him buy Texas Rangers, while Dick Cheney's ability to fish and shoot his way to serious money should be inspiration to all careerists (M) This year, of the Democrats and Republicans on the national tickets, only Joe Lieberman is a lawyer, and only Al Gore was ever a full-time soldier. It's never been clear how much voters care if a president's experience with the world of work in any way resembles their own. Do weary parents juggling two careers and child-rearing resent hearing about George W. Bush's afternoon naps? Would middle-aged professionals who are too humiliated to admit they don't know the difference between a money market and a mutual fund feel an affinity for Al Gore, who keeps his savings in a passbook account? Both Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, are rich men, while Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman are not. Economically speaking, Mr. Gore may actually be downwardly mobile. He says he doesn't buy stock  because it might look like a conflict of interest, and Fortune magazine, analyzing what passes for the Gore  portfolio, once suggested the vice president ''could be a financial dolt.'' Mr. Bush, who was about as successful at drilling oil wells as Mr. Gore is in investing, struck it rich when he persuaded a group of wealthy associates to help him buy the Texas Rangers and then persuaded the town of Arlington to build said team a new stadium. Mr. Bush's own $600,000 investment thus became $14.9 million when the franchise was sold. The work he performed as the managing general partner included encouraging team spirit, and reportedly involved a lot of autograph-signing. This may not have given him much in common with the nation's stevedores, but Ms. Brinkley and the other model/activists of the world undoubtedly know what he's been through.
 Al Gore has said, ''Our military is the strongest and the best in the entire world.'' Al Gore has said, ''Our military is the strongest and the best in the entire world.'' This echoes statements by George W. Bush that today's servicemen and women battle ''back-to-back deployments, poor pay, shortages of spare parts and equipment, and rapidly declining readiness.'' In his speech at the Republican convention, Mr. Bush charged that two of the Army's 10 divisions were not ready for a major war. Lack of military readiness. Mr. Bush's charge that two army divisions were unprepared for war sounds serious, but is not particularly relevant. Every active duty force, every national guard and reserve unit is currently judged ready for combat according to a list of standards that are in many ways more appropriate for cold war missions and less appropriate for our troops that served in Bosnia, Kosovo and Rwanda. Troops need to be less like a tightly packed, hierarchical combat force, and more like a sophisticated, flexible police force.
 Editorial assesses prescription-drug proposals; says need for coverage is undeniable, but that any new benefit will carry substantial price tag; notes that George W Bush seems to be leaning toward private-market model for Medicare drug coverage, while Al Gore would fund new public program Both political parties launched advertising blitzes this week pledging that their candidates would help the elderly pay for costly prescription drugs more effectively. Vice President Al Gore has put forward a detailed plan for a Medicare drug benefit. Gov. George W. Bush is scrambling to produce a plan of his own to be unveiled next week. Both political parties launched advertising blitzes this week pledging that their candidates would help the elderly pay for costly prescription drugs more effectively. Vice President Al Gore has put forward a detailed plan for a Medicare drug benefit. Gov. George W. Bush is scrambling to produce a plan of his own to be unveiled next week. The Gore plan would pay for all drug costs of elderly people with incomes below about $12,000 a year for an individual or $14,000 a year for couples. Those with higher incomes who choose to participate would pay monthly premiums that would start at $25 and increase over time to $44. In return, Medicare would pay for half the cost of their prescriptions up to $5,000 a year. Once a beneficiary had paid $4,000 out of pocket in a year, the government would pay all remaining costs. The program is estimated to cost $253 billion over 10 years. Mr. Bush has said generally that he wants a drug benefit to be part of an overall Medicare reform. Ideally, Congress should both modernize Medicare -- by increasing competition, improving quality and controlling costs -- and create a long-overdue drug benefit. But given voter demand, it seems more likely that Congress will first pass a drug benefit and leave restructuring for later. The question is how to design a drug benefit that will provide affordable coverage and will not interfere with future Medicare reforms. Mr. Bush says he will offer full drug coverage now to the low-income elderly. He also says he will ''build on'' proposals in Congress that rely on private insurers to offer prescription drug coverage, with government subsidizing the costs. But many private insurers have rejected this approach as unworkable because they say they will not be able to sell policies at rates that retirees can afford. The private-market model also means that benefits would vary, and insurers would be able to pull out of any market they thought unprofitable. Any new drug benefit will carry a substantial price tag. The House Republican bill that passed in June and relies on private insurers would cost the federal government more than $150 billion over 10 years. Mr. Bush has not proposed spending any new money. His aides say that savings from other Medicare cuts could cover the tab, an unlikely proposition that Mr. Bush will need to document. Mr. Bush seems to be leaning toward a private-market model for Medicare drug coverage. He will have to explain how his plan would keep premiums down, induce insurer participation and guarantee the elderly benefits that cannot be withdrawn. Mr. Gore's proposal will spend substantial money on a new public program. It will be interesting to see how Mr. Bush hopes to achieve the same outcome with less government involvement and less money.
 These days there is lackluster speculation about whether Mr. Giuliani will dare challenge Gov. George E. Pataki in a primary for governor in 2002, should Mr. Pataki run for a third term, or whether Mr. Pataki might go to Washington in a Bush administration and leave the race ripe for the mayor. The mayor, if his comments this week are any indication, might still have more than $3 million banked for a running start. Mr. Giuliani has also expressed interest in running for mayor in 2005, as the law allows.
 Bush Ad Mocks Gore Character  Aides to Gov. George W. Bush said they had approved a television advertisement that strikes directly at Vice President Al Gore's character. They said the ad was intended as a ''tongue-in-cheek'' response to critical Democratic ads. The Democratic National Committee dropped plans for a commercial questioning Governor Bush's record in Texas, choosing to yield the spotlight to the new Republican attack ad in hope that it would backfire. Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, called for a re-examination of the nation's role in peacekeeping missions and said it was time to consider pulling American ground troops out of Kosovo and Bosnia.
 ''It's not something you are going to use a lot, but there are certain plays it'll give you an intimate look at what is happening,'' said Ed Goren, Fox's executive director. Goren said the Green Bay Packers at Denver Broncos preseason game provided an excellent example. Fox will use the camera in three games a week, Goren said. This week it will be Arizona at the Giants, Philadelphia at Dallas, and Carolina at Washington.
 Political leaders ''have sensed this disquiet, and want to respond to it,'' Professor Green said, either by speaking of religious faith or talking more about broad values, as Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, does in speaking of the need for ''prosperity with a purpose.''
 Speaking in Oregon earlier this month, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, said Clinton administration policies that restricted logging ''made the forests more dangerous to fire,'' although he did not blame the president for the fires. The fires have been at the heart of a clamorous debate in the West. On Tuesday, on the day that Vice President Al Gore made a campaign stop in Oregon, a number of groups that favor more logging took out full-page advertisements in the state, blaming the vice president for the fires.
 Al Gore broke a barrier by selecting Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate. Perhaps Senator Lieberman, in his recent remarks about religion in public life, has opened the door to the day when nonbelievers will be seen as acceptable candidates for highest offices.
 George W Bush's campaign commmercial featuring some of Al Gore's more embarrassing moments described; photo; map (S) The Republican National Committee is to begin running this 30-second commercial, titled ''Really,'' in 16 states today. It features some of the most embarrassing aspects of Vice President Al Gore's career, including his raising money at a Buddhist temple and his claim to have created the Internet. It is being shown in Arkansas, Florida, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, New Mexico, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Washington, West Virginia and Wisconsin. The Republican National Committee is to begin running this 30-second commercial, titled ''Really,'' in 16 states today. It features some of the most embarrassing aspects of Vice President Al Gore's career, including his raising money at a Buddhist temple and his claim to have created the Internet. It is being shown in Arkansas, Florida, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, New Mexico, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Washington, West Virginia and Wisconsin. ON THE SCREEN -- The setting is a peach-colored kitchen, with a small television atop a counter. On the television screen Vice President Gore is seen speaking, though there is no sound, in the White House briefing room on the day he said there was ''no controlling legal authority'' over how he raised money in the 1996 campaign. The screen goes fuzzy and then shows Mr. Gore nodding to a Buddhist monk, who is bowing at him. The screen shows monks in saffron robes testifying under oath and then shows Mr. Gore, a near smirk on his face, speaking at the Democratic National Convention. It then shows him in a ''Larry King Live'' interview saying, ''I took the initiative in creating the Internet.'' The camera returns to the kitchen. Flashed on the screen is a Web site, gorewillsayanything.com. THE SCRIPT -- A female narrator says: ''There's Al Gore, reinventing himself on television again. Like I'm not going to notice. Who's he going to be today? The Al Gore who raises campaign money at a Buddhist temple? Or the one who promises campaign finance reform? Really. Al Gore, claiming credit for things he didn't even do.'' Mr. Gore: ''I took the initiative in creating the Internet.'' ACCURACY -- The commercial, a compendium of some of Mr. Gore's most embarrassing public moments, uses Mr. Gore's own words and pictures of him to suggest that he has no credibility. The statement that Mr. Gore ''raises campaign money at a Buddhist temple'' is technically not correct because he did not actually ask for money at the temple, but that point has been lost. The larger question is whether it is fair to link these events and cast them as Mr. Gore's ''reinventing'' himself. Earlier this year, Mr. Gore publicly acknowledged that he was ''an imperfect messenger'' on the subject of fixing the campaign finance system, a point the commercial ignores. He has also said that he thinks his comment about the Internet was the biggest mistake of his campaign, although at the time his aides defended the claim and had various leaders in the high-tech field vouch for Mr. Gore's involvement in legislation that helped pave the way for the Internet. SCORECARD -- Perhaps the most striking aspect of the commercial is the sarcastic tone of the narrator. Analysts say sarcasm is a dangerous weapon in commercials because if no actual humor is evident, sarcasm can come across as petty and malicious and turn off swing voters. The tone may also detract from the message, which seeks to exploit Mr. Gore's vulnerability on the matter of credibility. The timing of this commercial -- unusually early and coinciding with the slide of Gov. George W. Bush in the polls -- suggests a certain desperation by Republicans and an implicit assumption that negative advertising works. Whether it will prove to be a breakthrough commercial of some sort remains to be seen, but it is certainly laying the groundwork for harsher attacks to come, from both sides.
 MANHATTAN: NADER ENDORSES GREEN -- Ralph Nader, the consumer activist and Green Party presidential candidate, yesterday endorsed Mark Green, New York City public advocate, for mayor in next year's election. Answering reporters' questions at a campaign stop in Chinatown, Mr. Nader said, ''I think Mark Green is the best mayoral candidate for New York.'' Mr. Green, for his part, praised Mr. Nader as ''the greatest consumer advocate of the century'' but said he regretted that he could not reciprocate the endorsement. He is backing Al Gore for president.
 The more politically volatile decision of whether to field the system -- and break the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 -- would be left to the next administration, whether that of Al Gore or George W. Bush.
 George W Bush's presidential campaign, after struggling for weeks to seize offensive from Al Gore, approves sharp attack commercial that strikes at Gore's character and mocks his appearance at fund-raising event at Buddhist temple in 1996; 30-second ad paid for by Republican National Committee will air in 16 states; photos; Bush canceled similar ad earlier; Gore responds by scaling back focus on patient bill of rights, to keep attention on ad that his campaign believes will backfire; Democrats charge Bush is breaking own promise not to engage in personal, negative attacks (M) After struggling for a week to seize the offensive from Vice President Al Gore, aides to Gov. George W. Bush said today that they had approved a new and sharp attack commercial that strikes directly at Mr. Gore's character and mocks his appearance at a fund-raising event at a Buddhist temple four years ago. The 30-second spot, paid for by the Republican National Committee, will go on the air on Friday in 16 states, and comes just a week after Mr. Bush personally blocked another commercial sponsored by the party that also questioned Mr. Gore's truthfulness. The move exposed rifts within the Republican camp over how to attack Mr. Gore without violating Mr. Bush's vow to keep his campaign positive. After struggling for a week to seize the offensive from Vice President Al Gore, aides to Gov. George W. Bush said today that they had approved a new and sharp attack commercial that strikes directly at Mr. Gore's character and mocks his appearance at a fund-raising event at a Buddhist temple four years ago. The 30-second spot, paid for by the Republican National Committee, will go on the air on Friday in 16 states, and comes just a week after Mr. Bush personally blocked another commercial sponsored by the party that also questioned Mr. Gore's truthfulness. The move exposed rifts within the Republican camp over how to attack Mr. Gore without violating Mr. Bush's vow to keep his campaign positive. Mr. Bush's aides said they had wholeheartedly approved the contents and tone of the new spot, which they described as ''tongue-in-cheek.'' They said it was a response to critical advertisements run by the Democrats against Mr. Bush. The commercial shows a television set on a kitchen counter with Mr. Gore on the screen and an unseen woman complaining that the vice president is ''reinventing himself on television again.'' At one point the commercial shows a picture of Mr. Gore at the Buddhist temple event in 1996 and another segment shows him saying, ''I took the initiative in creating the Internet.'' At that point, the narrator says, ''Yeah, and I invented the remote control.'' Predictably, the commercial sparked accusations and counteraccusations between the two campaigns over which one had ''gone negative'' first. Mr. Gore's camp wasted no time responding to the commercial, which was widely shown on television news programs and on the Internet during the day. Mr. Gore also scaled back plans to focus on a patients' bill of rights in the belief that the Republican advertisement would backfire and that the Democrats should not create news that would distract public attention from it. The new commercial is part of a broader, coordinated effort by the Republicans to raise doubts about Mr. Gore's ethics and integrity, which the Bush campaign clearly views as the vice president's greatest vulnerability. All this week, Mr. Bush has criticized Mr. Gore as being a weak leader who broke promises made during the 1992 campaign to cut taxes and expand prescription drug coverage. And today, in a speech at a high school in Holland, Ohio, Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of using ''empty rhetoric'' that had disillusioned young people. But this more aggressive strategy also comes at the end of a two-week period in which Mr. Gore, clearly enjoying a postconvention bounce in the polls, has forced Mr. Bush to defend himself on issues like tax cuts, prescription drug prices and when the candidates would be debating. Since the Democratic National Convention last month, Mr. Gore has pulled even with Mr. Bush in many national polls, and is even ahead in some swing states where he had previously trailed. For that reason, Democrats asserted today that Mr. Bush was turning negative in an effort to stanch weakening poll numbers and reinvigorate a lackluster campaign. They also accused Mr. Bush of hypocrisy, citing his pledge at the Republican National Convention in early August ''to change the tone of Washington to one of civility and respect.'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said Mr. Bush had ''broken his own promise not to engage in personal, negative attacks.'' ''We've seen this from Bush before, in the primaries,'' Mr. Hattaway added. ''When his back was against the wall, he went negative on John McCain. Now he's talked out of both sides of his mouth about changing the tone of the debate.'' Mr. Bush's aides have said they had every intention of endorsing commercials that raised questions about Mr. Gore's ethics. But the content of such advertisements has been a subject of debate among Mr. Bush's top advisers and among Republican officials. While campaign officials said they viewed questions about Mr. Gore's credibility as an important part of their message, they have also been mindful of their candidate's pledge to run a positive campaign. Just this afternoon, as the Republican Party was releasing the new commercial, Mr. Bush was telling a boisterous audience at a high school here that ''politics doesn't have to be ugly and mean.'' Strategists in the Bush campaign and in the Republican Party have said that the best way to deliver a tough advertisement questioning Mr. Gore's ethics was to use humor, so as to avoid appearing mean-spirited. ''It's a good-natured way of making a very important point,'' Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's director of communications, said of the new Republican spot. ''That is: the gaping credibility gap between what Vice President Gore says and what Vice President Gore does.'' ''This ad gets at what Al Gore's weaknesses are, but it doesn't do it in what I think some people would consider an unfair way,'' Mr. Goldstein said on Political Points, a joint Webcast of ABC News and the New York Times. But Bill Carrick, a Democratic consultant, said the commercial would undermine what has been one of Mr. Bush's prime selling points: his genial personality. ''The guy's biggest asset is his sunny, hopeful presentation of himself,'' Mr. Carrick said. ''Since the Democratic convention, the Bush people have been trying to become the very mean-spirited Republicans they have been trying to run away from.'' In the spot, titled ''Really,'' a woman can be heard commenting on various television images of Mr. Gore.  Mr. Gore is then shown standing beside Buddhist monks at the Hsi Lai Temple near Los Angeles in 1996. Mr. Gore contends he did not know the luncheon was a fund-raiser. But two Democratic fund-raisers were later found guilty for their roles in soliciting illegal campaign contributions from people, including monks, who attended the event. The woman narrator then says: ''Who's he going to be today? The Al Gore who raises campaign money at a Buddhist temple? Or the one who promises campaign finance reform?'' The Republican commercial that Mr. Bush ordered canceled last week featured excerpts from a six-year-old interview in which a stammering Mr. Gore said President Clinton had never lied in his political career. The commercial, which was never broadcast, suggests that Mr. Gore was refusing to acknowledge that Mr. Clinton had made deceptive remarks about his relationship with a White House intern. But the advertisement was actually based on an NBC News interview in which Mr. Gore was talking about his criticism of Oliver L. North, who was then a Senate candidate in Virginia. Mr. Bush later said he objected to the commercial because Mr. Gore's comments had been taken out of context and ''had nothing to do with the affairs of the White House.'' The last two weeks have been difficult for Mr. Bush. Last week, Mr. Bush acknowledged that he needed to do a better job selling his proposed across-the-board income tax cut -- and then struggled to provide a coherent explanation of the plan. This week, Mr. Bush's aides had pledged he would stick to his education agenda. But almost every day, other issues have intruded to dilute his message. Still, Mr. Bush has been able to ratchet up his criticisms of Mr. Gore's character. In two rousing speeches today Mr. Bush laced time and again into Mr. Gore's character and credibility.
 He also dismissed his opponents, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as candidates whose similarities (favoring businesses over workers, in Mr. Nader's view, and taking millions from corporate donors) outweighed their differences. He also dismissed his opponents, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as candidates whose similarities (favoring businesses over workers, in Mr. Nader's view, and taking millions from corporate donors) outweighed their differences. ''They are different in a few areas, but the rhetoric is more different than the reality,'' Mr. Nader said of Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore on ''Today,'' as about 300 people milled about on a Rockefeller Center sidewalk outside the studio. Some held signs demanding that the major candidates open the presidential debates to Mr. Nader and one of the Reform Party candidates, Patrick J. Buchanan. Two men made the point by wearing chicken suits to represent Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. After ''Today,'' Mr. Nader gave a separate interview on NBC's cable cousin, MSNBC, then crossed the street to the headquarters of the network's corporate parent, General Electric, where he criticized the company for polluting the Hudson River. He also attacked Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush for taking contributions from the company. ''It is time for General Electric to obey the law and pay for its poisoning of the Hudson River and stop lying and deceiving the public about the dangers,'' Mr. Nader said, referring to G.E.'s legal discharge of PCB's into the Hudson until 1977, when the chemicals were banned by the federal government. He called for Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to give back the money their campaigns had received from General Electric. At various points since announcing his candidacy, it appeared as if Mr. Nader could garner a high enough percentage of the vote -- mostly from Mr. Gore -- in several important states, including California and Michigan, to push Mr. Bush ahead. But recent polls have suggested that Mr. Nader's moment appears to be fading, given Mr. Gore's surge in the polls after the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. ''I don't care how much of a threat he is to Bush and Gore,'' said David Joseph, 33, a graduate student in French at Hunter College, outside the NBC studios yesterday morning. ''I want to see something new, something fresh in the debates.''
 Vice President Al Gore has repeatedly lobbed the same charge at his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who supports repealing the estate tax. And in vetoing the bill today, Mr. Clinton adopted the same sort of language heard from Mr. Gore on the campaign trail. ''I believe that this latest bill, this estate tax bill, is part of a series of actions and commitments that, when you add it all up would take us back to the bad old days of deficits, high interest rates and having no money to invest in our common future,'' Mr. Clinton said, echoing Mr. Gore's attacks on Mr. Bush's tax plans. Governor Bush, who has proposed a $1.3 trillion tax cut over 10 years, has endorsed the Republican estate tax repeal, incorporating it in his own plan. Today, Mindy Tucker, Mr. Bush's press secretary, accused Mr. Gore of ''showing weak leadership'' in ''standing by while his administration vetoed a bill that would help so many hard-working Americans and their families.'' Mr. Gore's proposal is more in line with the Democratic alternatives. Instead of phasing out the estate tax entirely, it would exempt all estates worth less than $5 million, and the results would be immediate. ''Most of the benefits under the Republican plan goes to the extremely wealthy,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a Gore campaign spokesman. Since the national conventions, both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have jousted over the scale and wisdom of tax cuts at a time when the country is prospering economically.
 Republican vice presidential nominee Dick Cheney calls for re-examination of nation's role in peacekeeping missions around world, and says it is time to consider recalling American ground troops from Kosovo and Bosnia; photo during campaign stop in Florida; Al Gore's campaign calls remarks irresponsible and White House asks Cheney to say just which deployments he opposes (M) The speech drew an angry response from Vice President Al Gore's campaign, which called Mr. Cheney's approach ''irresponsible,'' and it was sharply questioned at the White House as well. As the Bush and Gore campaigns continued to debate military preparedness today, the Pentagon released a quarterly report that found most of the nation's combat forces ready to perform their wartime missions. Mr. Cheney did not spell out a specific doctrine that he and Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, would follow if they won the election. But he called for applying a more rigorous standard of whether United States military intervention was warranted before committing troops to the field. The Gore campaign was quick to note that the United States has already sharply scaled back the number of troops it has on the ground in the Balkans. Kym Spell, a Gore campaign spokeswoman, said American troops accounted for 14 percent of the force in Kosovo and 18 percent of the force in Bosnia.
 He said he thought the markets were encouraged by the post-convention bounce in the polls by Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, because it suggested maintenance of the political status quo in Washington assuming Republicans maintain their majority in Congress. ''Divided government is better for financial markets,'' Mr. Strauss said.
 WITHDRAWN AD RUNS -- Last week, the Republican National Committee announced that it would not go through with plans to run a television advertisement that challenged the veracity of Vice President Al Gore. It conceded the advertisement could be considered misleading and notified stations that had received advanced copies of it not to broadcast it. But on Wednesday, the ad began running anyway in New Orleans after a technician at the local CBS affiliate pushed the wrong button. The advertisement included an excerpt from a 1994 television interview in which Mr. Gore said he could not think of a single lie told by President Clinton. It did not mention that the interview took place before Mr. Clinton met Monica Lewinsky. Officials at the New Orleans station, WWL-TV, said the advertisement was pulled after several viewers complained. But Gore campaign officials are not complaining; several had said last week they hoped it would run, to create a backlash against Gov. George W. Bush.
 The best work in the series comes, not surprisingly, from Spike Jonze, who sprang exuberantly from the video world into film, with the inventive ''Being John Malkovich'' (and more recently into the world of politics, with his biographical documentary of Al Gore for the Democratic convention). His ''Oh So Quiet'' music video for the Icelandic pop star Bjork, set in a Goodyear tire store, is an extravagantly produced homage to Hollywood musicals of the 1930's. Bjork gleefully high-kicks and prances in an orange dress, looking happy to be in this bright, amusing little spectacle, where the music and pictures actually seem to have something to do with one another (even if they don't).
 Democratic National Committee pulls commercial questioning Gov George W Bush's record in Texas, instead yielding spotlight to new Republican attack ad against Gore, in hopes that it will backfire (M) The Democratic National Committee abandoned plans today to release a commercial that seriously questions Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, choosing to yield the spotlight to a new Republican attack advertisement against Vice President Al Gore in the hope that it will backfire. And after news reports about the Republican advertisement appeared this morning, Mr. Gore himself immediately revised his plans for the day, backing away from a speech about health care so that the Republicans' message -- an assault on Mr. Gore's credibility -- would come through loud and clear. The Democratic National Committee abandoned plans today to release a commercial that seriously questions Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, choosing to yield the spotlight to a new Republican attack advertisement against Vice President Al Gore in the hope that it will backfire. And after news reports about the Republican advertisement appeared this morning, Mr. Gore himself immediately revised his plans for the day, backing away from a speech about health care so that the Republicans' message -- an assault on Mr. Gore's credibility -- would come through loud and clear. Mr. Gore then deployed Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, his vice presidential running mate, to denounce the commercial. ''I'm very sad to tell you that today, rather than focusing on the serious issues before our country, our opponents have hit the airwaves with paid political negative personal attack ads,'' Mr. Lieberman said at a rally in Seattle, with Mr. Gore standing behind him. ''And that's wrong.'' Democratic officials said they believed that the Republican commercial would backfire as being unfair, and they did all they could to promote that impression. They also said that releasing their own attack against Mr. Bush now would have undermined their own credibility in trying to brand Mr. Bush as too negative, though they acknowledged that they were saving that commercial for later. When Mr. Gore followed Mr. Lieberman to the lectern, he delivered his standard stump speech, with only a modest emphasis on the planned topic of the day: a patients' bill of rights. In stark contrast to the other health-care speeches he delivered this week, Mr. Gore pointedly chose not to criticize Mr. Bush's record. The point, Gore aides said, was not to distract from news of the Republican commercial. The commercial uses pictures of Mr. Gore greeting monks at a much-maligned fund-raising event at a Buddhist temple in California and at a separate event taking credit for creating the Internet. Asked whether the commercial was negative, Bill Pascoe, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee, said: ''This is not a personal attack. This deals specifically with Gore's credibility on campaign finance, the issue that he says is his No. 1 priority, and that makes a discussion of his credibility fair game.'' He added, ''What's negative about merely showing video clips of Al Gore saying things?''
 Mr. Palast stated that the chairman of Green Mountain Energy Company, Sam Wyly, is a former business partner of George W. Bush. He is not.
