 CLEVELAND INDIANS--Recalled RHP Jim Brower, LHP Cameron Cairncross, OF Dave Roberts and RHP Jake Westbrook from Buffalo of the International League. Placed Westbrook on the 60-day disabled list. Purchased the contract of RHP Chris Nichting from Buffalo.  DETROIT TIGERS--Activated 1B Tony Clark and C Robert Fick from the 15-day disabled list. Recalled LHP Sean Runyan from Toledo of the International League. Purchased the contract of Rodney Lindsey from Jacksonville of the Southern League.  KANSAS CITY ROYALS--Activated C Jorge Fabregas from the 15-day disabled list.  MINNESOTA TWINS--Recalled OF Brian Buchanan from Salt Lake of the PCL.  YANKEES--Activated 2B Chuck Knoblauch and RHP Ramiro Mendoza from the 15-day disabled list. Transferred LHP Alan Watson from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list. Purchased the contract of OF Ryan Thompson from Columbus of the International League. Recalled RHP Craig Dingman from Columbus.  OAKLAND ATHLETICS--Recalled C A.J. Hinch from Sacramento of the PCL. Activated RHP T.J Matthews from the 15-day disabled list.  SEATTLE MARINERS--Activated OF Jay Buhner from the 15-day disabled list. Recalled RHP Frankie Rodriguez, OF Charles Gipson and RHP Kevin Hodges from Tacoma of the PCL. Purchased the contract of INF Brian Lesher from Tacoma.  TAMPA BAY DEVIL RAYS--Recalled OF Kenny Kelly and LHP Trevor Enders from Orlando of the Southern League and INF Jace Brewer from Charleston, SC of the South Atlantic League. Activated INF Damian Rolls from the 60-day disabled list. Sent RHP Billy Taylor outright to Durham of the International League.  TEXAS RANGERS--Activated LHP Darren Oliver from the 15-day disabled list. Recalled RHP Jonathan Johnson from Oklahoma of the PCL.  TORONTO BLUE JAYS--Designated LHP Eric DuBose for assignment. Transferred OF DeWayne Wise and 2B Homer Bush from the 15 to the 60-day disabled list. Recalled OF Vernon Wells from Syracuse of the International League.
 Excerpts from interview with Gov George W Bush (M)0 Following are excerpts from an interview with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times: Following are excerpts from an interview with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times: ''I'm going to say -- and I'm going to continue talking about -- missed opportunities by this administration. I find it amazing, and I think America will, too, that some of the same campaign issues they ran on in '92 are issues they run on in the year 2000: a middle-class tax cut. That was the cornerstone of their fiscal policy in '92; they said, vote for us, we'll give you a middle-class tax cut. Al Gore is saying, vote for me, I'll give you a targeted middle-class tax cut. Prescription drugs and Medicare. Social Security reform. These are issues that still exist; my opponent has to campaign on them because they haven't been solved.'' . . . Q. And if they judge for Gore? A. No, I wouldn't. I've said that publicly. I would not. Because I understand the commitment to which we'll be bound, but I will work with our allies to lay the groundwork to begin to take up more of the peacekeeping role in Bosnia and Kosovo. The model that I thought made a lot of sense was the East Timor model where the United States provided needed logistical support to, in this case, Australian troops, to help keep the peace. We need to review all the missions. I think Haiti was a failure -- $2 billion. And our point is that the mission needs to be focused and Clinton, the Gore campaign, is trying to say we're the strongest military in the world. Yeah. That's not the question. I think people recognize that. The question is, will we be the strongest in the world to the point where we can keep the peace. I look forward to this debate. I'm going to continue bringing up the issue. It is a real issue. It is an important issue. And it's not only what the military looks like today, it's what the military will look like tomorrow.
 The question of who would get what under Gov. George W. Bush's tax-cut plan, while legitimate, is not the real issue (''Bush Tax Plan: The Debate Takes Shape,'' front page, Aug. 26). The question should be what would be done with the money that would become available. If it went to wealthy taxpayers, it would probably be spent on bigger houses or invested in the stock market. The question of who would get what under Gov. George W. Bush's tax-cut plan, while legitimate, is not the real issue (''Bush Tax Plan: The Debate Takes Shape,'' front page, Aug. 26). The question should be what would be done with the money that would become available. If it went to wealthy taxpayers, it would probably be spent on bigger houses or invested in the stock market.
 Duncan Osborne letter on Aug 26 article comparing Gov George W Bush's tax proposal with Pres Ronald Reagan's tax cuts ''Bush Tax Plan: The Debate Takes Shape'' (front page, Aug. 26) compares George W. Bush's current proposal with President Ronald Reagan's tax cuts. What you do not say is that Mr. Reagan made up the revenue shortfalls his tax cuts created by borrowing billions of dollars. That is Mr. Reagan's real legacy. ''Bush Tax Plan: The Debate Takes Shape'' (front page, Aug. 26) compares George W. Bush's current proposal with President Ronald Reagan's tax cuts. What you do not say is that Mr. Reagan made up the revenue shortfalls his tax cuts created by borrowing billions of dollars. That is Mr. Reagan's real legacy. What both Mr. Bush and Al Gore need to guarantee is that any tax cuts will not be offset by borrowing that will be a burden of future administrations and taxpayers. What they will do for us now is not enough, especially when today's tax giveback carries a punishing cost years later.
 In contrast, the Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, has said that the ABM Treaty, in which the two superpowers sought to prevent nuclear war by agreeing to remain equally vulnerable to the other's attack, is an anachronism of the cold war. His top foreign policy advisers believe the treaty should be scrapped, paving the way for a sea-or space-based missile defense system. While Mr. Clinton appears to have listened hard to all those arguments, Mr. Bush and his defense experts, as well as some conservative Democrats, have brushed many of them aside. Broadly, the Bush camp argues that the ABM Treaty is an outmoded piece of security architecture that does not fit the needs of a world where a handful of countries -- North Korea, Iraq, Libya, Iran -- have or will have the capability of posing a nuclear threat against the United States. Mr. Bush picked up on this theme in a speech last May in Washington. Answering a question, he said that the ABM Treaty was an obstruction ''that makes it hard for us to fully explore the options available.'' The starkest declaration for the need to do away with the ABM Treaty came from Mr. Bush's senior foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, who was a Soviet expert on his father's National Security Council. In another difference with the Clinton approach, Ms. Rice has said that a Bush Administration would want to make an anti-missile system available to America's European allies, ensuring that the defense of the European allies was not separated from the defense of the United States.
 The presidential nominees Al Gore and George W. Bush both welcomed President Clinton's announcement, but from different perspectives. Bush Defends Attack Ad As Response to Gore Ads  Gov. George W. Bush, interviewed aboard his campaign plane, defended a new ad that challenged the credibility and character of Vice President Al Gore, saying it was a way to counter Gore ads against him. He also signaled that his frequent pledge to ''change the tone'' of politics would not prevent him from raising questions about Mr. Gore's truthfulness and leadership abilities. At a campaign appearance before 2,000 people in Louisiana, Mr. Bush assailed Mr. Gore's credibility. Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, said that if elected, he would forfeit $3.5 million in stock options for Halliburton, the energy services company he left to run for office. Debate commission officials rejected Bush campaign efforts seeking revisions to the locations and schedules of three debates in October. Officials said the arrangements were too far along. Mr. Bush said aides were studying options.
 STUMP AROUND THE CLOCK -- Vice President Al Gore is planning a round-the-clock Labor Day tour of several battleground states to emphasize the ticket's dedication to workers. Mr. Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, his running mate, start on Sunday in Philadelphia, where they will meet with construction workers, then they fly to Flint, Mich., for an 11 p.m. visit with hospital workers. Next, they are off to Tampa, Fla., for a 5 a.m. visit to a diner and breakfast with firefighters. The two split at that point, with Mr. Gore flying to Pittsburgh for an afternoon Labor Day rally, which will include John Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Mr. Lieberman breaks off for Detroit. Mr. Gore and his entourage move on to Louisville for a night rally at the Louisville Motor Speedway. STUMP AROUND THE CLOCK -- Vice President Al Gore is planning a round-the-clock Labor Day tour of several battleground states to emphasize the ticket's dedication to workers. Mr. Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, his running mate, start on Sunday in Philadelphia, where they will meet with construction workers, then they fly to Flint, Mich., for an 11 p.m. visit with hospital workers. Next, they are off to Tampa, Fla., for a 5 a.m. visit to a diner and breakfast with firefighters. The two split at that point, with Mr. Gore flying to Pittsburgh for an afternoon Labor Day rally, which will include John Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Mr. Lieberman breaks off for Detroit. Mr. Gore and his entourage move on to Louisville for a night rally at the Louisville Motor Speedway.
 Gov George W Bush tells over 2,000 supporters in Lafayette, La, that Clinton administration has repeatedly failed to fulfill its campaign pledges of past; photo (M) Undaunted by a blistering sun, Gov. George W. Bush delivered a fiery denunciation of Vice President Al Gore's credibility today, telling more than 2,000 sweaty but boisterous supporters that the Clinton administration had repeatedly failed to fulfill its campaign pledges of the past. Focusing on a theme likely to be a central part of his fall strategy, Mr. Bush mocked his Democratic opponent for making pledges this year that sounded like ones he made in 1992: to cut taxes on the middle class and create a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. Undaunted by a blistering sun, Gov. George W. Bush delivered a fiery denunciation of Vice President Al Gore's credibility today, telling more than 2,000 sweaty but boisterous supporters that the Clinton administration had repeatedly failed to fulfill its campaign pledges of the past. Focusing on a theme likely to be a central part of his fall strategy, Mr. Bush mocked his Democratic opponent for making pledges this year that sounded like ones he made in 1992: to cut taxes on the middle class and create a prescription drug benefit for the elderly. ''It's kind of like an echo from the past,'' Mr. Bush said. ''They're having to campaign on it again. But our message is: You had your chance, you have not led, and we will.'' On a day when the Republicans began broadcasting a tough new commercial attacking Vice President Al Gore's character, Mr. Bush continued to vow that he would elevate political discourse in Washington if elected. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said of Mr. Bush's remarks, ''It's hypocritical of Mr. Bush to talk about a change of tone in Washington while launching a negative personal attack.'' The two weeks since the end of the Democratic convention have not been particularly good for Mr. Bush, who has seen his lead in most national polls evaporate. Yet in a morning news conference aboard his campaign plane, Mr. Bush expressed few concerns and said he felt that the campaign was ''in excellent shape.'' ''Not only do I feel we're in good shape, by looking at the polls, I feel our team is unified and enthused, and I'm very pleased with where we are in the campaign,'' Mr. Bush said. Mr. Bush's aides often cite the size of his crowds as evidence of his momentum. He has drawn thousands of energetic supporters in the last few days. And while Mr. Bush seemed subdued early in the week, on Thursday and again today he looked loose, confident and animated. Accusing Mr. Gore of being unable to work with Republicans, Mr. Bush praised a Democratic senator from Louisiana, John B. Breaux, who has co-written a bipartisan plan for revamping Medicare that Mr. Bush broadly supports. Mr. Gore opposes the plan, which calls for introducing more private competition into the Medicare system. ''It's time to bring Republicans and Democrats together to make sure the promise of Medicare is kept to our seniors,'' Mr. Bush said. Many people in the audience here were pleased with the Republicans' tougher tone this week, saying they were worried that Mr. Bush was slipping a bit. ''I told him he has to go on the offensive,'' said Elaine Curry, 55, a secretary to an oil company who met Mr. Bush today. ''Dang, it's a campaign, and you have to fight.''
 Pres Clinton, in Georgetown University speech, says he does not believe that technology is ready for effective national defense system, and passes decision on moving ahead with project to his successor; says threat of future missile attacks is real and growing and that US has to search for new defenses; Gov George W Bush criticizes administration's handling of missile defense program; Vice Pres Al Gore supports Clinton's decision; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, has largely embraced the administration's stand of building a limited land-based system without withdrawing from the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972. The Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, favors a broader system that could include sea- and space-based arms. On May 23, Mr. Bush signaled his support for Mr. Clinton's leaving the decision to the next administration rather than committing the country to a course based on incomplete information, saying, ''No decision would be better than a flawed agreement that ties the hands of the next president and prevents America from defending itself.'' But today, Mr. Bush adopted a much sharper tone, criticizing the administration's handling of the missile defense program. ''I welcome the opportunity to act where they have failed to lead by developing and deploying effective missiles to protect all 50 states and our friends and allies,'' he said. In a statement, Mr. Gore said he supported Mr. Clinton's decision, which aides said he had discussed with the president, and implicitly criticized Mr. Bush's plan, which would require the United States to withdraw from the ABM Treaty. The accord bars Washington and Moscow from building national missile defenses, unless Moscow agrees to changes, which it has refused. ''As president, I would oppose the kinds of missile defense systems that would unnecessarily upset strategic stability and threaten to open the gates for a renewed arms race with Russia and a new arms race with China,'' Mr. Gore said. Senator Trent Lott, the majority leader, said, ''This is yet another example of the Clinton-Gore administration's legacy of missed opportunities.'' In the last several months, the domestic political landscape changed as well. With Republicans like Senators Hagel and Smith calling for Mr. Clinton to defer, Mr. Gore was shielded to some extent from any fallout if the administration left the decisions to the next president. By early last year, the White House was pledging its conditional support and $10.5 billion over six years to a limited system. Last summer, Mr. Clinton signed into law the National Missile Defense Act, which requires the United States to field a national defense against a limited strike when technologically feasible.  An original sponsor of the legislation was Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat who is now Mr. Gore's running mate.
 Cheney Says He Would Sell Options  Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential candidate, said that if elected he would forfeit stock options worth $3.5 million in the energy services company that he left to run for office. Mr. Cheney had been challenged by the Gore campaign for inviting a conflict of interest if he owned the options while in office. He was precluded from selling the options, which he was awarded for his service as chief executive of the Halliburton Company, until 2001 at the earliest, and their value by then would be affected by the company's profits, which are sensitive to the price of oil. [A1.]
 THIS little tidbit comes from the comedian Dennis Miller, who as the new analyst for ''Monday Night Football'' has gotten more press than Al Gore. It definitely falls under the category of too much information. THIS little tidbit comes from the comedian Dennis Miller, who as the new analyst for ''Monday Night Football'' has gotten more press than Al Gore. It definitely falls under the category of too much information.
 When Mr. Cheney talks about overcommitment of American forces, he is referring to United States participation in peacekeeping and peace-enforcement missions, like the NATO-led operations in Bosnia and Kosovo. Although the Bush campaign now says it would begin discussions on scaling back American military forces' participation in the Balkans, the Clinton administration cannot be seriously faulted for joining its main allies in these life-saving interventions. On another defense matter that has emerged as a campaign issue, President Clinton made the right call yesterday when he decided to leave it to the next president to decide whether and when to construct a national missile defense. Vice President Al Gore sees a strong case for building a limited missile defense and hopes he can persuade Russia to accept it within the framework of existing arms control treaties. Gov. George W. Bush wants to consider more robust defensive technologies and hopes to deploy an effective missile shield quickly. The president's decision to delay gives them a chance to proceed more carefully in choosing the right system and easing the concerns of Russia, China and America's skeptical NATO allies.
 Al Gore has aggressively courted the independents by focusing on issues in which they have shown an interest -- pledging to fight special interests and move on campaign finance reform -- as well as by choosing a maverick Democrat, Joe Lieberman, as his running mate. Al Gore has aggressively courted the independents by focusing on issues in which they have shown an interest -- pledging to fight special interests and move on campaign finance reform -- as well as by choosing a maverick Democrat, Joe Lieberman, as his running mate. George W. Bush, by contrast, has made only modest efforts to appeal to independents on the reform issues that are dear to them. To swing these voters his way, he should reconsider his failure to embrace the reform agenda that made Senator John McCain a viable opponent to him in the early primaries. To win the votes of Stewart and the other independents, Republicans will need more than campaign aesthetics to show Mr. Bush as a ''different kind of Republican.'' He has rejected the harsh partisan tone of the House Republicans, but he has failed to embrace the proposals for reform that have energized independent voters in the past. First, Governor Bush should find a way to the separate himself from the special interests that are anathema to many independents. He cannot afford to remain as close as he has been in the past to corporations like those he favored with tax cuts in Texas. A great vulnerability of Vice President Gore is the fund-raising scandals, despite his vow to sign a bill reforming the campaign finance system. Yet unlimited soft money contributions seem to have become a Republican sacrament, binding big-business lobbyists and the religious right. Without taking a 180-degree turn on the issue, Governor Bush  could call for the elimination of all corporate, union and individual soft money in return for raising limitations on so-called hard money contributions. The Democrats are likely to skewer Mr. Bush and the other oilman on the Republican ticket, Dick Cheney, as the J. R. Ewing dream team. Mr. Cheney's lavish severance package from Halliburton further reinforces that image. To deflect this attack, the Republicans should take on corporate welfare as discordant with fiscal conservative principles. Mr. Bush should find a corporate sacred cow to skewer, perhaps the notorious federal sugar subsidy or innumerable loopholes. Finally, the Bush campaign should place more emphasis on debt reduction rather than a huge tax cut targeted to the most wealthy. In opinion surveys, independents and followers of Ross Perot have consistently placed debt retirement before tax cuts. Without walking away from his tax plan, Governor Bush should reassure voters that he will move to postpone the cuts in the future if revenues were not sufficient for tax reduction. Governor Bush embodies many of the qualities the largely centrist, fiscally conservative independents are looking for in a president. It should not be difficult for him to make the logical moves on political reform that would secure their support. Marshall Wittmann, who is joining the Hudson Institute as a senior fellow, was deputy assistant secretary of health under George Bush.
 But that does not change the fact that the Gore-Lieberman ticket has pledged to make reform its top priority, while the Bush-Cheney ticket opposes it. That is what counts.
 Mr. Cheney had been challenged by the Gore campaign for inviting a conflict of interest if he owned the options while in office. He was precluded from selling the options, which he was awarded for his service as chief executive of the Halliburton Company, until 2001 at the earliest, and their value by then would have been affected by the company's profits, which are sensitive to the price of oil and United States energy policy. Mr. Cheney had been challenged by the Gore campaign for inviting a conflict of interest if he owned the options while in office. He was precluded from selling the options, which he was awarded for his service as chief executive of the Halliburton Company, until 2001 at the earliest, and their value by then would have been affected by the company's profits, which are sensitive to the price of oil and United States energy policy. If he had kept the stock options, any decision in a Bush-Cheney administration would have been scrutinized for whether it was helping Halliburton's stock price. Mr. Cheney's financial disclosures, required to be filed with the Federal Election Commission within 30 days of his nomination, also showed that when he was picked by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas as his running mate, Mr. Cheney received hundreds of thousands of dollars from Electronic Data Systems Corporation, and that his wife, Lynne, has been paid as a director of the  Lockheed Martin Corporation, a major defense contractor, since 1995.  Mr. Cheney was on the board of E.D.S. but resigned to run for vice president. E.D.S. which was founded by Ross Perot, was bought by General Motors in 1984 but was split off from G.M. in 1996. The Gore campaign was not impressed by the decision. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said: ''Cheney got caught with his hand in the cookie jar, and now he is trying to put the cookie back. It's a last-ditch attempt to separate the Bush-Cheney ticket from big oil.'' Mr. and Mrs. Cheney's tax returns not only showed a sharp increase in adjusted gross income from 1992 to 1999, they also showed total contributions to charities of $209,832, or just over 1 percent of their 10-year income of $20,677,742. Trying to put a more generous face on those figures, a statement by the Bush-Cheney campaign said $442,152 actually went to charity. The Cheneys were under no legal obligation to release the income tax returns, although many candidates, including Vice President Al Gore, have done so. In April, Mr. Bush released information about his taxes, but not the actual returns. At that time, a Bush spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said, ''Traditionally the governor has made his tax return available in October.''
 Commission on Presidential Debates tells Gov George W Bush's aides that it will not revise locations or schedules for three debates in Oct that Bush campaign had sought to modify; photo (M) Officials of an independent commission that organizes the presidential debates told aides to Gov. George W. Bush yesterday that they would not revise the locations or schedules for three debates in October that the Bush campaign had sought to modify. Janet Brown, executive director of the Commission on Presidential Debates, said that the panel's position was spelled out at a meeting in Washington with Joseph Allbaugh, the Bush campaign manager, and two other Bush lieutenants involved in debate preparations. Ms. Brown said she told the Bush officials that the arrangements were far too advanced and the job of ensuring network coverage too complex for the process to be tampered with. Officials of an independent commission that organizes the presidential debates told aides to Gov. George W. Bush yesterday that they would not revise the locations or schedules for three debates in October that the Bush campaign had sought to modify. Janet Brown, executive director of the Commission on Presidential Debates, said that the panel's position was spelled out at a meeting in Washington with Joseph Allbaugh, the Bush campaign manager, and two other Bush lieutenants involved in debate preparations. Ms. Brown said she told the Bush officials that the arrangements were far too advanced and the job of ensuring network coverage too complex for the process to be tampered with. Bush campaign officials have recently indicated that they are not happy with some aspects of the debates organized by the bipartisan commission, which has supervised the presidential debates since 1988. They have said their objections include the plan to broadcast all three debates in prime time, and the holding of the first debate at the University of Massachusetts in Boston because the location is adjacent to the John F. Kennedy Library, an institution commemorating a Democratic president. Asked yesterday why he was reluctant to agree to the commission debates, Mr. Bush said, ''I'm looking at the options. You know, it seems like to me that there will be some really interesting formats other than what we're told will have to be the format.'' Mr. Bush's resistance is the sticking point in the October showdowns. Vice President Al Gore has already agreed to the commission's proposals; in fact, he has accepted invitations to more than 50 debates, though his campaign chairman, William M. Daley, added the stipulation yesterday that Mr. Bush must consent to the commission debates before other offers would be entertained. Aides to Mr. Bush, meanwhile, have been exploring other options, meeting with officials of broadcast and cable networks this week to discuss debate formats. Mr. King might well be the gentle sort of inquisitor that the Bush camp seeks. Mr. Bush is said to prefer formats in which the candidates can converse, rather than formally debate -- an activity at which Mr. Gore is generally thought to be the more skilled. Mindy Tucker, a Bush spokeswoman, would say only that CNN's proposal was ''one of the many letters that have come in.'' But it is unlikely that one network would win such a coveted designation, because Mr. Gore -- who met yesterday in Nashville with Mr. Daley and others advising him on debate preparations -- says the commission's debates are his priority. ''We believe the commission schedule is the best way to conduct debates, so that they are seen by the most people on free television,'' said Mark Fabiani, the Gore campaign's communications director. ''Once the Bush campaign agrees to the commission's presidential debates, we then would be pleased to consider these other opportunities.'' Ms. Brown said she told Mr. Bush's representatives that the commission had always been open to employing varying formats for the debates, which are to occur on Oct. 3 in Boston; Oct. 11 in Winston-Salem, N.C., and Oct. 17 in St. Louis. She added that the panel would consider Mr. Bush's proposal that a second vice-presidential debate be scheduled.
 Gov George W Bush defends Republican advertisement that challenges credibility and character of Vice Pres Al Gore; says his pledge to change tone of politics will not prevent him from raising questions about Gore's truthfulness and leadership abilities; says commercial, which brings up Gore's 1996 fund-raising appearance at Buddhist temple, is way to undermine public confidence in Gore's own accusations against him; Bush photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush today defended a new advertisement that challenges the credibility and character of Vice President Al Gore and signaled that his frequent pledge to ''change the tone'' of politics would not prevent him from raising questions about Mr. Gore's truthfulness and leadership abilities in the coming weeks. In an extended interview on his campaign plane, Mr. Bush repeatedly remarked that the Democrats had now run $30 million in advertisements against him. And he cast the new Republican commercial ridiculing Mr. Gore and bringing up the vice president's 1996 fund-raising appearance at a Buddhist temple as a way to undermine public confidence in Mr. Gore's own accusations against him. Gov. George W. Bush today defended a new advertisement that challenges the credibility and character of Vice President Al Gore and signaled that his frequent pledge to ''change the tone'' of politics would not prevent him from raising questions about Mr. Gore's truthfulness and leadership abilities in the coming weeks. In an extended interview on his campaign plane, Mr. Bush repeatedly remarked that the Democrats had now run $30 million in advertisements against him. And he cast the new Republican commercial ridiculing Mr. Gore and bringing up the vice president's 1996 fund-raising appearance at a Buddhist temple as a way to undermine public confidence in Mr. Gore's own accusations against him. ''If this is what's going to happen in the campaign, we've got to lay the groundwork: this is a fellow that will say anything,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to Mr. Gore. ''The point is, this is a way to help inoculate me about what has come and is coming.'' [Excerpts, Page A14] Mr. Bush spoke, for about 45 minutes, at a pivotal moment in his campaign. He was not only heading into the Labor Day weekend and the final two months of the race, but also trying to emerge from a bumpy two weeks during which he was often thrown off his chosen message and put on the defensive. In addition, there have been accumulating signs that Mr. Bush's sustained advantage over Mr. Gore in the polls has vanished. In recent days, several nationwide polls have shown the race to be a dead heat, and a Newsweek poll released today found Mr. Gore with a lead of 10 percentage points. Even today, on his campaign plane, Mr. Bush was being pelted with questions that had nothing to do with his designated themes of the week. During an impromptu news conference, reporter after reporter sharply questioned him about how the attack commercial, which is being run by the Republican National Committee with the Bush campaign's approval, squared with his promise to take the high road. Asked whether he was raising questions about Mr. Gore's truthfulness, he said, ''No, I'm just saying this is a man who'll say things, like, he's for campaign funding reform and then conveniently forgets he went to the Buddhist temple.'' Over the subsequent interview, Mr. Bush projected a demeanor that was alternately intense and jocular, cutting and funny, and that never showed any fissures of worry. He went out of his way to assert that he was pleased with the state of the race. On the question of Mr. Cheney's retirement package, which includes lucrative stock options in Halliburton, an energy services company that could be affected by federal policy, Mr. Bush said he had known about the package when he picked Mr. Cheney as a running mate. ''He will deal with the options issue in a way that is comforting to the people,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Dick Cheney's an honest man.'' At another moment, Mr. Bush's eyes grew wet as he reflected, in an almost elegiac tone, on the ''amazing experience'' of running for president. Mr. Bush referred several times to his father's presidential campaigns, drawing comfort from the lessons of the past and the perspective it gave him. He acknowledged that many political analysts believed he could not beat an incumbent administration in peaceful, prosperous times. He continued, ''Therefore George H. W. Bush could not possibly win,'' and added that each campaign brought ''a historical certainty that always seems to get defeated.'' Mr. Bush provided some insight into how his campaign would engage Mr. Gore over the next few weeks, making clear that he would keep trumpeting the accusation that Mr. Gore and President Clinton had squandered their time in the White House and failed to do what they had told Americans they would. ''I find it amazing -- and I think America will, too -- that some of the same campaign issues they ran on in '92 are issues they run on in the year 2000,'' Mr. Bush said, lumping Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton together. He mentioned Medicare reform, Social Security reform and a middle-class tax cut. Asked how he would persuade Americans that the Democratic administration, not the leaders of the Republican-led Congress, bore the blame, he said, in reference to Mr. Gore, ''It sounds like this is a campaign where they're going to be willing to say, 'Give me credit for things that went well, but let's blame others for failure.' And to me I think Americans will realize that's not what a leader does.'' He brushed aside any suggestion that voters might decide that his engagement of Mr. Gore contradicted his promise to ''change the tone,'' a claim so central to his candidacy that it was the designated theme -- printed on banners -- for the week coming straight out of the Republican National Convention. ''This is politics,'' Mr. Bush said. In much the same manner that he dealt with questions about the advertisements, Mr. Bush dismissed any idea that voters were paying attention to the debate over presidential debates and the fact that he has not agreed to the three forums proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. Mr. Gore has accepted those invitations. Mr. Bush said that this was a familiar replay of his campaign for governor in 1994, when the incumbent, Ann Richards, a Democrat, accused him of dodging debates. In his remarks about the Republican attack advertisement, Mr. Bush made clear he did not like Mr. Gore's frequent assertions that the Texas governor was not offering policies that were specific enough on matters like prescription drug benefits. Asked why the Republicans had chosen to run the advertisement now, he referred anew to the $30 million in Democratic commercials, then added, ''The rhetoric started getting a little harsh: 'put up or shut up.' '' Mr. Gore has used that phrase to goad Mr. Bush to put out more specifics on his policy proposals. Mr. Bush now plans to release a Medicare prescription drug plan next week. Until now he had outlined some broad principles and spoken positively of one bipartisan bill in the Senate. On foreign policy, Mr. Bush said that despite his and Mr. Cheney's criticisms of the administration's peacekeeping missions, he would not recall American troops from Bosnia and Kosovo immediately if elected, ''because I understand the commitment to which we'll be bound.'' He added, ''But I will work with our allies to lay the groundwork to begin  to take up more of the peacekeeping role in Bosnia and Kosovo.'' The tone of Mr. Bush's remarks during the interview meandered from a serene confidence about his chances of victory to an almost nostalgic distance from the race. He talked for a minute or two at one point about how important it was to use the campaign to build a governing mandate for the first 100 days of a Bush presidency.
 Re ''Surprise! Debates May Matter. And Help Bush'' (Week in Review, Aug. 27): Re ''Surprise! Debates May Matter. And Help Bush'' (Week in Review, Aug. 27):
 Re ''The Class War Gore Could Lose,'' by David Lebedoff (Op-Ed, Aug. 27): Re ''The Class War Gore Could Lose,'' by David Lebedoff (Op-Ed, Aug. 27): Does he really mean to suggest that a presidential candidate (Al Gore) who talks about the importance of education; understands and can explain the facts relevant to domestic and foreign-policy issues and who reads and writes serious books is running at a liability for leading this country because of these actions?
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman campaigns in New Haven, Conn; tells residents of retirement center that Gov George W Bush would do nothing to strengthen Medicare; photo (M) Senator Joseph I. Lieberman returned to the warm embrace of his hometown today, where he criticized Gov. George W. Bush, telling a group of older residents that Mr. Bush would do nothing to strengthen Medicare. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman returned to the warm embrace of his hometown today, where he criticized Gov. George W. Bush, telling a group of older residents that Mr. Bush would do nothing to strengthen Medicare. He praised Mr. Gore's proposal to add a prescription drug benefit to Medicare, at a cost of more than $250 billion over 10 years, and to set aside some of the federal budget surplus to extend Medicare's solvency. And he cited the words of a Republican, Senator John McCain of Arizona, who criticized Mr. Bush's fiscal plan during the primaries. ''He said the Bush plan doesn't have one penny for Social Security, one penny for Medicare or one penny to pay down the debt,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''He was right when he said it earlier this year, he's right today and he'll be right on Election Day.'' Mr. Bush said last week that he would propose a prescription drug plan under Medicare this week, and he has argued that the surplus would be large enough to accommodate that goal and his tax cuts. ''Senator Lieberman has his facts all wrong,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''Governor Bush dedicates 240 trillion pennies to Medicare. His budget doubles Medicare funding over the next 10 years.'' Mr. Bush has proposed an across-the-board tax cut that would total $1.3 trillion over 10 years. Mr. Gore has proposed a more modest $500 billion package of tax cuts singling out specific areas, like college tuition, child care and care for the elderly. Though he is popular among voters in Connecticut, Mr. Lieberman's visit came with a hint of controversy. He is running not only for vice president but also for a third term in the Senate, which would leave the seat in Republican hands if he and Mr. Gore win because Connecticut's governor, a Republican, would appoint his replacement. ''A vote for Nader is a vote for Bush,'' he told about 15 contributors. But he noted of Mr. Nader's standing in the polls, ''I wouldn't say it has collapsed.'' Most polls have Mr. Nader with about 3 percent of the vote.
 Vice Pres Al Gore praises Pres Clinton for leaving decision on moving ahead with missile defense program to his successor; Gov George W Bush criticizes Clinton for announcement, but says he would welcome chance as president to make decision on deployment (M) Most White House decisions these days factor in Vice President Al Gore's campaign for president, and the announcement today that there would be no decision now on missile defense deployment was no exception. An adviser to the vice president said Mr. Gore had taken an active part in the decision-making process of many months by ''phone, fax or Leon'' -- referring to the vice president's national security adviser, Leon Fuerth. Most White House decisions these days factor in Vice President Al Gore's campaign for president, and the announcement today that there would be no decision now on missile defense deployment was no exception. An adviser to the vice president said Mr. Gore had taken an active part in the decision-making process of many months by ''phone, fax or Leon'' -- referring to the vice president's national security adviser, Leon Fuerth. Mr. Gore and the Republican presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, each welcomed today's announcement, but from different perspectives. Mr. Gore praised the action in a three-page statement issued minutes after the announcement, but he took pains to say that it was ''the president's decision.'' Mr. Gore left some uncertainty as to whether a Gore administration would start building a defensive shield. He said the presumed threat of a missile attack from North Korea or Iran was by no means certain, and did not necessarily require the construction of an elaborate and costly shield. But Mr. Gore said he would continue to test the feasibility of such a system and would go ahead with deployment of a land-based system if  he was ''fully convinced'' that the technologies were ready. Adopting the White House view, Mr. Gore has said he would seek to modify the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, which bans such missile defenses, instead of scrapping it altogether. Mr. Bush said he would welcome the chance as president to make the decision on deployment, but he wasted no time in criticizing ''the Clinton-Gore administration'' for the announcement even though he had warned the White House earlier in the campaign not to take any actions that would tie his hands if he wins. ''President Clinton and Vice President Gore first denied the need for missile defenses, then delayed,'' Mr. Bush said in a one-paragraph statement. ''Now they are leaving this important unfinished business for the next president.'' At a news conference at the airport in Texarkana, Ark., Mr. Bush added, ''The administration missed an opportunity to develop a missile defense system that will protect all 50 states, protect ourselves and our allies from accidental launch or political blackmail.'' Mr. Bush has backed a more extensive system based on land, at sea and possibly in space that would protect the United States and its allies in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. The Republican platform adopted in Philadelphia last month backed ''robust missile defenses'' and criticized the White House for becoming ''hopelessly entangled in its commitment to an obsolete treaty signed in 1972.'' It might have helped Mr. Gore, White House aides said, if Mr. Clinton had gone forward with such a shield, inoculating him against accusations of being soft on defense. But it might prove more beneficial for Mr. Gore that Mr. Clinton has opted to stay out of the decision, allowing the vice president to explain his own thinking on a complicated national security matter. The president's timetable for deciding the issue this fall grew out of campaign politics -- but it was Mr. Clinton's own campaign in 1996, not Mr. Gore's current one.
 Prof Robert W Gordon letters contends there are fallacies in David Lebedoff's Aug 27 Op-Ed arguing that Vice Pres Al Gore represents interests of 'meritocracy' while Gov George W Bush represents 'experience' and 'values' David Lebedoff (Op-Ed, Aug. 27) says voters may reject Al Gore because they dislike meritocracy and prefer ''experience'' and ''values.''  There are two fallacies here. One is that if Mr. Gore has intellect, he must lack experience and values. He might have all of these. David Lebedoff (Op-Ed, Aug. 27) says voters may reject Al Gore because they dislike meritocracy and prefer ''experience'' and ''values.''  There are two fallacies here. One is that if Mr. Gore has intellect, he must lack experience and values. He might have all of these. The other is that if Mr. Gore has intellect, George W. Bush must have experience and values. Mr. Bush might have none of these. The Bush campaign is pushing a third fallacy: that because President Clinton has a flawed character, Mr. Bush must have a sterling character and will dignify the presidency the moment he assumes it. What is the evidence for Mr. Bush's experience, values or exemplary character other than his own assertions?
 Benjamin Chesluk letter on David Lebedoff's Aug 27 Op-Ed challenges Lebedoff's contention that Vice Pres Al Gore represents new class of arrogant, 'meritocratic' intellectuals who eschew human values and place their 'principal faither in pure reason' Re ''The Class War Gore Could Lose,'' by David Lebedoff (Op-Ed, Aug. 27). Re ''The Class War Gore Could Lose,'' by David Lebedoff (Op-Ed, Aug. 27). Mr. Lebedoff claims that Al Gore represents a new class of arrogant, ''meritocratic'' intellectuals who eschew human values and place their ''principal faith in pure reason.'' He cites two recent interviews in The New Yorker as evidence that Mr. Gore speaks in ''tortured self-analytical psychobabble'' and ''social science prose'' that is ''almost impossible to read.'' Yet after reading the same interviews, I had the impression that Mr. Gore is an articulate, thoughtful man who has challenged himself to read widely and deeply. In those New Yorker interviews, Mr. Gore showed that he had obviously worked hard to understand the historical and philosophical context of his own political and moral values. Can George W. Bush say the same?
 Any decision by Mr. Clinton would have been reassessed as soon as a new administration takes over anyway, he said, and he did not want to do anything that would be detrimental to the Democratic Party, like making compromises with Moscow that would subject Vice President Al Gore to political attacks during the presidential campaign. As it was, the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush, criticized the Clinton-Gore record as failing to strengthen America's defenses, and said that if he was elected president, he would proceed with a missile defense system at the earliest possible date.
