 Republican vice presidential nominee Dick Cheney, in sorties to crucial states, uses blunt language to criticize Al Gore's campaign positions; photo in Michigan (M) On campaign sorties into several crucial states this week, Mr. Cheney used some of his bluntest language yet to criticize Vice President Al Gore and his proposals for the economy, health care and education. On campaign sorties into several crucial states this week, Mr. Cheney used some of his bluntest language yet to criticize Vice President Al Gore and his proposals for the economy, health care and education. ''In my view Al Gore is not yet ready for the big chair,'' he told the Economic Club of Grand Rapids, Mich., on Wednesday. He criticized Mr. Gore's economic proposals by saying that ''some people call his plan a 'Swiss cheese budget' because it has so many holes in it.'' He told a group in Kingston, Pa., on Tuesday that Mr. Gore's criticisms of Gov. George W. Bush's plan to overhaul Medicare were ''just flat-out wrong.'' And Mr. Cheney never refers to the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles without calling it ''the Hollywood convention.'' On Thursday in a Cleveland suburb, he accused Mr. Gore of hypocrisy for his stance against violence in entertainment. ''I find it a little hard to understand how, on the one hand, our opponents, Al Gore and Joe Lieberman, can go out publicly and castigate Hollywood and the music industry for the kinds of material they produce,'' he said, ''and, on the other hand, go to their homes and hold fund-raisers and schmooze with them as they collect millions of dollars.'' Mr. Cheney's newly combative language is just one of several readjustments he has made on the campaign trail this week, after his choice as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate was openly questioned by some leading Republicans who were concerned about Mr. Gore's rising poll numbers. Mr. Cheney has also continued to work on adopting a more relaxed style on the stump. To that end, he spent the week talking about Medicare in Pennsylvania, taxes in Michigan and education in Ohio. It was just how Bush aides had initially said they planned to use Mr. Cheney: send him to hotly contested, undecided states with a significant number of electoral votes, rather than relegate him to the lesser role sometimes accorded to running mates of shoring up the party's base in small, safe states. In Montague, Mich., he shed his necktie and donned a green Michigan State anorak for a campaign stop on a family farm, where he discussed Governor Bush's proposal to abolish the estate tax, or, as he called it, the death tax. It was a crisp, clear day, and the corn fields, the red barn, the John Deere tractor and a crowd of supporters sitting on bales of hay all made for a very different photo opportunity from the nursing homes, schools and airport hangars of the past few weeks. At a rally today at Jefferson County Airport in Broomfield, Colo., a small plane flew behind Mr. Cheney's lectern trailing a banner trumpeting one of the Bush campaign's favorite slogans: ''Help Is on the Way.'' At nearly every stop, Mr. Cheney has stepped up his criticism of Mr. Gore, assuming the traditional role of the running mate. ''We are using him to counterpunch more,'' said Karl Rove, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign. On Thursday, discussing education, Mr. Cheney accused Mr. Gore of being ''soft on accountability.'' Mr. Cheney began to go down this road last Friday at a campaign appearance at a senior center in Connecticut, where he responded to Democratic criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's Medicare plan. But his speech there was almost eclipsed by a series of embarrassments. A Republican Congressional candidate for whom he had gone there to stump  released an ad that day praising his Democratic rival, Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman. A newspaper reported that Mr. Cheney had missed 14 of the 16 elections during the five years he was registered in Dallas. Then The Associated Press reported that the company he led, Halliburton, maintained separate bathrooms overseas for American and foreign workers. Mr. Rove, the Bush campaign strategist, said that Mr. Cheney was showing signs of warming up to campaigning and noted that it had been 12 years since he had run for office. ''He's flexing his political muscles,'' he said.
 NEW MEDIUM, OLD TACTICS -- In addition to allegations of dirty tricks in conventional campaigning, Republicans and Democrats are accusing each other of stealing Internet tactics. Democrats are complaining that the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush copied techniques behind their latest e-mail drive. The Bush campaign countered that Vice President Al Gore's re-designed Web site was ''a pale imitation'' of its own site. The Democratic National Committee began an e-mail appeal in August that asked supporters to become ''e-precinct leaders'' by sending e-mail about the party to 10 friends. The appeal cited the victory of John F. Kennedy in 1960 by a margin that amounted to one vote per precinct. On Thursday, the Gore campaign distributed that e-mail message to its list of supporters. The same day, the Bush campaign sent supporters an e-mail announcing the ''Bush E-Train,'' which encouraged them to send campaign e-mail to their friends. The message also cited the one-vote-per-precinct victory in 1960. NEW MEDIUM, OLD TACTICS -- In addition to allegations of dirty tricks in conventional campaigning, Republicans and Democrats are accusing each other of stealing Internet tactics. Democrats are complaining that the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush copied techniques behind their latest e-mail drive. The Bush campaign countered that Vice President Al Gore's re-designed Web site was ''a pale imitation'' of its own site. The Democratic National Committee began an e-mail appeal in August that asked supporters to become ''e-precinct leaders'' by sending e-mail about the party to 10 friends. The appeal cited the victory of John F. Kennedy in 1960 by a margin that amounted to one vote per precinct. On Thursday, the Gore campaign distributed that e-mail message to its list of supporters. The same day, the Bush campaign sent supporters an e-mail announcing the ''Bush E-Train,'' which encouraged them to send campaign e-mail to their friends. The message also cited the one-vote-per-precinct victory in 1960.
 Republican Ticket Taking New Tack Against Gore  Gov. George W. Bush has shifted his tactics and has begun confronting Vice President Al Gore head-on over the issues, an area long considered to be Mr. Gore's greatest strength. Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, has also shifted gears, using especially blunt language to criticize Mr. Gore and his proposals. A spokeswoman for Mr. Bush said that negotiators for the Bush and Gore campaigns were near an agreement on formats for the three presidential debates, although ''some sticking points'' remained. Pledge on Test Ban Treaty  Vice President Gore told Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India that if elected president he would make passage of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty his first foreign policy act, and he urged India to adopt the treaty as well. Mr. Gore told an enthusiastic crowd of students at Howard University that improving schools and access to college must become a major federal priority in coming years. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, appearing on the Don Imus radio program, rejected the suggestion that it could appear hypocritical for him and Mr. Gore to have raised money from the entertainment industry with a concert the night before.
 But this time, Mr. Lieberman visited not as just a senator from Connecticut, but also as the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, at a time when Republicans are accusing him and Vice President Al Gore of hypocrisy in taking entertainment moguls to task while also taking their money. On Thursday night, both candidates attended a fund-raising concert at Radio City Music Hall, organized by entertainment industry leaders, that featured popular acts like Paul Simon, Sheryl Crow and K.D. Lang, singing relatively tame material. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman have threatened to impose a new set of marketing restrictions for violent or sexually explicit films, television shows, music and video games, citing a Federal Trade Commission finding that their makers routinely market them to children. ''To my recollection, Senator Lieberman has never reprimanded Imus for some of the ridiculous things he says,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee. Mr. Lieberman disagreed, suggesting, as other Democrats have, that he and Mr. Gore had been courageous to criticize an industry that had supported them so reliably. ''The question is, What do you do when you disagree with people who are your supporters and even friends?'' he said. ''And I think the reason this is not hypocritical is because Al Gore and I spoke out early, quickly and strongly and said the show business people have to stop marketing to kids.'' The tension in the Democrats' position was amply on display on Thursday night, as several of the stars at the concert needled Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman for their views.
 Vice Pres Gore tells Indian Prime Min Atal Bihari Vajpayee that as president he would give priority to passage of Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and urges India to give approval as well; suggests that Republican-led Senate's rejection of treaty gave India excuse to continue nuclear testing; Pres Clinton and other officials also meet with visiting Indian leader and sign several agreements, including Export-Import Bank loans (M) Mixing election politics and international diplomacy, Vice President Al Gore told Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India today that as president he would make passage of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty his first foreign policy initiative in Congress, and he urged India to adopt the treaty as well. Mr. Gore, reviving a promise he made last fall, was clearly suggesting that in rejecting the treaty a year ago, the Republican-led Senate had given India an easy excuse to keep its nuclear testing program alive, and had thus contributed to the dangerous standoff between India and Pakistan. Mixing election politics and international diplomacy, Vice President Al Gore told Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India today that as president he would make passage of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty his first foreign policy initiative in Congress, and he urged India to adopt the treaty as well. Mr. Gore, reviving a promise he made last fall, was clearly suggesting that in rejecting the treaty a year ago, the Republican-led Senate had given India an easy excuse to keep its nuclear testing program alive, and had thus contributed to the dangerous standoff between India and Pakistan. Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, has said repeatedly that he opposes the treaty, on the ground that it would limit America's nuclear leadership. Mr. Gore's comments to the visiting Indian prime minister today came at a private meeting between the two men after lunch at the State Department, aides said at a White House briefing. The president and the prime minister talked about everything from trade to the territorial battle over Kashmir, and then the focus quickly shifted to Mr. Gore's lunch at the State Department for Mr. Vajpayee and to the subsequent private meeting between the two. Under the glittering glass chandeliers in a State Department dining room, Mr. Gore basked in an incumbent's perk: acting as host of a state luncheon and talking peace with a world leader. Mr. Gore said India, the world's largest democracy, and America, the world's oldest democracy, shared a special bond, and made only glancing reference to India's nuclear weapons capability. ''As the world's two leading democracies, we bear a special responsibility to take the lead in meeting the challenges that all democracies face,'' Mr. Gore said. ''We must work together to ensure that democracy's promises are realized by all our people, that all benefit from freedom. Quality education, public health, a clean environment -- these are the goals we share and which together we can achieve. Threats that undermine democracy, such as terrorism and the proliferation of dangerous weapons technologies, are concerns we also share and will work together to address.''
 Negotiators for George W Bush and Al Gore are close to agreement on formats for presidential campaign debtes; photo of Bush in San Diego (S) Negotiators for Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore neared agreement today on formats for the three presidential debates, although ''some sticking points'' remain, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush said. Negotiators for Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore neared agreement today on formats for the three presidential debates, although ''some sticking points'' remain, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush said. The two campaigns met in Washington today and were to resume negotiations on Saturday. The talks began a day after Mr. Bush, ending weeks of resistance, accepted a schedule proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. The proposal, agreed to earlier by Mr. Gore, calls for debates on Oct. 3 in Boston, Oct. 11 in Winston-Salem, N.C., and Oct. 17 in St. Louis. At an appearance earlier today in San Diego, Mr. Bush said that he wanted to strengthen the armed forces, take better care of veterans and devote more resources to a full accounting of those who were missing in action. ''Today we remember with special gratitude those who were held against their will by our enemies and those whose fate is still unknown,'' Mr. Bush said in Balboa Park, near downtown San Diego. While Mr. Bush's remarks were guaranteed to resonate in a region where many military people live, they also reflected his campaign's belief that the issues of military readiness and stewardship of the armed forces would benefit Mr. Bush nationwide, especially among men. Mr. Bush's strategy for trying to compete against Mr. Gore in California -- and for trying to capture swing voters in crucial states -- pivots on talking about traditionally Democratic issues in ways that cast him as a progressive, sensitive Republican. And Mr. Bush did that today, visiting an elementary school where a majority of students did not speak English as a first language.
 Fred T Rossi letter finds it interesting that George W Bush saw no problem wasting time of his father's aide in 1988, when he asked for report on lives of presidential offspring instead of doing research himself (S) ''A Father's Footsteps Echo Throughout a Son's Career'' (front page, Sept. 11) begins with what I found to be the most telling anecdote about George W. Bush's personality.  Worried about what his father's election to the presidency in 1988 would mean for him, he asked one of his father's aides to write a report about what had become of the children of presidents. Mr. Bush could have researched this himself, but he saw no problem in wasting the time of one of his father's aides. ''A Father's Footsteps Echo Throughout a Son's Career'' (front page, Sept. 11) begins with what I found to be the most telling anecdote about George W. Bush's personality.  Worried about what his father's election to the presidency in 1988 would mean for him, he asked one of his father's aides to write a report about what had become of the children of presidents. Mr. Bush could have researched this himself, but he saw no problem in wasting the time of one of his father's aides.
 Nonetheless, much of the neoconservative agenda, in its older and newer forms, seems to have been appropriated by Gov. George W. Bush. His acceptance speech at the Republican convention echoed the theme of ''national greatness.'' And his ''compassionate conservatism,'' says Myron Magnet, an adviser to Mr. Bush and the editor of The City Journal, ''is a variety of neoconservatism, its latest avatar.'' George Nash, a historian who has written extensively on postwar American conservatism, finds ''Bush's compassionate conservatism closer to neoconservatism'' than to Reagan-style Republicanism: ''His education policies accept a federal role. There's no talk of abolishing the Department of Education.'' And Mr. Bush's reforming impulse fits the neoconservative formula. ''A lot of what neoconservatives offer is criticism of policy that has gone awry in practice,'' Mr. Nash explains. ''They excel at demonstrating that good intentions don't necessary lead to good results.''
 Joseph I Lieberman campaigns in Coney Island with Hillary Rodham Clinton, offering testimony to her character and commitment to Israel; Lieberman also speaks about his own campaign for Vice President and Al Gore's campaign for President; photo (M) Mr. Lieberman also spoke about his own campaign, and about the Democratic Party's candidate for the White House, Al Gore. But yesterday's event had little to do with presidential politics in New York, where Democrats are confident of Mr. Gore's chances against Gov. George W. Bush, and much to do with Mrs. Clinton's tighter Senate contest against Representative Rick A. Lazio. Mr. Lieberman also spoke about his own campaign, and about the Democratic Party's candidate for the White House, Al Gore. But yesterday's event had little to do with presidential politics in New York, where Democrats are confident of Mr. Gore's chances against Gov. George W. Bush, and much to do with Mrs. Clinton's tighter Senate contest against Representative Rick A. Lazio.
 Excerpt and assessment of George W Bush's campaign ad attacking Al Gore's position on prescription drug benefits in Medicare; photo (S) The Republican campaign of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney has begun broadcasting a commercial, ''Compare,'' in 18 states in its effort to take the offensive on the issues. It takes aim at Vice President Al Gore's stands on a prescription drug benefit in Medicare, on education and on tax cuts. The Republican campaign of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney has begun broadcasting a commercial, ''Compare,'' in 18 states in its effort to take the offensive on the issues. It takes aim at Vice President Al Gore's stands on a prescription drug benefit in Medicare, on education and on tax cuts. ON THE SCREEN -- The 30-second commercial features statements about Mr. Gore's proposals in black on a stark white background, counterposed with color pictures of Mr. Bush. It then shows pictures in color of Americans of different ethnicity, as it speaks of people who will not get a tax cut under Mr. Gore's $500 billion plan for tax relief. THE SCRIPT -- A female announcer: ''Al Gore's prescription plan forces seniors into a government-run H.M.O. Governor Bush gives seniors a choice. Gore says he's for school accountability, but requires no real testing. Governor Bush requires tests and holds schools accountable for results. Gore's targeted tax cuts leave out 50 million people -- half of all taxpayers. Under Bush, every taxpayer gets a tax cut and no family pays more than a third of their income to Washington. Governor Bush has real plans that work for real people.'' ACCURACY -- Health maintenance organizations are not popular, so it is not surprising that the commercial links Mr. Gore's prescription drug plan to H.M.O.'s. But to do so it has to stretch the facts. Mr. Gore does not force the elderly to accept his new prescription drug benefit. It is voluntary. And Medicare recipients can stay in traditional plans where they choose their own doctors. Mr. Gore's plan does rely on private benefit managers to manage the program -- just like private insurers do -- which encourages use of generic drugs and less expensive brand names. But these are not H.M.O.'s. Some critics argue that it is Mr. Bush's plan that would increase the number of older people enrolling in managed care. Mr. Bush would give people the ability to choose between the traditional Medicare program including a new drug benefit and government-subsidized private insurance packages. A question is whether the premiums would rise for traditional Medicare, causing more people to choose managed care. On schools, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore both propose testing and different kinds of accountability measures, but Mr. Bush's proposal calls for tests that would cover more grades and be more frequent than does Mr. Gore's. It is true that Mr. Bush's $1.3 trillion 10-year tax-cut plan would give a tax reduction to every income bracket while Mr. Gore's plan for $500 million in targeted tax cuts would give tax breaks only for purposes like college education or child care. SCORE CARD -- With its tag line, ''Governor Bush has real plans that work for real people,'' the spot suggests that Mr. Gore is not credible and neither are his programs. But Mr. Bush has his work cut out for him. Many polls show that voters trust the Democratic candidate more on health care and education. And while Mr. Bush may have the Republicans' traditional advantage when it comes to tax-cutting, right now tax cuts are not one of the top concerns of voters.
 Gov George W Bush, in tactical switch, is confronting Vice Pres Al Gore head-on over issues, area long considered to be Gore's greatest strength; his campaign opens advertising campaign in swing states comparing candidates' programs; his advisers say he can no longer rely on attacks on Gore's character and credibility (M) Faced with an opponent who has managed to deflect questions about his character and trustworthiness, Gov. George W. Bush has shifted tactics and begun confronting Vice President Al Gore head-on over the issues, an area long considered to be Mr. Gore's greatest strength. Day after day this week, from one coast to the other, Mr. Bush has sought to draw contrasts between his positions on Medicare, the environment, education and tax cuts and those of his rival. And to amplify the theme, his campaign began running a new advertisement in 18 swing states comparing the two candidates' programs. Faced with an opponent who has managed to deflect questions about his character and trustworthiness, Gov. George W. Bush has shifted tactics and begun confronting Vice President Al Gore head-on over the issues, an area long considered to be Mr. Gore's greatest strength. Day after day this week, from one coast to the other, Mr. Bush has sought to draw contrasts between his positions on Medicare, the environment, education and tax cuts and those of his rival. And to amplify the theme, his campaign began running a new advertisement in 18 swing states comparing the two candidates' programs. ''Al Gore's prescription plan forces seniors into a government-run H.M.O.,'' says the commercial. ''Governor Bush gives seniors a choice. Gore says he's for school accountability, but requires no real testing. Governor Bush requires tests and holds schools accountable for results.'' The commercial also says that ''Gore's targeted tax cut leaves out 50 million people -- half of all taxpayers.'' At the same time, Mr. Bush's running mate, former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, has been using blunt language this week to criticize Mr. Gore's positions on the economy, health care and education. [Page A11.] The tack is a change in emphasis that Mr. Bush's advisers say is every bit as important as the Texas governor's recent decision to court voters in more unscripted settings. Just last week, Mr. Bush was hammering at Mr. Gore's personal credibility and character. All year, the emotional center of the Bush campaign has been a pledge to bring ''dignity and honor'' back to the White House after the Clinton years. But with some polls showing a slight Gore edge and others showing a statistical dead heat, Mr. Bush's advisers say that he can no longer count on questions of personality and character to carry him into the White House, and that he needs to go after Mr. Gore on the issues that voters put at the top of their list of concerns. ''There was a thought we needed to go much more pointedly at issues and show these differences,'' one Bush aide said. ''Everybody agreed we needed to be much more pointed in drawing contrast.'' The Bush campaign argues that it can change the way the public is thinking about the issues, in much the same way that Republicans and their allies dampened enthusiasm for President Clinton's plan for universal health care coverage by persuading the public that the proposal amounted to government intrusion in private lives. The plan died in 1994 and the Republicans went on to win control of Congress. ''Just like President Clinton's failed health care effort in 1993, we believe that the more people look at the details of Al Gore's plans, the less they'll like,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''The more they look, the less they'll see.'' The new Bush effort reflects a fundamental change in the dynamics of the presidential race. Throughout the spring and summer polls showed that Mr. Bush had a comfortable lead that was built in large part on personality and on public dismay with President Clinton's personal morality. Polls found that voters had judged Mr. Bush more likable than Mr. Gore and more of a leader. While Mr. Bush has consistently talked about the issues, holding policy speech after policy speech, he mostly set out his own plans without drawing sharp contrasts to Mr. Gore's proposals. Before the Republican convention, his aides had said the issue speeches were largely designed to bolster impressions of Mr. Bush as a strong leader. That the Republican dared to propose changes in Social Security or that he said he would consider changes in nuclear doctrine made him look like a bold leader willing to challenge the status quo, his aides said. During that critical period, Republicans now acknowledge, Mr. Gore did everything that he needed to do. By choosing Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate, he managed to separate himself from Mr. Clinton. Polls now show that the vice president is as highly regarded as Mr. Bush when it comes to traits like leadership, character and personal popularity. If both men are viewed as personable and strong leaders, that shifts the focus of the race to the issues. Indeed, a survey of 2,000 voters, released this week by The Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, concluded that ''clearly, issues have fueled Gore's gains.'' Mr. Bush's advisers say they have not abandoned efforts to raise questions about Mr. Gore's credibility. Mr. Bush, for example, jumped on new reports that federal investigators are examining the Democrats' efforts in 1996 to raise money from a handful of Texas trial lawyers. But Mr. Bush's aides say he needs to talk about credibility in the context of issues. One strategist close to the Bush campaign said recent focus groups with voters had shown that while Mr. Gore had shaken off questions about his character, there were still doubts about him just below the surface. He said those doubts could be used to push people back into the undecided category. ''The difference between now and seven or eight weeks ago,'' the strategist said, ''is that before you could go straight at credibility issues. You could say, 'Al Gore: how can you believe anything he says?' People would nod and say, 'That's right.' Now people want to hear the comparison on the issues. Then you can bring up credibility and it's more viable.'' Another Bush adviser said, ''Pointing out issue differences is a way of pointing out credibility differences.'' The difficulty for Mr. Bush is that, unlike in the 1980's when issues like crime and taxes and the cold war favored the Republicans, this year's top voters' concerns -- health care and education -- are subjects on which Democrats have long had an edge. Still, Mr. Bush's advisers contend that their candidate has already narrowed the traditional Democratic advantage on education and Social Security. And they say that he can prevail on the issues if he reshapes the public debate. Ralph Reed, a Bush adviser, said the campaign would now focus on the details of Mr. Gore's plans. Mr. Reed was referring to the accusation made by Mr. Bush and by the drug industry that Mr. Gore's proposal to create a new prescription drug benefit inside the traditional Medicare program would create such a government buying monopoly for drugs that it would amount to price controls. In another line of attack on Mr. Gore's Medicare plan, the Republican National Committee is also running a new advertisement. Speaking of Mr. Gore's prescription proposal, an announcer says, ''He says he wants to fight for the people against H.M.O.'s, but his prescription drug plan forces seniors into one H.M.O. selected by the government. Al Gore: federal H.M.O. George Bush: seniors choose.'' The reference to H.M.O.'s echoes Mr. Gore's criticism of Mr. Bush's own Medicare plan, which would foster competition between Medicare and private insurers and encourage recipients to opt into government-subsidized private health plans with prescription drug coverage. The Gore campaign says the proposal would force more and more people out of Medicare's traditional fee-for-service program and into health maintenance organizations. ''It's no surprise that they are trying to distort the issue because it's so plain that Bush's plan puts seniors off on the tender mercies of the H.M.O.'s,'' Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said in response to the Republican spots. ''He knows that's one of the main vulnerabilities of his plan, so he's trying desperately to turn it around.'' One question for Mr. Bush is precisely how to frame the contrasts on the issues. He has spent the year presenting himself as a ''different kind of Republican'' who is less hostile to government than the Republicans who gained control of Congress  in 1994. Mr. Bush's advisers say he wants to present himself as a conservative reformer who is more market oriented and innovative while painting Mr. Gore as favoring government-run command and control policies that deny individuals choices. Mr. Bush says he is game for the fight. At a rally in California on Wednesday, he said: ''We've got a big debate on the issues during the campaign. And by the way, I love talking about the issues on the campaign, because we stand with the majority of the people when we talk about the issues.''
 Al Gore concludes breakneck week devoted to fund-raising and education policy by telling enthusiastic crowd of students at Howard University that improving schools and access to college should be major federal priority in coming years; photo; Democrats unveil television ad mocking George W Bush's new campaign slogan 'Real plans for real people' (S) Vice President Al Gore concluded a tightly controlled week devoted to fund-raising and education policy by telling an enthusiastic crowd of students at Howard University today that improving schools and access to college must become a major federal priority in coming years. Mr. Gore pointed out that the parents of school-age children now make up a smaller percentage of the overall voting population than ever before because the average age of Americans is rising and young adults, though a growing part of the population, are starting families later. That, he said, has undercut political support for the local tax increases and bond issues that typically pay for significant school improvements. Vice President Al Gore concluded a tightly controlled week devoted to fund-raising and education policy by telling an enthusiastic crowd of students at Howard University today that improving schools and access to college must become a major federal priority in coming years. Mr. Gore pointed out that the parents of school-age children now make up a smaller percentage of the overall voting population than ever before because the average age of Americans is rising and young adults, though a growing part of the population, are starting families later. That, he said, has undercut political support for the local tax increases and bond issues that typically pay for significant school improvements. The federal government, Mr. Gore said, must step into the breach. ''We need the biggest investment in education since the G.I. Bill,'' he said. Mr. Gore has proposed spending $115 billion over 10 years on elementary and secondary education programs, and an additional $55 billion over that period on tax credits for college tuition and after-school care. Public opinion polls show that improving education and health care, the two issues that Mr. Gore has most emphasized since the Democratic convention, are the top priorities of voters this year. A New York Times/CBS News poll taken from Sept. 9 through 11 showed that about two-thirds of voters feel that both Mr. Gore and the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, would be likely to improve education. Mr. Gore received a raucous reception from about 1,600 students packed into an auditorium at Howard, a predominantly black college here. The Howard band welcomed him with a brassy rendition of ''Love Train.'' As he often does before heavily black audiences, Mr. Gore made a point of introducing and praising his campaign manager, Donna Brazile, who is black. And he began his speech by asking for a moment of silence in honor of Prince Jones, a Howard student who was shot to death by an undercover Prince George's County police officer on Sept. 1. Mr. Jones, who was unarmed and was being tailed by the police, was shot several times, allegedly after his car rammed a police car. Mr. Gore took no position on the investigation of the case, but said to loud applause that ''the whole practice of racial profiling must come to an end.'' The vice president barely referred to Mr. Bush during today's appearance. But the Democratic National Committee unveiled a new television advertisement mocking Mr. Bush's new campaign slogan, ''Real plans for real people.'' The advertisement, which will be shown in nine states, accuses Mr. Bush of keeping both the minimum wage in Texas and a children's health insurance program there beneath federal standards. ''George Bush: his real plans hurt real people,'' the commercial concludes. Mr. Gore's week was marked by a breakneck schedule, and he sounded a bit weary today after a night in New York City that ended after 1 a.m. with a gathering at Elaine's that followed a gala Democratic fund-raising concert at Radio City Music Hall. Using his schedule to send the message that he has the stamina and drive to be president, Mr. Gore ended virtually every campaign day this week well into the night. The Gore campaign is highly disciplined these days, ensuring that Mr. Gore's appearances produce well-staged images and only intended messages. In contrast to Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore spends most of his time secluded from his traveling press corps, which typically sees him only on stage. His last open news conference was on July 17, and he ventures back to the press cabin of Air Force Two only occasionally, usually for brief chats.
 Reporter's Notebook comments on George W Bush's reinvention of himself and his campaign slogans, on his long campaign days that are tallied by aides miffed at unfavorable comparisons with Al Gore's taxing schedule, on speculation that Bush's frequent malapropisms are caused by dyslexia (M) For much of the presidential campaign, Vice President Al Gore has been cast as the desperate master of morphing and derided for earth-toned makeovers and alpha-male aspirations. But lately, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has been more than holding his own in the reinvention sweepstakes. For much of the presidential campaign, Vice President Al Gore has been cast as the desperate master of morphing and derided for earth-toned makeovers and alpha-male aspirations. But lately, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has been more than holding his own in the reinvention sweepstakes. He was once ''a reformer with results,'' the primary-season catch phrase of choice for a campaign with a yen for alliteration and a determination to appropriate Senator John McCain's mantle. Now Mr. Bush has ''real plans for real people,'' the similar consonants spawning semantic confusion. Mr. Bush prides himself on his constancy, and while his staff and proposed policies have not changed much in 15 months, his packaging has, and not only recently. After the Republican National Convention, his aides printed banners and literature with a promise to ''change the tone.'' But that was hard pressed to survive the sometimes acidic oratory and advertising that he and other Republicans trained on Mr. Gore. So Mr. Bush is trying something old, something new and something borrowed. Just before Mr. Bush started campaigning on Monday, his aides informed reporters that he would be showing up as ''a different kind of Republican,'' which is what he was in the spring as well. But this kind of Republican would now be reaching those ''real people,'' an obvious answer to Mr. Gore's references to ''working people'' and ''working families.'' At an event in Clearwater, Fla., that immediately followed his appearance at the airport, Mr. Bush explained his Medicare and prescription drug proposals by saying, ''Our prosperity must have a purpose.'' On Tuesday, Mr. Bush's campaign day spanned about 17 hours, three states and four time zones, undeniable evidence that he has picked up his pace. But who is counting? Long miffed by news articles that Mr. Bush's schedule was less taxing than Vice President Al Gore's, Bush aides have begun offering reporters regularly updated statistics about the campaign's ambitious reach. At one point, they even compared the relative velocities of a train that Mr. Bush used for a campaign trip and a riverboat that transported Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush's vehicle was about seven times faster, his aides noted, which allowed the governor to cover more ground. They know in their hearts that Mr. Gore is the real slacker, and they will not be fooled by any of the vice president's 24-hour, round-the-clock preening. ''Despite Vice President Gore's much-ballyhooed Labor Day workathon last week,'' Ms. Hughes told reporters, ''we visited more cities in more states by week's end than he had.'' The problem with all that hustle and bustle is that Mr. Bush often wears his fatigue on his tongue. And never has it twisted in such an exquisite fashion as it did during a visit on Thursday to a drugstore in Orange, Calif. A woman there asked Mr. Bush about an article in Vanity Fair magazine that postulates a cause for his frequent malapropisms and lapses of grammar: dyslexia. Mr. Bush has laughed off that theory and did so on this occasion by pointing out how little contact he had had with the writer of the Vanity Fair article, Gail Sheehy. ''The woman who knew that I had dyslexia -- I never interviewed her,'' Mr. Bush said.
 Responding to the Times article, Gov. George W. Bush rightly deplored the Democrats for milking the trial lawyers over this issue. What he left out is that he has made ''tort reform'' -- as Republicans like to call the curbs on personal injury lawsuits -- a centerpiece of his campaign. On the Republican side, millions of dollars have been raised from businesses that would stand to benefit from restrictions on the right to sue. Mr. Bush's opposition to the right to sue health maintenance organizations in particular is reaping huge sums of money from the insurance industry. What all this amounts to is institutionalized influence peddling. Also, in our view and that of many experts, the way soft money is being used is often illegal. The law restricts the use of such funds to so-called party-building activities. In the past, presidential campaigns have contended that using them for ads was all right, as long as the candidates themselves were not involved in producing the ads. But the evidence showed that President Clinton was closely involved in the ads four years ago, and Governor Bush's decision to pull an ad a few weeks ago, because he thought it was unfair, showed that he too is connected to the advertising process. Last week three longtime advocates of campaign finance reform asked a federal court to rule that these ads, paid for by soft money, were clearly coordinated with the candidates and therefore represented an illegal campaign contribution. The three are Fred Wertheimer, president of Democracy 21; Scott Harshbarger, president of Common Cause; and Archibald Cox, the former Watergate prosecutor. They note that in order to receive $68 million in public funds, both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore signed a written agreement not to accept other contributions or make any other expenditures for their campaigns except for a small amount for party expenditures on their behalf. Correction:  September 20, 2000, Wednesday  An editorial last Saturday erred in saying that Gov. George W. Bush opposes the right to sue health maintenance organizations. The Bush campaign says that its candidate favors a patient's right to sue provided that the claim is first reviewed by an independent medical panel. An editorial last Saturday erred in saying that Gov. George W. Bush opposes the right to sue health maintenance organizations. The Bush campaign says that its candidate favors a patient's right to sue provided that the claim is first reviewed by an independent medical panel.
 Re ''Dropping All of His Objections, Bush Agrees to Panel's Debates'' (front page, Sept. 15): Re ''Dropping All of His Objections, Bush Agrees to Panel's Debates'' (front page, Sept. 15):
