 Editorial, commenting on Gov George W Bush's new strategy to woo middle class, says he faces difficult task of getting arrythmic campaign back into steady beat before he is typecast as Republican version of Michael Dukakis, Democratic nominee in 1988 (S) Gov. George W. Bush's task for the next week or so is simple. He has to get his arrhythmic campaign back on a steady beat before he gets typecast as a Republican version of Michael Dukakis, the Democratic nominee in 1988. For a long time, Mr. Bush counted on his personality and his promise to restore ''honor and dignity'' to undermine public regard for Vice President Al Gore. But now that he is behind, Mr. Bush plans to battle on issues outlined in his new ''Blueprint for the Middle Class,'' such as his proposed tax cuts, education reforms and plans to overhaul Medicare and Social Security. This may well be the right strategy, but it will not be an easy one. Not only is this Mr. Gore's preferred terrain, but on most of these subjects, polls show that voters favor Mr. Gore. To be sure, Mr. Bush will now get a chance to be specific about compassionate conservatism, yet the debate will almost certainly be less about philosophy than about who gets what benefits. Mr. Gore has made headway because he has been able to show that his programs benefit middle-income families, while Mr. Bush's policies seem tailored to corporate interests and the well-to-do. Gov. George W. Bush's task for the next week or so is simple. He has to get his arrhythmic campaign back on a steady beat before he gets typecast as a Republican version of Michael Dukakis, the Democratic nominee in 1988. For a long time, Mr. Bush counted on his personality and his promise to restore ''honor and dignity'' to undermine public regard for Vice President Al Gore. But now that he is behind, Mr. Bush plans to battle on issues outlined in his new ''Blueprint for the Middle Class,'' such as his proposed tax cuts, education reforms and plans to overhaul Medicare and Social Security. This may well be the right strategy, but it will not be an easy one. Not only is this Mr. Gore's preferred terrain, but on most of these subjects, polls show that voters favor Mr. Gore. To be sure, Mr. Bush will now get a chance to be specific about compassionate conservatism, yet the debate will almost certainly be less about philosophy than about who gets what benefits. Mr. Gore has made headway because he has been able to show that his programs benefit middle-income families, while Mr. Bush's policies seem tailored to corporate interests and the well-to-do. On prescription drugs for Medicare, for example, Mr. Bush would use federal funding to encourage competition among private health care plans, an approach that Mr. Gore says would amount to a giveaway to insurance companies. The governor's assumption on these proposals seems to be that voters will see him as a champion of markets and Mr. Gore as a fan of big government. But it is by no means clear that the voters Mr. Bush needs -- say, retirees in Florida -- dislike Washington Medicare bureaucrats more than the benefits bureaucrats at the insurance companies. No matter how inventive Mr. Bush becomes in proposing changes in the basic New Deal and Great Society safety net, he has yet to explain how he will pay for what he wants to do if he proceeds with a tax cut estimated to cost nearly $2 trillion over 10 years. True, that proposal helped him in the Republican primaries when he was running against Senator John McCain. But even his fellow Republican derided it as too heavily weighted toward the rich, and now Mr. Gore has countered with a plan of limited tax cuts tailored to the middle-class concerns such as helping families pay for college. Mr. Gore's plan has been criticized as a fiscal patchwork, but its sales pitch has a broader appeal. If the tax cut drives the whole debate toward a choice between which programs benefit which classes of people, Republicans will deplore the dangers of class warfare. But class resentments have long been a staple of American politics, from the late 19th century to the presidential race in the new production of Gore Vidal's play ''The Best Man.'' So have the kind of income-distribution and retirement security concerns that Mr. Bush will be touching on when he takes to the stump with his tax, Social Security and Medicare proposals. The polls show why the governor felt he had to shift gears before the October debates, but it is hard to see exactly where the voter payoff comes in an argument with Mr. Gore over bread-and-butter issues in the swing states.
 Republican vice presidential nominee Dick Cheney is sharply questioned by parents, teachers and students during campaign stops about central idea of Gov George W Bush's education proposal, which would withhold federal funds from low-performing schools and give money directly to parents; photo (M) As he campaigns around the country, Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential nominee, stops in public schools nearly every week to lay out Gov. George W. Bush's education proposals. But at the last three such stops, Mr. Cheney has found himself sharply questioned by parents, teachers and students who are concerned that one of Governor Bush's central ideas -- his proposal to withhold federal funds from low-performing schools and give the money directly to parents -- would end up damaging the public school system. As he campaigns around the country, Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential nominee, stops in public schools nearly every week to lay out Gov. George W. Bush's education proposals. But at the last three such stops, Mr. Cheney has found himself sharply questioned by parents, teachers and students who are concerned that one of Governor Bush's central ideas -- his proposal to withhold federal funds from low-performing schools and give the money directly to parents -- would end up damaging the public school system. Mr. Cheney explained that under the Bush proposal, low-performing schools that failed to improve after three years would lose their federal Title I money -- financing that is allocated to help educate poor and disadvantaged students in public schools -- and that the money would be given directly to the children's parents. Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, has denounced the Bush proposal, saying it would harm public education.
 White House expresses alarm over possibility that Congress might provide money to states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov George W Bush has proposed in presidential campaign; administration officials say such approach is unworkable (S) The White House expressed alarm today at the possibility that Congress might provide money to the states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov. George W. Bush has proposed. Administration officials said such an approach was unworkable. The White House expressed alarm today at the possibility that Congress might provide money to the states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov. George W. Bush has proposed. Administration officials said such an approach was unworkable. The report attacks the approach favored by Mr. Bush and by Senate Republicans including Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader; Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the assistant majority leader, and William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware, the chairman of the Finance Committee. Correction:  September 23, 2000, Saturday  An article on Thursday about a health care policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush who has financial ties to eight health care companies referred incorrectly to her ownership of 16,000 options on shares in United Health Care, of which she is a director. The adviser, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, sold the shares in May at a profit of $328,144; she does not still hold them. An article on Thursday about a health care policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush who has financial ties to eight health care companies referred incorrectly to her ownership of 16,000 options on shares in United Health Care, of which she is a director. The adviser, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, sold the shares in May at a profit of $328,144; she does not still hold them.
 Thomas Friedman Op-Ed column on host of foreign policy issues that could be discussed by Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore in televised debates (M) Let's get crazy for a moment and imagine that the two presidential candidates are actually going to devote one of their debates to foreign policy -- what would they talk about? Would Al Gore, Rick Lazio-like, thrust upon George W. Bush a map of the world with the country names spelled out phonetically (RUSH-ah, ee-ROCK, Grease)? Would Mr. Bush ask Mr. Gore to give viewers his insights on Buddhist temples? Nah. Doubt it. Mr. Gore could, though, ask the Republican candidate to explain how is it that Mr. Bush's foreign policy advisers say the U.S. shouldn't be the world's global cop or 911, fighting wars around the world, while Mr. Bush's vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, says U.S. troops are woefully underfunded and underprepared. Put it together and the Bush position is that the U.S. military should be better prepared to do nothing and better funded to go nowhere. Let's get crazy for a moment and imagine that the two presidential candidates are actually going to devote one of their debates to foreign policy -- what would they talk about? Would Al Gore, Rick Lazio-like, thrust upon George W. Bush a map of the world with the country names spelled out phonetically (RUSH-ah, ee-ROCK, Grease)? Would Mr. Bush ask Mr. Gore to give viewers his insights on Buddhist temples? Nah. Doubt it. Mr. Gore could, though, ask the Republican candidate to explain how is it that Mr. Bush's foreign policy advisers say the U.S. shouldn't be the world's global cop or 911, fighting wars around the world, while Mr. Bush's vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, says U.S. troops are woefully underfunded and underprepared. Put it together and the Bush position is that the U.S. military should be better prepared to do nothing and better funded to go nowhere. Mr. Gore could also ask Mr. Bush why, if the Republicans are so serious about foreign policy, they allowed both the Senate and House foreign affairs committees to be run by Republican lawmakers, such as Jesse Helms, who had so little clue about the world that these two once-great committees have become more irrelevant than anytime in their histories. Mr. Bush, for his part, could press Mr. Gore to elaborate on his call for more ''forward engagement'' in U.S. foreign policy, to quell crises before they erupt. For instance, Mr. Bush could ask Mr. Gore for a single example of where the Clinton team successfully forward-engaged. The Asian economic crisis? Haiti? Kosovo? Russia? Cuba? Iraq? Other than in North Korea, where the Clinton team deserves credit for defusing a very dangerous situation, this would be a short list.
 By contrast, she said Mr. Lazio and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are proposing ''irresponsible, risky schemes'' that have not been tested and are bound to fail. She cited a new advertisement by Mr. Lazio that focuses on his proposed tax plan, which Mrs. Clinton and several independent experts say would cost more than Mr. Lazio suggests.
 Yet by standing together at the Governor's Mansion here, administration officials supporting Vice President Al Gore and governors with loyalty to the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, provided a rare picture of bipartisan achievement and civility. ''This shifts the model of the management of public lands,'' said Mr. Racicot, who is viewed by many Republicans as a possible successor to Mr. Babbitt in a Bush administration. ''We have committed ourselves to actions in the short-term and a long-term study of restoration. This is a moment of opportunity to move the agenda forward.''
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas had been criticized for appearing here in February while saying nothing about the institution's onetime policy of forbidding interracial dating, since changed, and its disagreement with the Roman Catholic Church. ''The press had it all wrong when they vilified George Bush for coming here as he did,'' Mr. Jones said, stressing the similarities of Mr. Buchanan and the school as mavericks who revel in defying the mainstream. The speech was Mr. Buchanan's first since his mid-August operation, and his recuperation could not come at a worse time for Mr. Bush, whose Republican Party Mr. Buchanan ridiculed as having lost the will to fight in tonight's speech. Now that it is clear that Mr. Buchanan will use the Reform Party platform for his own sharp-elbowed positions, he has the opportunity to begin drawing off a few like-minded conservative voters, particularly in southern states like South Carolina, at a moment when Mr. Bush is eager to regain his edge in national polls from Vice President Al Gore.
 White House expresses alarm over possibility that Congress might provide money to states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov George W Bush has proposed in presidential campaign; administration officials say such approach is unworkable (S) The White House expressed alarm today at the possibility that Congress might provide money to the states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov. George W. Bush has proposed. Administration officials said such an approach was unworkable. The White House expressed alarm today at the possibility that Congress might provide money to the states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov. George W. Bush has proposed. Administration officials said such an approach was unworkable. The report attacks the approach favored by Mr. Bush and by Senate Republicans including Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader; Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the assistant majority leader, and William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware, the chairman of the Finance Committee. Correction:  September 23, 2000, Saturday  An article on Thursday about a health care policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush who has financial ties to eight health care companies referred incorrectly to her ownership of 16,000 options on shares in United Health Care, of which she is a director. The adviser, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, sold the shares in May at a profit of $328,144; she does not still hold them. An article on Thursday about a health care policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush who has financial ties to eight health care companies referred incorrectly to her ownership of 16,000 options on shares in United Health Care, of which she is a director. The adviser, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, sold the shares in May at a profit of $328,144; she does not still hold them.
 Photo of Gov George W Bush in Little Rock, Ark, at start of six-day, nine-state trip aimed at gaining support of middle class
 Mr. Clinton raised the prospective deal with Mr. Putin in July in private talks at a Group of 8 meeting in Japan. The contract has also been raised by Vice President Al Gore and Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, with their counterparts. Russian nuclear contacts with Tehran have expanded since 1995, when cash-strapped Moscow signed a contract with Iran to complete the Bushehr nuclear power station, which its German builders abandoned in 1979, at the onset of the revolution. Despite pressure by the Clinton administration and sanctions by Congress, which halved foreign aid to Russia's central government in the last two years, Russia has refused to abandon the project. American officials reportedly do not regard Bushehr as a source of nuclear material that could be diverted to a bomb-making program. But the administration apparently fears that the project will train an entire generation of Iranian physicists and engineers in nuclear technologies, thus enhancing the nuclear scientific base, including any program to develop nuclear weapons. Russian and Iranian officials argue that Iran has ruled out nuclear weapons and has put the Bushehr plant under the international agency's rules and safeguards. Russia has refused to forgo revenue from Bushehr and future reactor sales, each of which could run up to $1 billion. But former President Boris N. Yeltsin pledged not to expand nuclear cooperation with Iran beyond Bushehr, which plans up to four reactor and turbine units.
 Handful of states deemed crucial to outcome of presidential election has become television advertising battlegrounds for campaigns of Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore; Detroit is epicenter of activity; commercial time on local stations in city of one million has been consumed by political advertising with intensity that Democrats and Republicans agree is unmatched in Michigan history; photos (M) Pro-Gore. Anti-Gore. Pro-Bush. Anti-Bush. Commercials by parties and special interest groups praising the contenders for their positions on education and Social Security and attacking them for their positions on education and Social Security. Add to the media mix a fiercely competitive United States Senate race and a bevy of aggressively contested state contests and ballot questions, and the television dial seems tuned to a schedule of all political commercials all the time. This media thicket makes it tough for any candidate to get a coherent message out to voters. But pollsters here say that Vice President Al Gore appears to have had more success. The latest Michigan surveys give him a marginal lead over Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the pollsters assert that a contributing factor is that the Gore spots emphasizing the candidate's stands on specific issues have played better than Republican commercials questioning Mr. Gore's integrity. ''The Bush ads are more thematic,'' said Ed Sarpolus of the EPIC/MRA polling firm, in Lansing, ''and when I look at them, knowing who's on the line here, people want substance, not themes.'' ''The voter today wants to know what your decisions are and how you make them,'' Mr. Sarpolus added. ''If you look at the Gore approach, you notice a lot more of that. Bush has yet to explain any of that.'' Still, Mr. Johnson, a political independent, said he was impressed with Mr. Gore's television campaign and was inclined to support him. ''I don't think he's mudslinging as much as Bush is,'' he said, adding that for Mr. Bush to win his vote, ''he'd have to start talking about the issues more, and getting off Gore's back.'' Some other voters interviewed in Ann Arbor and Detroit acknowledged the spots have made a difference. ''Back in January and February, it seemed that Bush was a stronger candidate, but now I'm leaning towards Gore,'' said James Ambrose, a Detroit photographer. ''Seeing Gore presented in the persona of a respectable figure in advertisements has swayed my opinion.'' But Peter O'Grady, a Bush supporter from Ann Arbor, said he enjoyed the Republican spots that criticized Mr. Gore, particularly one that cited the vice president's assertions that he was instrumental in the development of the Internet.'' Mr. O'Grady called that spot hilarious. What makes the battle of the airwaves here all the more unusual is that while Detroiters and their counterparts in other heavily targeted markets like Philadelphia, St. Louis and Milwaukee are being subjected to large daily doses of Gore and Bush advertisements, voters in other cities, including New York, Los Angeles and Houston, see virtually none. That is because in June, when the general-election advertising got seriously under way, the political parties picked 15 to 17 states -- including Michigan, Pennsylvania, Missouri and Wisconsin -- in which they believed the election would be decided. Because of the campaigns' desire to protect their media strategy, it is difficult to get a full accounting of how and where they spend their money. According to figures provided by senior Gore officials and the Democratic Party, the Bush and Gore campaigns and both parties have bought a total of nearly $60 million in television time for the period of Aug. 21 to Sept. 24, with the largest amounts for both sides being spent in  Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and Florida. On a recent weekday, a viewer channel-surfing the newscasts and other programs between 6 p.m. and 6:30 p.m., a peak half-hour for political spots, turned up 17 of the commercials on local affiliates of ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox. Attacks outpaced embraces. One spot running frequently here by the Republican National Committee suggests shady dealings by Mr. Gore. ''Because of Gore's last fund-raising campaign,'' the announcer says as the vice president's face appears on a television screen-within-a-screen, ''22 people have been indicted, 12 convicted, 70 took the Fifth Amendment and 18 witnesses fled the country.'' Mr. Bush comes in for his share of knocks from Gore partisans as well. In a blistering piece by Handgun Control that ran on several channels, the voiceover gives the impression that the United States will resort to frontier justice if the governor wins the White House. ''Say no to the gun lobby,'' the announcer says. ''Tell George Bush handguns don't belong in our nursing homes and churches.'' But the commercials that appear to be clicking with voters are those that stake out an issue and provide at least a light coat of detail and warmth. Mr. Bush, for example, is frequently running an advertisement promoting his prescription drug plan, while Mr. Gore has a spot on the air here in which a grateful mother tells how the vice president persuaded an insurer not to cut off benefits for her chronically ill little boy.
 THE PACE PICKS UP  With the presidential campaign in the homestretch, the pace is picking up and the Bush and Gore camps are both portraying themselves as going all-out, leaving not a town bypassed, a hand unshaken, a baby unkissed or a local delicacy untried. According to each camp's calculations, here's how yesterday went: Length of the Official Day: Bush, 11 1/2 hours; Gore, 15 1/2 hours States Visited: Bush 3; Gore 2 Towns and Cities Visited: Bush 3; Gore 2 Events: Bush 4; Gore 4 Press Conferences/Interviews: Bush 1; Gore 0 BACK TO HEALTH CARE  At the start of a week that Democrats had said would be devoted to the broad issue of helping working families, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman abruptly shifted gears yesterday and focused instead on health care, an issue the Democrats have found works to their favor but one that Gov. George W. Bush homed in on hard over the weekend. Speaking in Albuquerque, Mr. Lieberman responded to Mr. Bush's charge that Democrats advocate big-government health care solutions by asserting that government does, in fact, have a role to play. Mocking Mr. Bush's health care record in Texas, Mr. Lieberman said: ''He says that we should leave no child behind. But in Texas he has left behind more than one million children who need health insurance. That's Governor Bush's real record, what that real record has meant to real people, real children.'' Then, defending the Democratic approach to health care, Mr. Lieberman said: ''Government can't and shouldn't do everything for everybody. But when it comes to a vital need such as health care, unless government stands up for people, millions of Americans will not have a real choice.'' THE PACE PICKS UP  With the presidential campaign in the homestretch, the pace is picking up and the Bush and Gore camps are both portraying themselves as going all-out, leaving not a town bypassed, a hand unshaken, a baby unkissed or a local delicacy untried. According to each camp's calculations, here's how yesterday went: Length of the Official Day: Bush, 11 1/2 hours; Gore, 15 1/2 hours States Visited: Bush 3; Gore 2 Towns and Cities Visited: Bush 3; Gore 2 Events: Bush 4; Gore 4 Press Conferences/Interviews: Bush 1; Gore 0 BACK TO HEALTH CARE  At the start of a week that Democrats had said would be devoted to the broad issue of helping working families, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman abruptly shifted gears yesterday and focused instead on health care, an issue the Democrats have found works to their favor but one that Gov. George W. Bush homed in on hard over the weekend. Speaking in Albuquerque, Mr. Lieberman responded to Mr. Bush's charge that Democrats advocate big-government health care solutions by asserting that government does, in fact, have a role to play. Mocking Mr. Bush's health care record in Texas, Mr. Lieberman said: ''He says that we should leave no child behind. But in Texas he has left behind more than one million children who need health insurance. That's Governor Bush's real record, what that real record has meant to real people, real children.'' Then, defending the Democratic approach to health care, Mr. Lieberman said: ''Government can't and shouldn't do everything for everybody. But when it comes to a vital need such as health care, unless government stands up for people, millions of Americans will not have a real choice.'' TEAMSTERS CHEER GORE  To the cheers of 1,500 Teamsters, Vice President Al Gore bounded into a Las Vegas ballroom yesterday to formally accept the endorsement of the Teamsters union. James P. Hoffa, the Teamsters' president, declared that the union's 1.5 million members and 500,000 retirees were ''ready to join the fight.'' The union had withheld its endorsement last year when most of the rest of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. endorsed Mr. Gore, but conferred its blessing on Sept. 7. In thanking the members meeting here today, Mr. Gore spoke on behalf of raising the minimum wage and against ''all the union-busting that's going on.''
 Gov George W Bush launches bid to gain allegiance of middle class, arguing that his tax-cut plan would relieve pressure on parents who were forced to hold more than one job to make ends meet; uses issue to open six-day, nine-state drive to showcase proposals campaign says will help middle-income Americans from 'cradle to grave;' first stop is in Pres Clinton's home state of Arkansas, which polls indicate is tossup; photo (S) Gov. George W. Bush began his bid today to gain the allegiance of the middle class, arguing that his tax-cut plan would relieve the pressure on parents who were forced to hold more than one job to make ends meet. Mr. Bush used the issue of tax cuts to open a six-day, nine-state drive to showcase proposals that his campaign said would help middle-income Americans from ''cradle to grave.'' His first stop was in President Clinton's home state of Arkansas, which polls show to be a tossup. Gov. George W. Bush began his bid today to gain the allegiance of the middle class, arguing that his tax-cut plan would relieve the pressure on parents who were forced to hold more than one job to make ends meet. Mr. Bush used the issue of tax cuts to open a six-day, nine-state drive to showcase proposals that his campaign said would help middle-income Americans from ''cradle to grave.'' His first stop was in President Clinton's home state of Arkansas, which polls show to be a tossup. In a line he repeated throughout the day, Mr. Bush said his plan for a $1.3 trillion tax cut over the next decade would give tax relief to all Americans while Vice President Al Gore's proposal for $500 billion in ''targeted'' tax cuts would leave out millions of taxpayers. ''My plan gives people options, not orders,'' Mr. Bush said, adding that ''there's a lot of fine print'' in Mr. Gore's plan. ''It's so targeted that it misses the target,'' Mr. Bush said. His drive to court the middle class came as opinion polls showed Mr. Gore edging ahead in the presidential race, making inroads with voters in households earning $50,000 to $75,000 a year and also making gains with women. Hoping to stem Mr. Gore's advance, Mr. Bush has put a new focus on fighting Mr. Gore head to head on the issues. At a Catholic hospital in Little Rock, Ark., Mr. Bush said it was an ''important week in this campaign, a week that speaks to the aspirations and hopes of middle-class families all across the country.'' His running mate, Dick Cheney, and his aides continued efforts today to hammer away at Mr. Gore's credibility. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, distributed an article from The Boston Globe that challenged Mr. Gore's assertions that his mother-in-law paid nearly three times as much for the same arthritis medicine that was used by his ailing dog Shiloh. The article said that the figures Mr. Gore used came from a House Democratic study and that Mr. Gore's aides could not say for sure whether his mother-in-law and dog actually took the drug, Lodine. Ms. Hughes noted that reporters had focused on how Mr. Bush sometimes mangles words, and said, ''This is not a case of mispronunciation. This is a case of direct misstatement of facts.'' Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for Mr. Gore, called the Bush campaign's focus on the article, ''the latest sign the Bush-Cheney ticket is very, very desperate.'' And she said the campaign had verified that both Mr. Gore's mother-in-law and dog had used the same drug. Despite Mr. Bush's desire to focus on issues, he also made it clear that he would continue to raise questions about the vice president's character and credibility. ''I would rather fight the fight on issues and on philosophy,'' Mr. Bush said in an interview with Fox News, ''but I'm not going to squander the opportunity. I will not let this man distance himself from the previous administration.'' His aides said that in large measure, his drive this week was focused on women. While Democrats in recent campaigns have done better among women than Republicans, Mr. Bush had made headway earlier this year by stressing education. But the traditional ''gender gap'' has reopened. Ms. Hughes said the gap had occurred because Mr. Gore had ''misrepresented'' the governor's record and ''that also he's managed to unfortunately muddy the waters on the issue of education.'' Mr. Bush toured the maternity ward at St. Vincent Doctors Hospital in Little Rock at his first stop today and delivered his speech standing next to two families with babies. Later this week Mr. Bush will appear on Oprah Winfrey's syndicated television program in Chicago and on the Regis Philbin show, both programs that appeal to women. The governor's wife, Laura, was campaigning with him today. Asked about her husband by an audience member in Little Rock, Ark., she said, ''his best character quality is his good heart.'' ''I see that every day in the way he relates to our children, to our pets even,'' Mrs. Bush said. Mr. Gore also kept up his courtship of women today, talking about health care in Las Vegas. In a speech at the University of Nevada, Mr. Gore said: ''The issue today is whether or not we will have a president who stands up and fights for families who need health care, for the women who need health care, for the children, all of whom should have health care, and against the H.M.O.'s and insurance companies that are always standing in the way!'' Mr. Bush's emphasis on the financial problems of the middle class seems to draw inspiration from the success of Mr. Gore's recent appeals. Nearly two weeks ago, Mr. Gore released an economic blueprint with broad social goals including eliminating the national debt, increasing personal savings and homeownership and reducing poverty. The Bush campaign countered  with a 16-page booklet, ''Blueprint for the Middle Class,'' which summarizes Mr. Bush's domestic agenda. Mr. Bush held the pamphlet aloft. ''This pamphlet here outlines exactly what I'm talking about,'' he said. Mr. Bush told Fox News in the interview that he would speed up tax cuts in a recession. Tonight, Mr. Bush flew here and was honored by the local Fraternal Order of Police. In the group's union hall, Mr. Bush kneeled and held a microphone for Jim Mullen, a former police officer who was shot and paralyzed from the neck down in 1996 and is now in a wheelchair. Mr. Mullen had trouble speaking, but he gasped out praise for the governor. When he finished, Mr. Bush leaned over and kissed him on the forehead.
 Bush Courts Middle Class  Gov. George W. Bush opened a six-day, nine-state drive to showcase proposals intended to appeal to middle-income Americans, asserting that his tax cut plan would relieve the pressure on parents who work more than one job. A21  Dick Cheney, sharply questioned by voters and students, sought to allay concerns that Governor Bush's proposal to withhold federal funds from low-performing schools and give the money directly to parents would damage public schools. Gore on Women's Health Care  Vice President Al Gore promoted his plans for improving women's health care and accepted the Teamsters' endorsement at their convention. Warning on Drug Benefit Plan  The White House expressed alarm at the possibility that Congress might provide money to the states to help low-income elderly people buy prescription drugs, as Gov. George W. Bush has proposed. Administration officials asserted that such an approach would be unworkable. Editorials: Mr. Bush's new strategy; the shadowy politics of Peru; a ban on assisted suicides; boys of autumn.
 Gov George W Bush's initial decision to participate in only one of three debates proposed by bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates and two others on individual television networks was based on faulty assumptions by himself and senior aides that voters did not care much about commission; campaign has admitted that strategy backfired (M) When Gov. George W. Bush initially announced that he wanted to take part in only one of the three debates proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates and two others on individual television networks, he and his senior aides made two central assumptions. One was that voters did not care -- or know -- much about the commission. The other was that news organizations would hold Vice President Al Gore's feet to the fire for having said, in the past, that he would participate in network debates. When Gov. George W. Bush initially announced that he wanted to take part in only one of the three debates proposed by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates and two others on individual television networks, he and his senior aides made two central assumptions. One was that voters did not care -- or know -- much about the commission. The other was that news organizations would hold Vice President Al Gore's feet to the fire for having said, in the past, that he would participate in network debates. On the first point, it is impossible to know whether Mr. Bush and his aides were right or wrong. But on the second, it is now clear that they made what even they admit was a significant miscalculation. By Thursday, less than two weeks after Mr. Bush had staked his original position, he had agreed to the entirety of the three-debate schedule outlined by the commission. And several Republican strategists and even a few Republican officials who advise the campaign said that most of what the Bush campaign succeeded in doing over that period of time was making the candidate look halting and nervous. ''In the end, I don't know that it mattered much,'' said an official with ties to the Bush campaign, adding that voters probably paid little heed to the debate over debates. But, the official said, referring to the Bush campaign: ''They overplayed it. There's a thing with public perception that they're still dealing with: Is he deep enough? Is he heavy enough? And every time they go through one of these drills, it looks like they're trying to protect him from something.'' Karen P. Hughes, the director of communications for the campaign, said Mr. Bush emerged from the process in a good position. She said that the formats the campaigns agreed to in negotiations on Saturday were more ''free-flowing'' and less ''stilted'' than they would have been had Mr. Bush not pressed his case. ''We fully expected the media would help us demand that Vice President Gore live up to his word,'' she said. ''Had the shoes been reversed, I think we would still be talking about why Governor Bush had backed off his word.'' But Republican officials said that the Bush campaign failed to take several realities into account. They said that because of Mr. Gore's reputation as an adept debater, the story line accompanying Mr. Bush's desire for alternate formats was bound to pivot on the question of whether he was trying to minimize the impact of the debates. And that question, they said, was fueled by the nature of the Bush plan.  The commission had proposed 90-minute debates that would be broadcast by all the television networks; Mr. Bush had proposed 60-minute sessions likely to be shown only by the network sponsoring them. Other advisers said that the Bush campaign believed that it could successfully use the debate over debates to press the charge that Mr. Gore did not live up to his word. After all, the campaign released snippets of videotape in which Mr. Gore emphatically said he wanted to debate Mr. Bush on the network news programs that Mr. Bush was suggesting. Several advisers said that they thought it would be a strong opening salvo as the campaign entered the newly intense phase after Labor Day and sought to halt the momentum Mr. Gore was carrying out of his convention. But, as other advisers conceded, the strategy backfired. ''They didn't get that the story line about Bush was already set: you're a scaredy- cat,'' one adviser said. So when the Gore campaign declined the network debates, saying that his agreement to do them had been predicated on doing the three commission debates for starters, few news accounts or editorials quibbled with his position. The degree to which the Bush campaign expected and counted on a different reaction from news organizations was reflected in its release, following Mr. Bush's initial announcement, of a commercial that used the snippets of videotape to accuse Mr. Gore of double-speak. The commercial was released in a handful of markets, with the main goal being to generate more news coverage of Mr. Bush's position. Several Bush advisers said they began discussing alternate formats even before the party conventions. By the Labor Day weekend, they said, there was a consensus between the candidate and his aides. The strategy was motivated by several factors, advisers said. A few said that its principal proponent was Mr. Bush, who they said inherited from his father a general dislike of the commission, a feeling that it tried to dictate terms to candidates and that its formats did not flatter President Bush in 1992. Other advisers disputed that contention. In addition, Mr. Bush's aides felt at the time that the public did not care who sponsored the debates. ''We're not stupid,'' one adviser said several weeks ago. ''We've been looking at this. Nobody knows who the commission is.'' Several said they and Mr. Bush believed that the debates would be better suited to him if they were conversational and informal, and they thought that because they were proposing an early debate to be moderated on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' by Tim Russert, a widely respected interviewer, reporters would not see their position as a timid one. But several Republican strategists said that the Bush campaign did not realize that during a period in which Mr. Gore's poll numbers were rising, much of what Mr. Bush did was bound to be interpreted as defensive. One Republican strategist said that beyond the pounding in the news media that the Bush campaign suffered over the course of this, it had also inadvertently strengthened the commission's hand in the future, by first objecting to its power and control and then seeming to surrender.
 Democrats said the Republicans were trying to distance themselves from their own tax-cut plan. They said House Republicans were breaking with their presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, by trying to protect the Medicare surplus.
 Al and Tipper Gore's big kiss at the Democratic National Convention isn't the latest public display of affection by a well-known couple from Tennessee. They're being outdone by Tim McGraw and Faith Hill, the married, multimillion-selling pop-country singers whose shared tour came to Madison Square Garden on Saturday night. Each sang an hourlong solo set; then, after a video about their marriage and children, they returned to share duets and clinches. Their image of lusty fidelity, translated into songs, is just what suburban America -- or at least the program directors of country radio stations -- wants to hear. Al and Tipper Gore's big kiss at the Democratic National Convention isn't the latest public display of affection by a well-known couple from Tennessee. They're being outdone by Tim McGraw and Faith Hill, the married, multimillion-selling pop-country singers whose shared tour came to Madison Square Garden on Saturday night. Each sang an hourlong solo set; then, after a video about their marriage and children, they returned to share duets and clinches. Their image of lusty fidelity, translated into songs, is just what suburban America -- or at least the program directors of country radio stations -- wants to hear.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on media coverage of presidential campaigns of Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore and of election campaign by Republican Repr Rick Lazio for US Senate seat from New York (M) There is a strong feeling on the part of many political campaigns that reporters have way too much time on their hands. They write a story every time George W. Bush backward speaks the sentence written. Or they point out that Al Gore once mistranslated ''e pluribus unum.'' There is a strong feeling on the part of many political campaigns that reporters have way too much time on their hands. They write a story every time George W. Bush backward speaks the sentence written. Or they point out that Al Gore once mistranslated ''e pluribus unum.'' Yesterday there was a flap about whether Mr. Gore had misstated the cost of medicine for his labrador, Shiloh, in a speech on the high price of prescription drugs. ''Frankly, I would expect better from the vice president,'' said Mr. Cheney, more in sorrow than in anger. (Don't bother to send Shiloh get-well cards. Just form a committee, collect some soft money, and run a few TV commercials suggesting that people call Al Gore and thank him for taking care of his dog.) This year the media are leaving no anecdote unexamined, canine or otherwise. Mr. Bush constantly quotes an unnamed Texas woman who once berated him for failing to ''ask for my vote.'' But Jim Dwyer of The Daily News recently pointed out that when Tip O'Neill used to tell the story, the woman lived in Boston.
 Op-Ed article by Bard College president Leon Botstein examines proposals by presidential candidates Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore to improve public education; says no matter who wins there is little reason to believe that any serious improvement in education is in offing; says neither candidate is willing to confront underlying obstacle to real change, namely, premise that basic responsibility for education rests with communities and states, not with federal government; drawings (M) The presidential candidates are taking their parties to new places with their education proposals: Al Gore has called for higher standards for teachers as well as higher pay, while George W. Bush has emphasized closing the achievement gap between rich and poor and holding schools accountable for student performance. Yet no matter who wins in November, there is little reason to believe that any serious improvement is in the offing. The presidential candidates are taking their parties to new places with their education proposals: Al Gore has called for higher standards for teachers as well as higher pay, while George W. Bush has emphasized closing the achievement gap between rich and poor and holding schools accountable for student performance. Yet no matter who wins in November, there is little reason to believe that any serious improvement is in the offing. As things stand now, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore can say anything they want about education, but in the end, they can't be held accountable. A real ''education president'' would be one who admits that our education crisis cuts across state lines, and that the solution is a federal system based on national standards and paid for with federal dollars.
 Even as his opponent shifts into more aggressive gear, Vice President Al Gore is hewing to front-runner's strategy that relies on discipline, stagecraft and control; with two weeks remaining before first of three presidential debates, he is determined not to be forced onto defensive by sharpened attacks of Gov George W Bush; photo (M) Even as his opponent shifts into a more aggressive gear, Vice President Al Gore is hewing to a front-runner's  strategy that relies on discipline,  stagecraft and control. With two weeks left before the first of three presidential debates, Mr. Gore is determined not to be forced onto the defense by the sharpened attacks of Gov. George W. Bush. On Saturday, Mr. Bush delivered a speech that assailed Mr. Gore as a big-government Democrat, a point the Republican nominee then reinforced in a series of interviews on Sunday. Even as his opponent shifts into a more aggressive gear, Vice President Al Gore is hewing to a front-runner's  strategy that relies on discipline,  stagecraft and control. With two weeks left before the first of three presidential debates, Mr. Gore is determined not to be forced onto the defense by the sharpened attacks of Gov. George W. Bush. On Saturday, Mr. Bush delivered a speech that assailed Mr. Gore as a big-government Democrat, a point the Republican nominee then reinforced in a series of interviews on Sunday. But Mr. Gore has declined to respond in his own words, though his campaign aides have had plenty to say. Today, in two appearances in Las Vegas before flying here for a fund-raiser, Mr. Gore stuck carefully to script. At a rally where he did not mention Mr. Bush by name, he promoted his plans for improving women's health care, and then he formally accepted the endorsement of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters at the union's convention. Such campaigning has become Mr. Gore's pattern since his poll numbers began improving after the Democratic National Convention. In many ways, he has become the boy in the bubble, running a highly insulated, carefully managed campaign that keeps him on message, places him in photogenic surroundings and circumvents traditional media whenever possible. Today, Mr. Gore surpassed his previous record for the interval since his last open news conference, a mark that now stands at 63 days. Instead, Mr. Gore is relying increasingly on lighthearted appearances on television talk shows -- he sat beside  Oprah Winfrey and David Letterman last week -- to convey a sense of his candidacy, and his typical day on the road is often driven by setting as much as by substance. While he grants occasional interviews, they are often limited to subjects of his choosing. Mr. Gore's strategy of essentially trying to freeze news coverage is not a new one, either for him or for American politics. ''This is line one from the Reagan playbook,'' said S. Robert Lichter, president of The Center for Media and Public Affairs, a nonpartisan group that monitors coverage of campaigns. ''There's no need to generate good press when you're in the lead. You just step aside and let your opponent's bad press keep accumulating.'' For their part, Bush advisers are hoping to generate some news that favors their candidate, by increasing his schedule and focusing anew on his position on issues of concern to the middle class. ''We're going for a thaw,'' said Dan Bartlett, a Bush spokesman. As he is doing now, Mr. Gore went into a kind of visible isolation last February after he began to overcome his primary opponent, Bill Bradley. He delivered packaged messages on a variety of issues, raised money, shored up relations with traditional Democrats, especially minority voters, and devoted himself to activities like spending eight hours in a single school. He avoided holding a news conference from Feb. 19 to April 21. Mr. Gore defeated Mr. Bradley in every state where there was a contest, and his aides believe he is now achieving similarly positive results. He has moved ahead of Mr. Bush in some polls, his fund-raising is vigorous, and he is garnering strong coverage in the local media, they say. By avoiding news conferences, Mr. Gore has kept the focus of coverage on his chosen message, minimized any chance for distraction and lessened the prospect that some careless remark might prompt a media feeding frenzy. He is careful, for instance, not to come back to the press cabin of Air Force II on days when his comments could prolong the shelf life of a harmful story. Mr. Bush did just that, with devastating results, when he told reporters on his plane several weeks ago that he had not done a good job explaining his tax-cut plan. That confession helped fuel a weeklong series of news reports suggesting that the Bush campaign was having problems communicating its message. Republicans are now trying to make an issue out of Mr. Gore's seclusion. They set up a conference call today for reporters to speak with Representative David Dreier, a Republican from California, to focus attention on what they called ''Gore's disappearance from the American public.'' And Nelson Warfield, a Republican strategist in Bob Dole's 1996 campaign, said in an interview today that  ''it's harder to get at Al Gore than it is to get at the mummy's crypt.'' Mr. Gore's seclusion stands in stark contrast to the more accessible campaign style of Mr. Bush, who holds regular news conferences. But political analysts and Gore advisers said that Mr. Gore was only being savvy. Mr. Lichter said the public does not care much about the media's access to a candidate and that there was little reason for Mr. Gore to change tactics as long as he is winning the daily battle for headlines. A study by Mr. Lichter's center found that during the first week of September, when an open microphone captured Mr. Bush denigrating a reporter, Mr. Gore received favorable coverage on the networks' evening newscasts at the same time that Mr. Bush received negative coverage, the first week that has happened. Mr. Gore's team of strategists, many of them tested in two Clinton-Gore campaigns and the crucible of impeachment, have decided that the path to victory is surer when little is left to chance. That is particularly true, they assert, during this stage of the campaign, when the views of swing voters are likely to remain frozen until the October debates. Instead, they have chosen to use this time to continue their efforts to humanize Mr. Gore, a process that accelerated at the Democratic convention. Thus, the appearances on talk shows, where Mr. Gore scores by slapping a high-five with Ms. Winfrey or reading a self-deprecating top ten list to Mr. Letterman. He is scheduled to appear with Jay Leno on Tuesday, and an appearance on Rosie O'Donnell's show is also being discussed. Mr. Gore's aides like such forums because the hosts rarely ask the difficult questions. One Gore aide exulted last week that the appearance on Oprah had been an ''hour-long commercial.'' Some of the Gore campaign's bubble effect is simply a consequence of the trappings of the vice presidency. Mr. Gore travels on Air Force II, which has room for only a small, rotating pool of reporters. A separate plane carries most of the press corps. Even encounters intended to look spontaneous are anything but. In late August, on his way to deliver a speech in Tallahassee on his drug plan, Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, stopped at Baker's Pharmacy with a crew of cameras in tow. There, the Gores found 82-year-old Myrtle Jennings, who was only too happy to tell them that her $207 monthly drug bill sometimes forced her to choose among prescriptions. But Mrs. Jennings was not there by accident. A Gore aide, directed to her by the pharmacist, had called her four days earlier, interviewed her, and then invited her to show up at the store at the appointed time.
