 Many recent presidents have tried to mimic the demotic style of Roosevelt's fireside chats, the wit and flair of Kennedy's news conferences and the anecdotal power of Reagan's speeches. But Truman's straight talk has had an equal if not larger influence on presidents' communication strategies. Al Gore's pledge in his speech at the Democratic National Convention ''to stand up'' for working families by waging the ''day-by-day fight'' against the ''powerful forces and powerful interests that stand'' in their way could have been delivered by Truman. And Gore's postconvention rise in the polls suggests that Trumanesque clarity and empathy can still galvanize the public. Many recent presidents have tried to mimic the demotic style of Roosevelt's fireside chats, the wit and flair of Kennedy's news conferences and the anecdotal power of Reagan's speeches. But Truman's straight talk has had an equal if not larger influence on presidents' communication strategies. Al Gore's pledge in his speech at the Democratic National Convention ''to stand up'' for working families by waging the ''day-by-day fight'' against the ''powerful forces and powerful interests that stand'' in their way could have been delivered by Truman. And Gore's postconvention rise in the polls suggests that Trumanesque clarity and empathy can still galvanize the public.
 ''Lost Years'' covers the period 1945-51, in which the stamina or self-awareness necessary for a journal dissolved in drink and promiscuity. Time and again, Christopher is on the floor, scarcely alert to what is going on. Day after day he is caught up in the techniques of reciprocal onanism. Only one book, ''Prater Violet,'' was published in these years, and that was written in 1943-4. Apart from that, he was struggling to make sense out of movies like ''The Woman in White'' (from Wilkie Collins) and ''The Great Sinner'' (from Dostoyevsky). (This was not the worst: years later, Isherwood did the life of Diane de Poitiers for Lana Turner, then tried to persuade Gore Vidal, or himself, that it was viable.)
 Close reading of Vice Pres Al Gore's and Gov George W Bush's budget proposals and interviews with economists and analysts inside and outside campaigns suggest proposals are more substantive than those developed by two parties in previous elections, but hinge on optimistic assumptions; proposals provide look at candidates' priorities and test of their fiscal responsibility; Gore has built more of buffer into his budget; Bush has less wiggle room, even by own reckoning, should surplus fall short of expectations or need for new spending be greater than he assumes; Bush stresses tax cut, Gore new spending and debt reduction; table of proposals; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have made clear the differences in how they would use the federal budget surplus, the much-anticipated but as yet unrealized bounty of prosperity. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have made clear the differences in how they would use the federal budget surplus, the much-anticipated but as yet unrealized bounty of prosperity. A close reading of the proposals put forward by Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, and interviews with economists and analysts inside and outside the campaigns, suggest the budget plans are more substantive than those developed by the two parties in previous elections, but that each hinges on optimistic assumptions. If his accounting is taken at face value, Mr. Gore has an advantage in that he has built more of a buffer into his budget. Mr. Bush, even by his own reckoning, has less wiggle room should the surplus fall short of expectations or the need for new spending be greater than he assumes. Mr. Bush has made a tax cut the centerpiece of his budget. Mr. Gore stresses new spending and reducing the national debt. Each campaign seeks every day to punch holes in the other's budget arithmetic. Mr. Bush's campaign contends that Mr. Gore has understated, by hundreds of billions of dollars, the cost of his plan to promote retirement savings. The Gore camp points out that Mr. Bush has not included in his budget any money to deploy a national missile defense, a cornerstone of Mr. Bush's military policy. Of that, $2.39 trillion would come from excess payroll tax revenue earmarked for Social Security. The two parties have agreed not to use the Social Security surplus for tax cuts or spending programs. Mr. Gore would use it to pay down the national debt, except for $97 billion he would use to increase benefits for elderly women. Mr. Bush would split it between debt reduction and helping to pay for his proposal to create private investment accounts within Social Security. Mr. Bush's plan starts with a tax cut of just over $1.3 trillion. He values his spending initiatives at $475 billion, including $158 billion for the addition of prescription drug coverage to Medicare, $132 billion to make health insurance more affordable and $45 billion in additional money for the military. Mr. Bush's tax and spending package comes to $1.79 trillion. After adding the interest costs that stem from using the surplus for any purpose other than debt reduction -- $312 billion in this case -- the total Bush budget comes to about $2.1 trillion, or just $70 billion less than the anticipated surplus. Mr. Bush seeks to give himself a little more breathing room by pledging to produce savings of a little less than $200 billion over 10 years from what he terms government reform. He can therefore claim that he still has $265 billion in reserve. ''The combination of Social Security reform, tax rate reductions and debt reduction that are in George W. Bush's plan is a responsible framework for helping us prepare for the future,'' said John F. Cogan, an economist who advises the Bush campaign on fiscal policy. ''The $260 billion to $300 billion cushion should suffice to meet contingencies that might arise.'' Mr. Gore starts by asserting that the $2.17 trillion surplus is actually a $1.81 trillion surplus. Just as the two parties have agreed to wall off the portion of the surplus generated by Social Security, Mr. Gore says they should also agree to neither spend nor use for tax cuts the portion of the surplus from excess Medicare payroll tax revenues -- $360 billion over the next decade. He says he would use that money only to reduce the national debt. Of the remaining $1.81 trillion surplus, Mr. Gore would use $1.51 trillion, according to his campaign's estimates, for his tax and spending initiatives and their interest costs. He would provide tax cuts of $480 billion. He would allocate $340 billion to Medicare, including the addition of prescription drug coverage and money to keep the insurance program solvent. He would increase spending on national security, including the military, by $100 billion, and would provide an additional $120 billion each to health care and the environment. The interest costs for his plans would be $253 billion. Mr. Gore would then set aside the remaining $300 billion as a reserve fund. To help his numbers add up, Mr. Gore assumes that his tax cut can be partly paid for with $96 billion he says could be raised by closing tax loopholes. He assumes that he can eliminate $30 billion in wasteful spending from the Pentagon and other agencies. And he proposes to raise $66 billion by raising taxes on cigarettes. ''Al Gore has put forward a strong, pro-growth framework which includes bold steps for education, research and savings and working-family tax cuts,'' said Gene Sperling, the White House economic policy director, who is advising the Gore campaign. Mr. Gore's approach ''not only continues the path toward making America debt-free, but even includes a $300 billion surplus reserve to ensure we get there even if unexpected emergencies or contingencies occur,'' Mr. Sperling said. Mr. Bush's budget would overrun the projected surplus if Congress were to bar the use of the Medicare surplus for tax cuts or spending, as Mr. Gore has proposed. If Mr. Bush cannot find the promised $200 billion in savings from what he calls government reform, he would have trouble paying for potentially expensive initiatives like deploying a national missile defense. And his budget makes no provision for the possibility that his plan to create investment accounts within Social Security might require money from general tax revenues. Mr. Gore could have trouble if his initiatives prove to be more expensive than he has estimated. Republican budget analysts in Congress say Mr. Gore has badly understated the costs not only of his retirement savings plan but also of other proposals, like his call for universal preschool education. Mr. Gore could also have trouble raising some of the nonsurplus money he is counting on. The Clinton administration's efforts to increase taxes on cigarettes have gone nowhere, and its efforts to crack down on tax loopholes have found little support in Congress. But because Mr. Gore has not committed as much to tax and spending initiatives as Mr. Bush, he possibly  has more flexibility should his budget plans go awry. At least by his own accounting, he can claim to have a buffer of at least $660 billion: the $360 billion Medicare surplus, which Mr. Gore would put to reducing the national debt, plus his $300 billion reserve fund. That is nearly $400 billion more than Mr. Bush's $265 billion buffer.
 George Bush senior reminded every woman of her first husband. Steve Forbes reminded every woman of her first husband's accountant. And now Little Ricky reminds every woman of her husband on a peevish tear about expenses, just like those classic scenes from ''I Love Lucy,'' when Big Ricky's eyes would pop and veins would bulge as he waved a bill at Lucy and ordered her to stop spending the household money on hats. Like Al Gore, Hillary Clinton may not be the warmest candidate, but both do their homework. Like the vice president, she's been blessed with an opponent who seems immature, lazy and susceptible to clumsy moments. On Friday, Mr. Lazio misstated the legal voting age as 21 while visiting an elementary school in Riverhead.
 Gov George W Bush, in broad, specific and strongly worded attack on Vice Pres Al Gore, casts him as advocate of bigger government, speech via satellite to California Republican Party convention; signals his campaign's heightened desire to challenge Gore on issues and fashion Bush as real populist; Gore aides issue swift, unusually detailed rebuttal; attack Bush's proposals; excerpts from Bush speech (M) Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked Vice President Al Gore's positions on tax cuts, Social Security, Medicare and education today, casting them as triumphs of federal control over individual choice. ''My opponent's ideas are shaped by a quarter century in Washington -- they were tired even when his career began,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech to a convention of the California Republican Party that he delivered by satellite from his central Texas ranch this afternoon. ''Every big idea means bigger government. It's an old temptation: you start off trying to help people, and you end up telling them what to do.'' Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked Vice President Al Gore's positions on tax cuts, Social Security, Medicare and education today, casting them as triumphs of federal control over individual choice. ''My opponent's ideas are shaped by a quarter century in Washington -- they were tired even when his career began,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech to a convention of the California Republican Party that he delivered by satellite from his central Texas ranch this afternoon. ''Every big idea means bigger government. It's an old temptation: you start off trying to help people, and you end up telling them what to do.'' The speech was by far Mr. Bush's most comprehensive, specific and  strongly worded criticism of his Democratic opponent's policies, signaling his campaign's heightened desire to challenge Mr. Gore on issues and fashioning Mr. Bush as the real populist in the presidential race. ''The vice president talks about 'the people versus the powerful,' '' Mr. Bush said. ''But, in all his plans, who ends up with the power? Who always ends up making the choices? Not the taxpayers, but the tax collectors. Not the senior citizens, but the H.M.O. overseers. Not the parents, or even the teachers, but some distant central office.'' The remarks provoked a swift and extraordinarily detailed response from Mr. Gore's aides, who issued a nearly 3,500-word written rebuttal and put many of Mr. Bush's proposals under their own microscope. They charged Mr. Bush with false assumptions and faulty arithmetic and left no doubt about the energy with which they would participate in an intensifying policy debate. For more than a week, Mr. Bush's aides had said that he would begin to paint bolder contrasts between his and Mr. Gore's positions on some of the issues most important to voters. And in bits and pieces, Mr. Bush did that over the last six days, as he campaigned in Florida, Missouri, Washington, California and New Mexico, maintaining a schedule that reflected the degree to which he has picked up his pace. But not until today did he venture such a sweeping and pointed dissection of Mr. Gore's agenda. His speech was full of new and newly aggressive language, coupled with the assertion that if the campaign centers on issues, Mr. Gore will be forced ''to play on our turf.'' That claim amounted to an inversion of the conventional wisdom and of the findings in many polls, which show that more voters side with Mr. Gore and Democrats on many of these issues. But Mr. Bush's remarks today showed that he would try to erase that advantage by characterizing Mr. Gore as an old-style Democrat bent on big spending and intrusive government regulation. He portrayed himself, in turn, as the candidate of new ideas, and he sought to turn his own considerably more limited and shorter career in government into an advantage by tagging Mr. Gore as the caretaker of the status quo. ''I do not believe government is the enemy,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But I do not believe government is always the answer. At its best, it can help people find the tools they need to build for themselves. At its best, it gives options, not orders. At its best, government can help us live our lives, but it must never run our lives.'' The Bush campaign's greater resolve to engage Mr. Gore on issues underscored the progress that Mr. Gore has made in making himself more likable to voters. Mr. Bush's aides came to believe that it was more important than ever to tangle with Mr. Gore not simply over questions of character but also over questions of policy. In an appearance today on the CNN news program ''Evans, Novak, Hunt & Shields,'' Mr. Bush made clear that he was not entirely abandoning the former, and made reference to Mr. Gore's fund-raising efforts in the 1996 presidential race. ''The vice president's a good family man, no question about it,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But he has been part of an administration that violated financing laws. He did go to the Buddhist temple. He made phone calls from the White House and then uttered the famous phrase, 'no controlling legal authority.' '' But the critique of Mr. Gore in today's speech steered clear of ethics and personality, which Republicans once saw as Mr. Gore's principal vulnerabilities, and straight into the issues. It illustrated Mr. Bush's eagerness to dictate the terms of the  race after several weeks in which he did not do so. Mr. Bush said that Mr. Gore's proposal for ''targeted'' tax cuts, less than half the size of his own $1.3 trillion plan over 10 years, was so rife with conditions that it rewarded only people who lived as the federal government saw fit. ''You may get help with child care, but only if your child is in paid or government-approved child care,''  Mr. Bush said. ''Grandparents and family and friends are not included.'' ''My opponent's theory is that only the 'right' people should get tax relief,'' he added. ''That's what Vice President Gore calls them, the 'right' people. But there are no right people or wrong people in America.'' He said that Mr. Gore's proposal to provide prescription drugs for elderly Americans through Medicare would not allow any flexibility. He said that Mr. Gore would not do enough to change Social Security and that the vice president's plan did not address the long-term financial solvency of the program. ''He relies on accounting gimmicks and massive I.O.U.'s that our children will have to pay,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He calls his plan 'Social Security Plus,' '' Mr. Bush said. ''And that's a good name. The Gore plan is Social Security, plus massive government debt. Social Security, plus a staggering tax increase on the next generation.'' The Gore campaign marshaled news articles and its own numbers to dispute many of Mr. Bush's charges, and Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said in an interview, ''The speech is as fatuous as his policies are flawed as his allegations are flagrantly wrong.'' The Bush campaign, for example, maintains that at least 50 million American taxpayers would not have their taxes lowered under Mr. Gore's plan, while the Gore campaign puts that figure at around 30 million. The Gore campaign's written answer to the Bush speech cited analyses that supported Mr. Gore's contention that middle-class Americans would get more economic help from him. Mr. Lehane said that Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut -- which, in raw dollars, gives the most money back to the wealthiest Americans -- was proof that Mr. Bush would not have the resources, and did not have the desire, to help low-income and middle-class Americans. ''George W. Bush has no credibility on the issues, since he spends the entire budget surplus on a massive tax cut for the few at the expense of the many,'' Mr. Lehane said. Aides said Mr. Bush's speech was a preview of the week to come. As he visits nine states over six days, Mr. Bush will pursue a cradle-to-grave comparison of what he believes to be the disparate effects of his policies and Mr. Gore's. At the beginning of the week, he will talk about children; at the end, about elderly people. But his strategy carries risks, and not only because of the suggestion in polls that more voters believe that Mr. Gore shares their positions on issues. Mr. Bush is not always as forceful in detailed policy discussions as he is in broadly thematic appeals, and while today's speech allowed him to read from a text, many of the kinds of town hall-style campaign events that his campaign is staging are less controlled. At such events this week, Mr. Bush's appraisals of Mr. Gore's proposals were nowhere near as vigorous as they were today. Mr. Bush has spent much of the 15 months since he began his campaign laying out his own proposals. What was new about today's speech was how long and how critically it dwelled on the policies that Mr. Gore is advocating. He lashed into Mr. Gore's calls for new government spending, saying that Mr. Gore would create federal budget deficits. ''My opponent has a plan for the non-Social Security surplus: he's going to spend it all on new programs,'' Mr. Bush said. And Mr. Bush used this charge to label Mr. Gore as someone who had been in Washington too long already. ''I can sum up my opponent's economic plan in one simple sentence: keep sending too much of your money to Washington, because Al Gore thinks he knows how to spend it better than you do,'' Mr. Bush said. He invoked President Reagan to explain why he felt that Mr. Gore was not a champion of the people. That detail perhaps demonstrated Mr. Bush's need and attempt to win  ''Reagan Democrats'' as he and Mr. Gore compete for voters without binding allegiances to either party. ''As Ronald Reagan said,'' Mr. Bush recalled, '' 'You can't be for big government, big bureaucracy, and still be for the little guy.' '' Following are excerpts from remarks delivered yesterday by Governor Bush to a meeting of the California Republican Party in Palm Springs, Calif. He addressed the group from his ranch near Crawford, Tex., by satellite: ''On taxes, here's my plan: If you pay income taxes, you get a tax cut . . . My opponent has a plan, too. He calls it targeted tax relief. The first problem is that at least 50 million American taxpayers -- over half the total -- are nowhere near the target. They get nothing. All the rest may get a tax cut from Al Gore, but only if they do things his way. My opponent's theory is that only the 'right' people should get tax relief. That's what Vice President Gore calls them, the 'right' people. But there are no right people or wrong people in America. Tax relief should be aimed at one big target, so you can't miss. Everyone in America who pays income taxes should get tax relief . . .
 Gergen makes no effort to hide his Republican loyalties, but there is no obvious partisanship here. Republicans hoping for a well-timed attack on Vice President Gore will be disappointed; Gergen says Gore ''often gave the president some of his shrewdest advice.'' Richard Nixon's Republicanism does not keep Gergen from attributing his downfall to ''demons within.'' Even Gergen's excessively generous treatment of Ronald Reagan owes less to political loyalty than to an appreciation of Reagan's demeanor and attitude, including his willingness to conciliate those Washington elites rather than go to war with them as Nixon and, later, Clinton did.
 Bush and Gore Focus On 10 Crucial States  Vice President Al Gore, who has erased Gov. George W. Bush's lead in most national polls, has also edged ahead of him in the battle for electoral votes, according to independent and partisan analysts. But several major states are still tossups. Mr. Bush attacked Mr. Gore's positions on tax cuts, Medicare and education, signaling his campaign's desire to focus on issues.
 Latest poll has Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush tied in New Hampshire; both candidates have visited in recent weeks, their first visits since primaries; state offers Bush his best chance of victory in New England (S) New Hampshire could fall either way. Mr. Bush had been leading slightly in recent months, but the latest poll by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center has Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore tied at 42 percent. About 10 percent said they preferred other candidates and 6 percent remained undecided. Historically, the state had been a good bet for Republican presidential candidates, until Mr. Clinton was victorious here twice. The governor, Jeanne Shaheen, is a Democrat in her second term, and made Mr. Gore's short list of possible running mates. Still, 37 percent of registered voters are Republicans, compared with 27 percent who are Democrats. New Hampshire could fall either way. Mr. Bush had been leading slightly in recent months, but the latest poll by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center has Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore tied at 42 percent. About 10 percent said they preferred other candidates and 6 percent remained undecided. Historically, the state had been a good bet for Republican presidential candidates, until Mr. Clinton was victorious here twice. The governor, Jeanne Shaheen, is a Democrat in her second term, and made Mr. Gore's short list of possible running mates. Still, 37 percent of registered voters are Republicans, compared with 27 percent who are Democrats. Mr. Bush probably has uncomfortable memories of New Hampshire because of his stinging loss to Senator John McCain in the primary in February, but polls indicate he has won back most of those Republican votes. The polls show that each candidate can count on about three-quarters of his party's registered voters and will need to secure the rest, as well as win over a substantial number of independents, to prevail. New Hampshire residents like to vote, usually insuring a good turnout. New Hampshire is by far Bush's best chance of a victory in New England, and in recent weeks he has been running more ads here than his competition.
 But New York also has its advantages -- in particular, the matrix of immigrant communities that serves as a safety net for so many of the city's newcomers. While at Wackenhut, Kanyinda had gotten to know several other Congolese asylum seekers, and one of these, a man named Eddie, had a sister who told Kanyinda about an evangelical church on Nostrand Avenue in Brooklyn that might help him find housing. It was through the church that Kanyinda met Gigi, a friendly, round-faced man, originally from Kinshasa (the capital of Congo), who offered him room and board in his fourth-floor apartment in Bushwick for just $200 a month.
 In his early days in Congress, Mr. Stockman recalled fondly, he hotly debated energy and environmental policy with another brash young freshman named Al Gore. ''We argued incessantly, to the chagrin of the senior members, who felt the kids shouldn't talk at all,'' Mr. Stockman said.
 A New York Times analysis found that most of Mr. Corzine's money went for television and radio commercials to compensate for his oppoent's edge in name-recognition. Mr. Corzine bought $18 million in TV time. Shrum, Devine & Donilon, which booked nearly all of his commercials, was paid $450,000 for producing them and received $488,000 in consulting fees. In comparison, Vice President Al Gore spent $10.8 million and George W. Bush $25.2 million in their national TV campaigns through July 31.
 Strong support in Colorado for ballot initiative to require background checks of those buying guns at shows is among early signs that Gov George W Bush may not win state; latest poll shows Vice Pres Al Gore has erased Bush's big lead; Democrats are investing more capital in state, with visit by Sen Joseph I Lieberman to be followed by visit by Gore's daughter, Kristen, and possible Gore visit (M) One of the early signs that Colorado's eight electoral votes may no longer be a sure bet for Mr. Bush is a ballot initiative to require background checks of those buying guns at weekend shows. One of the early signs that Colorado's eight electoral votes may no longer be a sure bet for Mr. Bush is a ballot initiative to require background checks of those buying guns at weekend shows. Then, said the Democrats' state party chairman, Tim Knaus, Mr. Gore's message on growth, environment, education and the economy began to catch on, and all of a sudden the presidential race in the state  appears to be a dead heat. The latest statewide poll, conducted this month for The Rocky Mountain News and KCNC, the CBS affiliate in Denver, found that Mr. Gore had closed the advantage Mr. Bush held in July, 45 percent to 31 percent, to a virtual tie of 43 to 40, with Mr. Gore inside the margin of error of 4 percentage points. Gov. Bill Owens, who is serving as Mr. Bush's state campaign chairman, said he did not believe the poll and pointed to another, conducted by a firm that he and other Colorado Republicans use, that showed Mr. Bush with a lead ''above 10 points.'' Yet, he conceded: ''The race has obviously narrowed, and Governor Bush has had some difficult weeks. But campaigns run in cycles and after a tough month that left us essentially even, we have a nice base to go back up.'' Colorado has recently shown an independent streak in presidential elections, supporting Bill Clinton over President Bush in 1992 by 4 percentage points and Bob Dole over Mr. Clinton four years later by 2 points in a race in which third-party candidates won 10 percent of the vote. But as one measure of the apparent shift back, the Democrats are investing more capital in Colorado, with Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, visiting today, to be followed by Mr. Gore's daughter Kristen next week. And talks are under way to bring in Mr. Gore. Mr. Owens said he welcomed the visits. ''I'm confident enough Coloradans will support Governor Bush,'' he said. ''So every dollar they spend here takes it out of states they have a better chance of winning.''
 CLINTON and Lazio. Gore and Bush. They may have the attention of most New York voters these days, but in Nassau County, the races to watch are more local, much more local. CLINTON and Lazio. Gore and Bush. They may have the attention of most New York voters these days, but in Nassau County, the races to watch are more local, much more local. They are also buoyed by the fact that Democrats traditionally vote in higher numbers in a presidential election year and hope that a strong showing for Al Gore's will help Hempstead Democrats.
 New Mexico, despite its small number of electoral votes, is viewed as national bellwether in presidential politics and has already attracted visits from Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; new poll shows race remains statistical tie; Gore continues to lead among Hispanic voters, whom Bush courts aggressively (M) This may help explain why both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush already have both visited this state with only five  electoral votes -- and likely will come again before Election Day. This may help explain why both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush already have both visited this state with only five  electoral votes -- and likely will come again before Election Day. This weekend, The Albuquerque Journal is scheduled to release a poll that declares the race a statistical tie. The poll of 553 likely and registered voters gave Mr. Bush 43 percent and Mr. Gore 42 percent, with 11 percent remaining undecided. The poll, conducted by Research and  Polling Inc., was taken from Sept. 7-13. Neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Gore  has an apparent reason for claiming momentum; a March poll found the two candidates tied. Mr. Bush has courted Hispanic voters aggressively, and New Mexico would seem fertile ground for this appeal, since Hispanic residents make up about 41 percent of the state's population. But The Journal poll shows Mr. Gore with a lead among Hispanics, 57 percent to 25 percent.
 Georgia's unusual demographics could make state important testing ground for Gov George W Bush's ability to hold onto his base; teetering political balance is sustained by three distinct voting groups: African-Americans in cities, who vote Democratic; suburbanites, who tend to be Republicans but will support centrist Democrats, and rural voters, who are less tied to party affiliations; Bush holds narrow lead (M) Georgia has not spent much time this year on anyone's list of hotly competitive states, but its unusual demographics could make it an important testing ground for Mr. Bush's ability to hold on to his base. Though Mr. Bush is still ahead here, his lead is narrow, and political professionals say there is no better place to gauge his national strength in the weeks ahead. ''If Georgia turns out to be close, that means Gore will win nationally,'' said Bobby Kahn, chief of staff for Gov. Roy E. Barnes and a leading Democratic strategists in the state. Georgia has not spent much time this year on anyone's list of hotly competitive states, but its unusual demographics could make it an important testing ground for Mr. Bush's ability to hold on to his base. Though Mr. Bush is still ahead here, his lead is narrow, and political professionals say there is no better place to gauge his national strength in the weeks ahead. ''If Georgia turns out to be close, that means Gore will win nationally,'' said Bobby Kahn, chief of staff for Gov. Roy E. Barnes and a leading Democratic strategists in the state. The state has always been comfortable with centrist Democrats like Mr. Barnes and Senator Max Cleland, but like the rest of the South, it  remains suspicious of Democratic presidential tickets. While Georgia did vote for Bill Clinton in 1992, that was mostly because Ross Perot drew support away from George Bush; four years later, Mr. Clinton drew more votes than in 1992, but was narrowly beaten by Bob Dole for the state's 13 electoral votes. Black voters in Georgia tend to be better organized than in other Southern states, and their turnout, along with that of white suburban women, will be the key to the outcome, pollsters say. Two polls taken for each of the major parties since the convention showed Mr. Bush with leads of 6 and 7 percentage points, but both were fairly conservative with their estimates of black turnout. Both parties acknowledge that if black turnout is higher than it was for Mr. Barnes's election in 1998, the race will be much closer. As a result, the Democrats will be concentrating on getting out black voters, hoping that the former Democratic Gov. Zell Miller's popular Senate candidacy will bring along suburbanites. Mr. Bush has already begun running television advertisements in the state's largest markets, unlike Mr. Gore; but both sides are expected to spend a considerable amount of money and time in the state beginning next month.
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 George W. Bush: 24  PREVIOUS WEEK'S JOKES: 38  % CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS WEEK: -37% Al Gore: 23  PREVIOUS WEEK'S JOKES: 7  % CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS WEEK: +229% George W. Bush: 24  PREVIOUS WEEK'S JOKES: 38  % CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS WEEK: -37% Al Gore: 23  PREVIOUS WEEK'S JOKES: 7  % CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS WEEK: +229% 'Not subliminal, subliminable!'  ''Have you seen George W. Bush trying to pronounce the word 'subliminal?' He pronounces the word 'subliminable' - not 'subliminal,' 'subliminable.' And it makes me wonder, gosh do you think this guy is 'electimable'?''  David Letterman ''This is not a good week for George W. Bush. Now he$)s angrily denying a report in this month's 'Vanity Fair' that he has dyslexia. He said today, 'Thank Dog I don't have it.'''  Jay Leno ''Al Gore has been accused of polling voters and using the result of that poll to write his policy statements. This made him mad, he shot back. Today Gore said, 'I pay no attention to the polls and neither do 73.3% of the American people.'''  Jay Leno
 Polls suggest contest for Missouri, which tends to seesaw in presidential races, is close call; Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush or their running mates have been visiting state almost weekly (M) One poll, taken by Zogby International and published on Sept. 10 in The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, showed Mr. Gore with a slight lead -- 45 percent to Mr. Bush's 40 percent. But with a margin of sampling error of 4 percentage points, that lead is decisively soft. ''Bush, I think, isn't regarded worse than he was,'' Professor Davis said. ''He hasn't come down so much as Gore has come up.'' In the poll, Mr. Gore's strongest support was in St. Louis. Outside the cities, he and Mr. Bush were statistically tied. Roy Temple, executive director of the Missouri Democratic Party, said the suburbs were the real battleground. Mr. Gore is ''aggressively campaigning here and I think that's making a difference,'' he said.
 Vice Pres Al Gore apparently has edged ahead of Gov George W Bush in battle for electoral votes, but enough states are either tossups or held so narrowly that presidential race remains fiercely competitive; both sides are fighting hard in battleground states; independent and partisan analysts comment; map of electoral vote breakdown (M) Vice President Al Gore, who has erased Gov. George W. Bush's lead in most national polls, has also edged ahead of him in the battle for electoral votes, according to independent and partisan analysts. But despite the postconvention trend in Mr. Gore's favor, enough states are either tossups or held so narrowly that the race remains fiercely competitive. The overall picture is almost a mirror image of how things looked before the Republican National Convention, when Mr. Bush held a slim but decided lead in the Electoral College. Vice President Al Gore, who has erased Gov. George W. Bush's lead in most national polls, has also edged ahead of him in the battle for electoral votes, according to independent and partisan analysts. But despite the postconvention trend in Mr. Gore's favor, enough states are either tossups or held so narrowly that the race remains fiercely competitive. The overall picture is almost a mirror image of how things looked before the Republican National Convention, when Mr. Bush held a slim but decided lead in the Electoral College. But major states that had leaned Mr. Bush's way, like Florida, Michigan, Missouri and Wisconsin, have since become tossups, according to strategists in both campaigns, as well as postconvention polls and political scientists interviewed around the country. Similarly, earlier tossup states like Minnesota, New Jersey and Pennsylvania are now leaning toward Mr. Gore. Both sides are fighting hard in the battleground states. This week, for example, the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee were buying television time costing $995,000 in Pennsylvania, $719,000 in Michigan and $665,000 in Ohio. Television spending by the Gore campaign and the Democratic National Committee was $763,000 in Pennsylvania, $632,000 in Michigan and $745,000 in Ohio. Although the campaigns did not disagree sharply about how most states stood, they offered very different interpretations of what the current standings meant. Matthew Dowd, the Bush campaign's internal pollster, said: ''This race is right now nationally within one or two points. Electorally, we both are starting out with about the same amount of states in our safe column. Then there are 10 or 12 states that are sort of up for grabs, even, or us up a little in some, or them up in some.'' Tad Devine, a Gore strategist, argued that the trend in Mr. Gore's favor was continuing. ''Gore's advantage in critical battlegrounds has grown enormously and is continuing to grow,'' he said. ''I think it's a different world coming out of the convention. The race is much more settled. Voters have a much more serious take on the race.'' But, he conceded, ''It's a long way from Election Day.'' Before the conventions, it was the Bush campaign claiming a lead and the Gore campaign maintaining that there was essentially a dead heat in the contest for the 270 electoral votes that make a majority of the 538 to be cast. If all those states stayed in Mr. Gore's column, he would have 239 electoral votes, and to win he would need to find 31 others from 10 tossup states with 98 electoral votes. Governor Bush holds commanding leads in 17 states, but only 3 of them, Indiana, Texas and Virginia, have more than 10 electoral votes. The 17 have a total of 132 votes. Six more states, with 69 electoral votes, lean his way, though the margins in some, like Ohio and Colorado, have slipped. If Mr. Bush held those 23 states, he would have 201 electoral votes. So to win, he would need 69 of the 98 votes from those 10 tossup states. The financial advantage held by the Republican National Committee over its Democratic counterpart could help him win the tossup states. In some of those states, even ones Democrats think they can win, Democrats are not yet advertising on television. And while the Republican margins are narrow in many states, in some others they are huge. For example, this week's Florida spending showed $1,026,000 backing Mr. Bush and $330,000 on Mr. Gore's side. But even as the campaigns put differing emphases on different states as they seek 270 electoral votes, their fortunes in the states are hardly independent of the national trends that have favored Mr. Gore in recent weeks. These include his growing strength in how voters perceive his personal qualities and a deepening advantage over his signature health care issues. John Petrocik, chairman of the political science department at the University of Missouri in Columbia, said he thought Mr. Bush's lead in Missouri had declined because ''a large component of how you are doing in every given state is how you're doing nationally.'' One national hazard for the Republicans is the recent, and perhaps exaggerated, sense that Mr. Bush is in trouble. When Republican strategists say of the Bush campaign, as one did this week, ''They have to almost draw a royal straight flush to win -- almost,'' then followers may get discouraged, too. Ed Sarpolus, a Michigan pollster, said one reason for Mr. Bush's decline in that state, and elsewhere in the Midwest, was a growing number of Republicans' ''losing confidence in George Bush.'' In The Detroit Free Press today, a poll he conducted reported a Gore lead of 45 percent to 37 percent for Mr. Bush. Another factor in Mr. Gore's gains in Michigan has been a sharp drop in support for Ralph Nader of the Green Party. ''The opportunity that Republicans in Wisconsin have to contribute to a Bush victory in November has really electrified the grass roots of our party here,'' Mr. Hise said. ''The foot soldiers are ready for battle. That is a dynamic that has not always been the case.'' ''We've made up enormous ground,'' he said. Agreeing with Mr. Hise that the race was even in Wisconsin, Mr. Feingold argued that Mr. Gore had come through much better as a person, and was helped by health care issues and his emphasis on Social Security over tax cuts -- positions ''clearly in tune with most Wisconsinites.'' Two battleground states that appear to have shifted sharply are New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Although Chuck Haytaian, the Republican state chairman in New Jersey, predicted a narrow Bush victory ''by 25,000 votes,'' an independent pollster, Cliff Zukin of Rutgers University, said he thought the state was leaning strongly to Mr. Gore. Mr. Zukin, director of the Star-Ledger Eagleton Rutgers poll, said that at the Democratic National Convention and later, Mr. Gore ''was sounding populist themes which resonate well in New Jersey.'' In Pennsylvania, it may have been the Republican convention that hurt more, with the rejection of the state's governor, Tom Ridge, highlighted as an anti-abortion decision by Mr. Bush. Two recent polls have shown Mr. Gore with a double-digit lead. Ohio remains a battleground state where Mr. Bush is apparently still ahead. Most polls give Mr. Bush leads of two to six percentage points. Eric Rademacher, co-director of the University of Cincinnati's Ohio Poll, said, ''I think right now it's fairly safe to say the race is somewhere between a tossup and lean Bush.''
 Presidential race between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush appears to be a dead heat, resembling 1960 campaign much more than one in 1980; in 1960, like today, voters seemed relatively content (M) Nevertheless, as Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore sweat out the daily tracking polls, there may be some lessons for them in examining how Mr. Reagan and Mr. Kennedy managed to charge ahead in the final days -- or final hours, in Mr. Kennedy's case -- before the election. Around this time 20 years ago, Mr. Reagan did many of the same things Mr. Bush has done recently: He declared himself the underdog; asserted that his rival, as the incumbent, had the advantage; pronounced the current administration's record a failure, and insisted that he was not deterred by the publicity about whether he had the brains to be in the Oval Office. Mr. Kennedy sought to inspire the electorate with a vision of the nation's future. At a speech given in Mineola, N.Y., nearly 40 years ago, he said, ''This is a contest between the contented and those who wish to move ahead, between those who are satisfied and those who want to do better.'' Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have also made the case that while the economy might be thriving, that is not enough, and were either of them to repeat verbatim Mr. Kennedy's words, no one would find them surprising or out of place today. This year, just as in 1960 and 1980, it appears that the televised presidential debates will prove critical to the campaign. Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Reagan faced questions about their capacity and preparedness to lead, as Mr. Bush does now. Such questions were largely put to rest by the debates. President Clinton has been much more helpful to his vice president, especially by giving him a substantial role in his administration. But, given Mr. Clinton's own troubles, the relationship is complicated and Mr. Gore seems not to have resolved how and how much he can make use of the president to support his candidacy. Beyond these narrow analogies lies a broad lesson that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush should learn from the past -- especially in a fight as closely contested as this one. And that is not to grow too confident.
 There are also intriguing prospects for those venturing beyond mainstream Shaftesbury Avenue and the big national companies. I myself can vouch for the quality of Gary Mitchell's ''Force of Change,'' a highly topical tale of police corruption in Ulster that follows David Hare's new ''My Zinc Bed'' into the Royal Court on Nov. 8. I liked ''Howie the Rookie,'' Mark O'Rowe's play about near-Homeric violence in Dublin that returns to London's outstanding pub theater, the Bush, on Oct. 27. I enjoyed a young actor called Jason Watkins, who reprises a hilarious performance as a harlequin in Goldoni's ''Servant to Two Masters'' at the New Ambassadors on Dec. 14. But I'm also hoping for a bit of stimulus from the work opening, sight unseen, at the three most fashionable of London's small theaters, the Donmar in Covent Garden, the Almeida in Islington and the Royal Court's studio playhouse, the Theater Upstairs. Bush Theater, Shepherds Bush Green, London W12; (44-207) 610-4224. (Closed for refurbishment until Oct. 24).
 No, I do not mean Bush and Gore. Still, if history runs to script, then Sight and Sound, the magazine of the British Film Institute, some time early in 2002, will publish its sixth once-a-decade poll on the movies that critics and filmmakers think of as the best ever. Does that poll matter? Only to the extent that Sight and Sound is the oldest serious film magazine in English, and because it has carefully nursed its poll to cover a wide range of voters. There is also the point that its winner chimes with just about every other poll ever taken. A year and a half ahead of polling, ''Citizen Kane'' is a Tiger Woods favorite to retain the title it first won in 1962. No, I do not mean Bush and Gore. Still, if history runs to script, then Sight and Sound, the magazine of the British Film Institute, some time early in 2002, will publish its sixth once-a-decade poll on the movies that critics and filmmakers think of as the best ever. Does that poll matter? Only to the extent that Sight and Sound is the oldest serious film magazine in English, and because it has carefully nursed its poll to cover a wide range of voters. There is also the point that its winner chimes with just about every other poll ever taken. A year and a half ahead of polling, ''Citizen Kane'' is a Tiger Woods favorite to retain the title it first won in 1962.
 The Federal Trade Commission's finding last week that entertainment companies regularly market violent movies and video games to people too young to buy them legally, and the efforts of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to outdo each other in expressing outrage, is just the latest example of this sort of soul-searching and moralizing.
 Latest polls show Gov Georgge W Bush is barely behind Vice Pres Al Gore in Washington and essentially even with him in Oregon, states carried by Democratic presidential candidates since 1998; Bush has made repeated visits to region; could be helped by variety of factors, including Ralph Nader's strong popularity in some cities, where analysts say he could draw many more votes from Gore than from Bush (M) Though voters in Oregon and Washington State rejected Mr. Bush's  father in both 1988 and 1992 and gave President Clinton a wide margin of victory four years ago, the Texas governor has repeatedly said he expects the Pacific Northwest to be highly competitive. The latest polls agree, showing Mr. Bush barely behind Mr. Gore in Washington and essentially even with him in Oregon. Though voters in Oregon and Washington State rejected Mr. Bush's  father in both 1988 and 1992 and gave President Clinton a wide margin of victory four years ago, the Texas governor has repeatedly said he expects the Pacific Northwest to be highly competitive. The latest polls agree, showing Mr. Bush barely behind Mr. Gore in Washington and essentially even with him in Oregon. Mr. Bush has made repeated visits to the Northwest, most recently last week, in which he criticized Mr. Gore's environmental record but also reiterated his staunch opposition to proposals to help salmon runs by breaching dams in eastern Washington. Such proposals are favored by many environmentalists but are anathema in many communities in the affected region. Mr. Bush could be helped by a variety of factors, one of which is the strong popularity in some Northwestern cities of Mr. Nader, who drew 10,000 people to a rally in Portland, Ore., recently and who, most analysts say, draws many more left-leaning voters from Mr. Gore than he does from Mr. Bush. In Washington State, Mr. Bush could be helped by a strong turnout for Mr. Nader, by his stand on dams that could energize a vote in parts of eastern Washington, and perhaps even by lingering resentment in the home state of Microsoft to the federal government's antitrust case against the software giant. A poll of 500 Washington voters taken for KING-TV in Seattle last week indicated that Mr. Gore was at 45 percent, Mr. Bush at 41 percent, Mr. Nader at 5 percent and Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party at 1 percent, with the rest undecided. The survey had a margin of sampling error of 4 percentage points. A separate Washington State survey by Moore Information of Portland, which has polled for many Republican candidates in the region, found Mr. Gore at 44 percent, Mr. Bush at 43 percent and Mr. Nader at 4 percent. That poll also was of 500 voters, with a margin of sampling error of 4 percentage points. But a Democratic pollster, Mark Mellman, conducting a regular tracking survey of 200 voters for an upcoming United States  Senate primary, found Mr. Gore in the lead by roughly 10 points. In Oregon, a poll taken this week for The Oregonian and KATU-TV  showed Mr. Nader at 8 percent, leaving Mr. Gore with 42 percent, virtually tied with Mr. Bush at 41 percent. About 8 percent of those surveyed were undecided, and the support for  Mr. Buchanan was negligible.
 All this terrific reportage, however, cannot obscure Easton's fundamental problem: she lacks an overarching argument. On every page she has interesting things to say, but she never offers a precise diagnosis of the movement. Why has it flourished in the last two decades? Why did it embark on its kamikaze crusade against Clinton? Why would conservatives rally around George W. Bush, when he not so quietly distances himself from them? And there's an even more fundamental problem: the book is based on a specious premise. In the end, Easton's boomercons are not unlike the generations of conservatives before them. They're certainly not any more pugnacious or idealistic than William F. Buckley Jr. and the guys that started National Review in the 1950's. Conservatism has always been obsessed with preserving its ideological purity, dividing the world into ''us'' versus ''them.'' Easton seems to believe that conservatives can take their medication and suppress their hard-edged politics -- that they can turn ''their momentary gains into a governing majority.'' Perhaps Bush's presidential campaign will prove her right. But to judge from ''Gang of Five,'' it seems doubtful that true conservatives will truly moderate their tone or allow themselves to triangulate on the scale of Bill Clinton. If they look like ideologues, it's because they are.
 The topics that dominated the political news last week spelled strategic difficulties and odd distractions for the Bush campaign. The topics that dominated the political news last week spelled strategic difficulties and odd distractions for the Bush campaign. In the realm of tactical reversals, Gov. George W. Bush beat a wholesale retreat from his attempt to sidestep the Commission on Presidential Debates and impose his own debating schedule. On Thursday, the Bush campaign dropped any remaining objections it had to the commission plan and agreed to debate under all the original conditions laid out by the panel. As for reading and rats: these involved potholes on the campaign trail unearthed by the news media. An article in Vanity Fair offered an armchair assessment of Mr. Bush's propensity for mispronunciations: Dyslexia, a condition associated with problems in deciphering the written word. Mr. Bush, campaigning on health care issues in Florida, reacted by saying he had never been tested for dyslexia but dismissed the idea as media fancy. And then there was ''Rats.'' The word appeared for a split second in an anti-Gore commercial running in more than a dozen states across the country. The word was excused as a fragment of the word bureaucrats, various pieces of which flashed across the television screen in the spot by the Republican National Committee. When The New York Times ran a front-page article about it on Tuesday, the story quickly took on a life of its own, with Democrats crying foul and Republicans calling it an innocent oversight. The Gore campaign seemed happy to watch Mr. Bush's struggles from the media sidelines. On Wednesday, as Mr. Bush embarked on a major swing through Washington and California (total electoral votes: 65), Mr. Gore spent much of the day at a high school in Maine (total electoral votes: 4).
 All the recent presidents, including Nixon and Clinton, make positive appearances. In witty illustrations, Nixon is shown bowling at the White House and Reagan is shown holding a movie fan magazine while being fitted for a suit by Andrew Johnson, the only tailor to become president. And what child could resist the statement that the president ''doesn't have to eat yucky vegetables,'' or George Bush's refusal to eat broccoli in office? If it suits you, this book is also an easy jumping-off point for a discussion of Al Gore, George W. Bush or anyone else running this year. There is nothing here about the weighty things that presidents do, though the president's oath of office is given and poignantly described. ''Only 35 words! But it's a big order when you're president of this country.''
 ''The Scarlet Pimpernel'' -- don't ask which version -- dashes to the Bushnell in Hartford, without its original star, Douglas Sills, having played the Shubert last season with Mr. Sills. But better yet, get a schedule of musicals at the Bushnell (eight; ''Fosse'' ends today), Oakdale (six), the Garde (six, plus Off Broadway's hit, ''I Love You, You're Perfect, Now Change''), the Shubert (five including Off Broadway's never-ending ''Stomp'') and Stamford Center (four including the ''Chicago'' revival, still on Broadway.) Since the essential we-saw-it-first status of Conecticut theatergoers must be preserved, it is important to mention that the Shubert, once again, will attempt to reclaim its legend as tryout home for Broadway hits, with ''Tom Sawyer'' -- no, it is not ''Big River II'' -- and Barry Manilow's ''Copacabana'' (which is also to play the Bushnell).
 Donna Karan holds party at flagship store on Madison Avenue for Candace Bushnell, author of New York Observer columns that formed basis of Sex and the City TV show, and her forthcoming book Four Blondes (S) The featured author for the event was the ubiquitous Candace Bushnell, who wrote New York Observer columns that formed the basis of ''Sex and the City,'' the culturally seismic HBO show. Indeed, the star-flecked cocktail-and-shopping hour, to celebrate Ms. Bushnell's forthcoming book, ''Four Blondes,'' seemed like just the kind of event that Ms. Bushnell's clothes-savvy characters might attend. The featured author for the event was the ubiquitous Candace Bushnell, who wrote New York Observer columns that formed the basis of ''Sex and the City,'' the culturally seismic HBO show. Indeed, the star-flecked cocktail-and-shopping hour, to celebrate Ms. Bushnell's forthcoming book, ''Four Blondes,'' seemed like just the kind of event that Ms. Bushnell's clothes-savvy characters might attend.
 THE debate between Gov. George W. Bush and Al Gore is almost a side issue in the presidential race around here compared to the fireworks over how the Senate seat of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman should be filled should he be elected vice president. THE debate between Gov. George W. Bush and Al Gore is almost a side issue in the presidential race around here compared to the fireworks over how the Senate seat of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman should be filled should he be elected vice president. Democrats, even with the uncertainty over the Senate seat, are thrilled with the dual candidacy of Mr. Lieberman, who has until Oct. 27 -- less than two weeks before the election -- to drop out of the Senate race. Political observers said Mr. Lieberman's popularity and his name on two different lines on the ballot will help elect Democrats across the state, especially those in close races. The Democrats who support Mr. Lieberman's running for two offices said news of Mr. Gore's selection didn't leave time for any contenders for the seat to hold a primary even if Mr. Lieberman had quit as senator immediately. The 72 members of the Democratic Central Committee, not the electorate, would have chosen the Senate candidate.
 Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked Vice President Al Gore's positions on tax cuts, Social Security, Medicare and education as triumphs of federal control over choice. Gov. George W. Bush sharply attacked Vice President Al Gore's positions on tax cuts, Social Security, Medicare and education as triumphs of federal control over choice.
 People here look at Al Gore and George W. Bush and see two men born to the country club, men whose family histories jingle with silver spoons. They appear, to people here, just the same. Poorer people here never felt any connection with Republicans. But, as  Mr. Gore has moved to the nation's political center, people like Aundray Dogain who work in low-paying jobs  know that means they are being left behind. The disillusionment here with the national candidates runs so deep that though the roads are lined with political signs for local politicians, there is no sign of Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore in Dixie County. It was Mr. Gore, people here point out, who pushed so hard for the North American Free Trade Agreement, which, they say, has led to the closing of manufacturing plants around the country and sent jobs to Mexico. She hears Al Gore talk about continuing the nation's prosperity and she cringes. She hears George W. Bush talk about how things could be done so much better, and she cringes again. She knows what the Republicans mean when they talk about good times, and she believes that it seldom includes a 31-year-old black woman who works in the heat and grease of a fast-food restaurant. In 1998, when Mr. Bush's brother, Jeb, won the race for governor of Florida, only 31.9 percent of Dixie County's 9,898 registered voters went to the polls, compared with the state average of 49.5 percent. To Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, he said, Dixie County is a ''faraway land,'' of people who do not matter, and ''too small of a town'' to even worry about.
 Campaigns of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush agree on formats and structure of three Oct presidential debates; choose Jim Lehrer to moderate debates; agree one of debates and single vice-presidential debate will be conducted with candidates seated at table, new debate format; agree on timing system that will be less rigid than in previous debates (M)0 After three days of negotiations, officials from the Gore and Bush campaigns agreed today on the formats and structure of three presidential debates in October and selected Jim Lehrer, the anchorman of PBS's ''News Hour,'' as the moderator for all three. After three days of negotiations, officials from the Gore and Bush campaigns agreed today on the formats and structure of three presidential debates in October and selected Jim Lehrer, the anchorman of PBS's ''News Hour,'' as the moderator for all three. The details took eight hours today for the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Elections to hammer out with representatives of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Each campaign said it came away with something -- the Gore campaign fought for three debates, which it won, and the Bush campaign fought for the less rigid format, which it won. Donald L. Evans, Mr. Bush's campaign chairman, emerged from the negotiations here tonight praising the free-flowing debates. William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, lauded the agreement for allowing ''the widest possible audience.'' The first debate, Oct. 3 in Boston at the University of Massachusetts, will be held with Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush standing at lecterns. The second, set for Oct. 11 at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C., is to be conducted at a table. The third, on Oct. 17 at Washington University in St. Louis, will be a town-hall format.
 Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate has significantly undermined the conventional wisdom that vice-presidential candidates don't matter much. That is due in part to the fact that Mr. Lieberman has looked like a bundle of energy in comparison with the leaden presence of Dick Cheney, the former Secretary of Defense, on the Republican ticket. Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate has significantly undermined the conventional wisdom that vice-presidential candidates don't matter much. That is due in part to the fact that Mr. Lieberman has looked like a bundle of energy in comparison with the leaden presence of Dick Cheney, the former Secretary of Defense, on the Republican ticket. No one attributes all of Mr. Gore's gains to Mr. Lieberman's presence. The vice president's convention speech, his success in putting Social Security and Medicare at the center of the debate, his growing aura of confidence and Mr. Bush's gaffes all play a role. But Mr. Lieberman has clearly given ethical, even theological ballast to Mr. Gore's effort to succeed a president widely perceived as, shall we say, situationally religious.
 Ms. Reno's response may provide political cover for President Clinton and the Democratic presidential nominee, Al Gore, as they continue to avoid facing the serious moral and constitutional problems afflicting the federal death penalty system. But it cannot obscure the administration's duty to make sure no executions occur until the unfairness is cured.
 So, why not cheerleading? ''Bring It On,'' a movie about cheerleading, is a smash box-office hit. Cheerleading competitions are shown on ESPN. George W. Bush was a cheerleader. It would be beautiful: the rare sport in the summer Olympics in which men and women compete together. (They need men for pedestals.) And none of that unpleasant gender testing. The waiting room over at Gender Verification isn't pretty, let me tell you.
