 What the editorial did not mention is the unprecedented unity behind Restoring the Everglades, an American Legacy Act. Conservation organizations, agricultural producers, home builders, water utilities, Indian tribes and others have endorsed it. Agreement among these groups on Everglades issues is rare. Yet we are also joined by a bipartisan coalition of senators, Florida's Congressional delegation, the Clinton administration and Florida's governor, Jeb Bush -- all committed to restoration in a manner that respects the needs of water users in Florida.
 Ben Brantley reviews revival of Gore Vidal's play, under title Gore Vidal's The Best Man, directed by Ethan McSweeney; Charles Durning, Spalding Gray and Christopher Noth star; photos (M) When an ambitious young senator who would soon be president first saw ''The Best Man'' 40 years ago, he was quick to point out to its author that the play's vision of politicians wasn't exactly authentic. ''You know,'' John F. Kennedy is reported to have said to Gore Vidal, ''in a campaign we don't have all that much time to talk about the meaning of it all.'' When an ambitious young senator who would soon be president first saw ''The Best Man'' 40 years ago, he was quick to point out to its author that the play's vision of politicians wasn't exactly authentic. ''You know,'' John F. Kennedy is reported to have said to Gore Vidal, ''in a campaign we don't have all that much time to talk about the meaning of it all.'' Still, as current evidence makes narcotically clear, politicians can afford to be boring in ways that fictional characters cannot. And whatever the weaknesses of the unsteady revival that opened last night at the Virginia Theater under the amended title of ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man,' '' the production makes you wish that Mr. Vidal were writing the dialogue for the forthcoming, much-debated presidential debates. Despite the notoriously short shelf life of satire in the theater, this morality tale of a national political convention still rings appealingly with the whip cracks of abiding worldly wisdom dispensed in quips. You can sense from the audience's gratified laughter that some of the play's shapely lines are sure to be repeated at cocktail parties in this election season, prefaced with something like, ''Old Gore Vidal said it best, 40 years ago.'' The observations made here on the very different and often incompatible virtues of good statesmanship and good politics, and of public and private morals, have aged surprisingly well, more like fine Bordeaux than Beaujolais. References to sexual escapades in the White House and to the role of God in campaigning are guaranteed to evoke smiles of recognition.
 Pres Clinton addresses annual meeting of Congressional Black Caucus Foundation in Washington, where he urges black leaders to work for election of Vice Pres Al Gore; photo (S) He said he had come merely to listen, clap and say thank-you. But President Clinton was the headliner of the show, and he put his star power to work on Saturday night doing what many Democrats think he does best: rousing black voters to come out to the polls to help Democrats, particularly Vice President Al Gore. In a speech before more than 4,000 people at the annual meeting of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Mr. Clinton warned against complacency bred by prosperity, urging black leaders to work for Mr. Gore's election. He said he had come merely to listen, clap and say thank-you. But President Clinton was the headliner of the show, and he put his star power to work on Saturday night doing what many Democrats think he does best: rousing black voters to come out to the polls to help Democrats, particularly Vice President Al Gore. In a speech before more than 4,000 people at the annual meeting of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Mr. Clinton warned against complacency bred by prosperity, urging black leaders to work for Mr. Gore's election. The president remains extremely popular among black voters, and the Gore campaign is planning to use him at events where some of that popularity might rub off. Mr. Clinton embraced that role on Saturday night, recalling how black politicians had supported him during some of his darker days, asking them to do the same for Mr. Gore in November. Mr. Clinton noted that he was not supposed to use the words ''vote for'' because the foundation, despite its obvious Democratic leanings, is a nonprofit, nonpartisan group. But he sidestepped the problem by asserting that the election of Mr. Gore and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is running for the Senate from New York, would help prevent the ''denial of justice'' to black people. Mr. Gore praised the president, saying, ''Millions of Americans will live better lives for a long time to come because of the job that has been done by President Bill Clinton.'' Like Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore dodged the prohibition for explicitly asking members for their votes by calling on them to ''vote C.B.C.,'' or Congressional Black Caucus, if they wanted sympathetic Supreme Court nominees, affirmative action, black chairmen of House committees and a litany of other political goals.
 After Al Gore announced that Joseph I. Lieberman would be his running mate last month, Mr. Lieberman immediately  made the rounds of all the various television news outlets. After Al Gore announced that Joseph I. Lieberman would be his running mate last month, Mr. Lieberman immediately  made the rounds of all the various television news outlets. Within hours, top network executives confronted top Gore campaign officials, who assured them that the spokesman was speaking out of turn in the heat of a busy campaign day. As far as the presidential campaign goes, executives at the network said they believed its coverage had been as hard on Mr. Gore as it had been on his Republican opponent, George W. Bush. Brit Hume, a former ABC anchor who is the host of a nightly political program, ''Special Report With Brit Hume,'' cited a recent segment that ran on his program about accusations that Republicans had inserted a subliminal message -- the word ''Rats'' -- into a commercial critical of Mr. Gore. In the report, the Fox News correspondent Carl Cameron pointedly referred to Mr. Bush's mispronunciation of the word ''subliminal'' when he denied those charges. ''The Bush campaign, they don't like it when his inability to pronounce the names of foreign leaders, and certain words, is pointed out,'' said Mr. Hume, who, also noted that the channel was first to report on the appearance of the subliminal message in the advertisement. Yet conservative media monitors, members of the Gore campaign and Fox's competitors believe the network is tougher on Mr. Gore than other outlets are. ''Fox is the most likely to do stories embarrassing to Al Gore,'' said Tim Graham, director of media analysis at the Media Research Center, a conservative media research center. For instance, Mr. Graham pointed to a recent Fox report that detailed veterans' recriminations against Mr. Gore for failing to attend the annual American Legion convention last month. Mr. Bush, however, did appear. The report did not appear on the other networks, Mr. Graham said. He said this is a good thing, helping to counterbalance bias in other television outlets. But Erik Sorenson, MSNBC's vice president and general manager, said he believed his network by and large covered the same political reports critical of Mr. Gore that the Fox News Channel did. But, he said, Fox would give those stories more time by discussing them on its night talk shows. In critiques of Fox, it is usually noted that Mr. Ailes was a political consultant to Richard M. Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George Bush. But Gore campaign officials are far less scathing in their criticism. The reach of the channel's news reports is not lost on them. They know the Fox correspondents' reports are often repackaged and sent to Fox broadcast channels across the country. They said they believed Mr. Gore  was treated fairly by Fox's political reporters, like Jim Angle, the former editor of National Public Radio's ''All Things Considered'' who is now covering the candidate. And they noted that the campaign's officials are often represented on network programs like ''Special Report With Brit Hume.'' Rather, they said they took some issue with the Fox News Channel's highly rated, prime-time commentators, like Bill O'Reilly, of ''The O'Reilly Factor'' -- with the second-highest audience in cable news in prime time -- or Sean Hannity, the conservative radio talk-show host whose foil is Alan Colmes the liberal talk-show host who is considered by many Democrats to be overshadowed by his co-host on ''Hannity & Colmes.'' Gore campaign officials cited that lineup when they did not give the network the initial interview with Mr. Lieberman. The commentators are often compared to Rush Limbaugh, the conservative talk radio host. Night in and night out on Fox News Channel programs Mr. Gore is accused of being a ''serial campaign finance abuser,'' Hillary Rodham Clinton is labeled a fake, and Mr. Clinton is regularly ridiculed. The commentators are often counterbalanced with liberal guests or contributors, but Gore campaign officials say the shows tend to help keep an anti-Gore message in circulation while revving up the Republican base -- ''no small thing,'' in the words of one official. But, they say, they believe the commentators are probably addressing an audience that, for the most part, is not inclined to vote for Mr. Gore.
 Mark J Eisner letter on Paul Krugman's Sept 13 column on Gov George W Bush's economic plan; urges nonpartisan group set up Web site that lets voters test viability of each candidate's economic plan; drawing Paul Krugman (column, Sept. 13) says George W. Bush's economic plan does not add up. Governor Bush says it will. The voter is left bewildered, unnecessarily so. With so many Americans using personal computer software or the Web to analyze their personal financial futures under various economic assumptions, cannot some nonpartisan organization set up a Web site that lets voters test the viability of each candidate's economic plan? Paul Krugman (column, Sept. 13) says George W. Bush's economic plan does not add up. Governor Bush says it will. The voter is left bewildered, unnecessarily so. With so many Americans using personal computer software or the Web to analyze their personal financial futures under various economic assumptions, cannot some nonpartisan organization set up a Web site that lets voters test the viability of each candidate's economic plan?
 Dallas Lea letter on William Safire's Sept 14 column says Gov George W Bush's frequent mispronunciations indicate he does not read much William Safire overlooks a key point about George W. Bush's frequent mispronunciations (''The Snickering Campaign,'' column, Sept. 14). Mr. Bush's errors tend to be ones of either adding a syllable to a word, or deleting one; these are characteristic of someone who has heard a word spoken but not encountered it in print. William Safire overlooks a key point about George W. Bush's frequent mispronunciations (''The Snickering Campaign,'' column, Sept. 14). Mr. Bush's errors tend to be ones of either adding a syllable to a word, or deleting one; these are characteristic of someone who has heard a word spoken but not encountered it in print.
 Martin H Arnold letter on on Sept 13 article by Jerry J Jasinowski, president of National Association of Manufacturers, says Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman attack big business because it is safe target Jerry J. Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, is unsure why Al Gore and Joseph I. Lieberman have suddenly identified big business as ''the enemy'' (Op-Ed, Sept. 13). Let me offer an explanation. Jerry J. Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, is unsure why Al Gore and Joseph I. Lieberman have suddenly identified big business as ''the enemy'' (Op-Ed, Sept. 13). Let me offer an explanation. Such criticism is nothing new for Mr. Gore. What is most sad is to hear similar pronouncements from Mr. Lieberman. As a senator he has been  strongly in favor of economic incentives that have benefited businesses large and small, their employees and customers. Now that his aspirations have risen, he has changed his tune.
 Battlegrounds, second article in series on four states likely to be critical to outcome of presidential race, finds Gov George W Bush holding reasonably steady lead in Ohio, bucking trend in which Pennsylvania and several other swing states may have shifted toward Vice Pres Al Gore; polls indicate candidates have both built solid partisan bases within state, considered political microcosm since Civil War, and are fighting over perhaps 5 to 6 percent of electorate, composed largely of independents, suburban residents and women; maps (M) Pennsylvania and several other swing states may have shifted toward Vice President Al Gore in the presidential race in the last three weeks, but so far Ohio has more or less stayed put, if surveys of voters are to be believed. In polls by various organizations starting in May, Mr. Gore's main rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has held a reasonably steady lead. A recent survey, completed before Labor Day by The Columbus Dispatch, gave him a lead of six percentage points, 49 to 43, with a margin of sampling error of 2 percent. Pennsylvania and several other swing states may have shifted toward Vice President Al Gore in the presidential race in the last three weeks, but so far Ohio has more or less stayed put, if surveys of voters are to be believed. In polls by various organizations starting in May, Mr. Gore's main rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has held a reasonably steady lead. A recent survey, completed before Labor Day by The Columbus Dispatch, gave him a lead of six percentage points, 49 to 43, with a margin of sampling error of 2 percent. One of the state's leading academic pollsters said, ''This race hasn't changed a lick in Ohio in the last six months.'' Some politicians see progress for Mr. Gore, but they think that he still has ground to make up. Which is a bit odd, because this Midwestern state has been considered a political microcosm since the Civil War. Bill Clinton carried it twice (albeit by fewer than 100,000 votes in 1992). Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan and George Bush took it in the three elections before that, and in 1984, 1988 and 1996, the voting breakdown here almost exactly matched the national pattern. Whatever the explanation may be, Mr. Bush's continued strength here is very good news for a campaign that has been short of good news lately -- and no Republican has ever been elected president without carrying Ohio. Mr. Gore's strategists insist that he can catch Mr. Bush here. With nine paid field operatives already in the state, the Gore campaign decided this week to send in 15 more. And the vice president shows no sign of reducing his campaigning or his television spending in the state, even in the heavily and ancestrally Republican Cincinnati area. He has been there four times this year, and he unveiled his $500 billion tax-cut plan there this summer. On Tuesday, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, rode school buses from the Dayton area through Middletown to Cincinnati, trailed by a procession of limousines, regular buses, vans and motorcycles. The idea was to draw attention to the Democrats' prescriptions for education. Representative Tom Sawyer of Akron, a Democrat, conceded that ''Gore had trouble getting traction here, and a month ago people in our own party were saying he was on his last legs.'' But he said Mr. Gore's emphasis on issues in his speech at the Democratic convention had made a big difference. William A. Burga, president of the Ohio A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has more than 800,000 members, said he thought Mr. Gore was spending far too much time in Cincinnati and needed to go ''where his base is -- the northern, northeastern, southeastern parts of Ohio.'' Still, all the available evidence suggests that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have both built solid partisan bases here, and that they are fighting over perhaps 5 to 6 percent of the electorate, composed largely of independents, suburban residents and women. Kelly Craiglow, 33, who describes herself as a ''stay-at-home mom'' and lives in Lancaster, a small city southeast of here, is just the sort of voter Mr. Gore needs to win over if he is to carry Ohio. She leans to Mr. Bush because she is a Republican, she said in an interview, but having worked for a time in a pharmacy, she is very worried about the cost of prescription drugs. Although aware that both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore had plans to deal with the problem, she acknowledged that she had not taken the time to study and compare them. But she said she would watch the debates and ''probably vote for whichever one sounds as if he is going to be able to help those people a little.'' Mr. Gore may have more trouble reaching voters like Elaine Medsker, 71, who works part time at a hospital near her home in Geauga County, east of Cleveland. Her comments dealt with character, not policy questions. ''I've been very depressed by Mr. Clinton. He's a sleazy person, and Gore's not far behind,'' said Mrs. Medsker, a Republican who has voted for Democrats for president in the past. ''Gore makes so many promises, one after another, and you know he can't deliver on them. Now, President Bush was a good man, an honest man, and I think he has a good influence on his son.'' Like Mr. Sawyer, Mr. Burga said he had detected some recent movement toward Mr. Gore, whether or not it had been reflected in the polls.  People were beginning to volunteer in larger numbers, he said, ''as the vice president starts to focus on the issues our members think about, like prescription drugs, education and Social Security.'' How much the state Democratic Party will be able to contribute to the Gore effort is questionable. The Republicans have a strong organization, built up over many decades by chairmen like Ray C. Bliss, who went on to head the Republican National Committee, and the incumbent, Robert T. Bennett. Representative John R. Kasich, the Columbus Republican who made a brief run for the Republican presidential nomination last year, argued that the State Democratic Party would be of little help to Mr. Gore in November. ''Gore will pay a price for the Democrats' weakened condition,'' Mr. Kasich said. ''They're in a shambles. The only thing I can compare it to is the lousy condition of our own party in the 1970's as a result of Watergate.'' Mr. Kasich is retiring. His district, once considered marginal, is now leaning slightly toward the Republican nominee, Pat Tiberi, the majority leader in the State House. But Mr. Tiberi has been distancing himself from Mr. Bush's 10-year, $1.3 trillion tax-cut proposal, focusing instead on more modest measures, like eliminating the inheritance tax. ''Insurance,'' an Ohio Republican consultant said. ''If Gore demolishes Bush's tax plan in the debates next month, Tiberi doesn't want to pay.''
 Bush Makes New Pitch To Attract Middle-Class  Gov. George W. Bush said he was determined to convince middle-income voters that they would fare better under his proposals than under Vice President Al Gore's, and he released a new campaign document, ''Blueprint for the Middle Class,'' outlining his proposals. Pennsylvania and several other swing states have recently shifted toward Mr. Gore, but in Ohio, Mr. Bush still holds a steady lead. That is good news for a campaign that has been short of good news lately. No Republican has ever been elected president without carrying Ohio. Lynne V. Cheney, the wife of the Republican vice-presidential nominee Dick Cheney, accused Mr. Gore of ''hypocrisy'' for attending what she called an ''X-rated'' fund-raiser in New York City last week after he had chided the entertainment industry for marketing inappropriate materials to children. Celebrities told some crude jokes at the event.
 ''I had never understood how different it was to step across the line from supporting a surrogate to being an actual candidate,'' Mrs. Clinton said. ''Maybe that sounds strange. But all of a sudden, you're the person who is answering the questions. I'm not speaking on behalf of Bill Clinton and Chuck Schumer or Al Gore. I'm speaking on behalf of myself. Finally, Mrs. Clinton has the same problem that Al Gore does, which is that, inevitably if unfairly, her campaigning skills are judged against the standard set by President Clinton. ''I've watched him over the years,'' she said, ''and he gets an enormous amount of enjoyment out of it. He loves meeting people, and the experience of being in crowds. And I find it to be very exciting and interesting, and even touching.''
 Even those in Hollywood who said they were genuinely troubled by some of the findings in the federal report also said they were concerned about the threat of censorship lurking beneath the talk. And more than a few expressed resentment that so many Democrats, particularly Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, were helping to lead the charge. ''When you have Al Gore saying that Hollywood has six months to get its act together, that sounds like McCarthyism to me and I find it very troubling,'' said the screenwriter and director Rod Lurie. ''I worked for Gore in '88 and I am really taken aback by this. It's one thing to co-opt the enemy's issues, but not in a way that betrays your most important, fundamental values.'' In fact, there is little evidence that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman are suffering. The day after Mr. Lieberman testified at the Senate hearing, he and Mr. Gore were the star attractions at a fund-raising concert at Radio City Music Hall in New York, organized by top entertainment executives, which raised $6.5 million. And on Monday, Mr. Gore will travel to Los Angeles for a fund-raiser given by Warner Brothers. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE ENTERTAINMENT ISSUE  Correction:  September 20, 2000, Wednesday  An article on Monday about people in the movie industry who were troubled by politicians' recent criticism of Hollywood misstated the sponsorship of a fund-raiser for Al Gore that day. Although the sponsors included Alan Horn, president and chief operating officer of Warner Brothers, the company itself was not a sponsor. The others were Rob Reiner, the writer and director; Haim Saban, a children's television executive; and Ron Burkle, a supermarket entrepreneur. An article on Monday about people in the movie industry who were troubled by politicians' recent criticism of Hollywood misstated the sponsorship of a fund-raiser for Al Gore that day. Although the sponsors included Alan Horn, president and chief operating officer of Warner Brothers, the company itself was not a sponsor. The others were Rob Reiner, the writer and director; Haim Saban, a children's television executive; and Ron Burkle, a supermarket entrepreneur.
 In Weeki Wachee, in Hernando County, Frank Bush, a retired truck driver, ignored a mandatory evacuation order in his mobile-home park. ''I'll keep watching the water,''  Mr. Bush, 68, said. ''This storm is going to impact the entire state,'' Gov. Jeb Bush said earlier today.
 The commercial criticizes Vice President Al Gore's proposal to add a prescription drug benefit to Medicare, saying that the plan would let ''bureaucrats decide'' what coverage Medicare participants receive. As the word ''bureaucrats'' flashes across the screen, the word ''rats'' appears in large type for a moment.
 Democratic vice presidential nominee Sen Joseph I Lieberman makes campaign premiere in Rocky Mountain states; says Democrats now see Colorado, long dominated by Republicans, as swing state, and they plan to contest it vigorously; most recernt polls show Vice Pres Al Gore closing to within 3 percentage points of Gov George W Bush, who previously had comfortable lead in state long dominated by Republicans (M) Until recently, polls showed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas with a comfortable lead over Vice President Al Gore, but the most recent published survey, conducted last week, showed Mr. Gore closing to within three percentage points. Until recently, polls showed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas with a comfortable lead over Vice President Al Gore, but the most recent published survey, conducted last week, showed Mr. Gore closing to within three percentage points. Mr. Lieberman is to campaign Monday in New Mexico, another Rocky Mountain swing state, which the vice president visited in late August. Campaign aides say he will speak there about a patient's bill of rights, one of the issues the Democrats will focus on this week. Mr. Lieberman plans to travel to Los Angeles later Monday, for a campaign event and a fund-raiser with Mr. Gore.
 ON THE SCREEN -- This spot focuses on Mr. Lazio's tax plan, which he has promoted as a major distinction between him and Hillary Rodham Clinton, but which he has also tried to present as less drastic than George W. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut. The ad opens with Mr. Lazio picking up one of his daughters on the beach, the lead-in to a rather run-of-the-mill montage of Mr. Lazio speaking, talking to voters, marching in a parade and shaking an elderly woman's hand. In contrast to other recent Lazio ads, Mrs. Clinton is neither pictured nor mentioned by name.
 George A Young letter replies to Jerry J Jasinowski's Sept 13 article, defending Vice Pres Al Gore's criticism of some corporations and denying that Gore targets business as 'enemy' Jerry J. Jasinowski (''Gore's War on Business,'' Op-Ed, Sept. 13) seems to confuse the meaning of ''business'' with that of ''corporations.'' I have  seen no evidence that Mr. Gore believes that ''business is the enemy.'' Rather, he has attacked companies that take advantage of oil shortages, corporations that pollute and pharmaceutical makers that find it easier to raise prices in this country than in Canada. Jerry J. Jasinowski (''Gore's War on Business,'' Op-Ed, Sept. 13) seems to confuse the meaning of ''business'' with that of ''corporations.'' I have  seen no evidence that Mr. Gore believes that ''business is the enemy.'' Rather, he has attacked companies that take advantage of oil shortages, corporations that pollute and pharmaceutical makers that find it easier to raise prices in this country than in Canada. As a Republican and a businessman, I find it distressing to see a spokesman for our manufacturing base describe Mr. Gore's compassion for the less fortunate as ''newfound angry populism.'' People who deny or criticize all criticism of corporations are themselves the biggest danger that American business faces.
 Lynne V Cheney, wife of Republican vice-presidential nominee Dick Cheney, accuses Vice Pres Al Gore of hypocrisy for attending what she calls 'X-rated' fund-raiser in Radio City Music Hall sponsored by entertainment industry after chiding executives for allegedly peddling violence to children (S) Lynne V. Cheney, the wife of the Republican vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, accused Vice President Al Gore of ''hypocrisy'' today for attending what she described as an ''X-rated'' fund-raiser in New York City last week after he had chided the entertainment industry for marketing inappropriate materials to children. Mrs. Cheney, who led the National Endowment for the Humanities in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush and who plays a large role in her husband's campaign, made the accusation on three Sunday morning talk shows. Lynne V. Cheney, the wife of the Republican vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney, accused Vice President Al Gore of ''hypocrisy'' today for attending what she described as an ''X-rated'' fund-raiser in New York City last week after he had chided the entertainment industry for marketing inappropriate materials to children. Mrs. Cheney, who led the National Endowment for the Humanities in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush and who plays a large role in her husband's campaign, made the accusation on three Sunday morning talk shows. It was the latest salvo in a battle that began last week when the Federal Trade Commission released a report that found that adult-rated entertainment was often marketed to children and teenagers. Mr. Gore warned that he would press for federal regulation of the entertainment industry if it did not change its ways. At a Senate hearing on Wednesday, both Mrs. Cheney and her husband's opponent, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, agreed there was a problem but not on how to resolve it. Today, Mrs. Cheney criticized Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman for appearing at the fund-raising gala that major figures in the entertainment industry sponsored on Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall, where celebrities performed and spoke and a number of crude jokes were told. The Democratic ticket collected about $6.5 million at the fund-raiser. Without commenting on the entertainment at the fund-raiser, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, Douglas Hattaway, suggested that Mrs. Cheney turn her attention to Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee. Mr. Bush, he noted, had served for a decade on the board of directors of Silver Screen Management, a film company that produced a 1986 movie called ''The Hitcher,'' in which a woman's body was ripped in two.
 In a Jim Borgman cartoon, Al Gore is pictured grabbing and passionately kissing George Bush as the debate moderator says, ''I know it worked for you at the convention, Mr. Gore, but traditionally debates begin with a handshake.'' In a Jim Borgman cartoon, Al Gore is pictured grabbing and passionately kissing George Bush as the debate moderator says, ''I know it worked for you at the convention, Mr. Gore, but traditionally debates begin with a handshake.'' The first -- with debaters behind lecterns -- favors Gore, who pulverized Ross Perot and Jack Kemp (though Dan Quayle more than held his own against a combative Gore). The second -- three guys around a table, with a looser give-and-take -- tends to favor Bush, who wanted that format from the start of negotiations. It also means that a hidden campaign is now in full swing: debate preparation is all, as we tensely await relaxed demeanors. New Hampshire Senator Judd Gregg spars with Bush in private to anticipate the Gore thrusts; former Long Island Congressman Tom Downey plays Bush to help Gore overcome the likability gap. That's an example of how the unexpected in debates could affect elections. Despite prepared one-liners and readied ripostes, Bush and Gore in debate may emphasize policy differences or reveal personality differences that ignite interest and forge public opinions. That's why the clear winners in debates 2000, fellow voter, are thee and me.
 Should you find yourself a witness to such a sight, you might fiddle with your purse or stretch your neck or start doing your expense report in your head. Things don't get much easier when the only other item of clothing a model is wearing is a sarong printed with the face of former President George Bush. That particular look was displayed at Marc Ecko's runway show on Friday evening and raised the question of why someone would bother picturing a member of the Bush family on an article of clothing that screamed ''beach blanket bingo later at my place,'' and then not use the image of George W. Should you find yourself a witness to such a sight, you might fiddle with your purse or stretch your neck or start doing your expense report in your head. Things don't get much easier when the only other item of clothing a model is wearing is a sarong printed with the face of former President George Bush. That particular look was displayed at Marc Ecko's runway show on Friday evening and raised the question of why someone would bother picturing a member of the Bush family on an article of clothing that screamed ''beach blanket bingo later at my place,'' and then not use the image of George W.
 Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush says he is determined to convince middle-income voters that they would fare better under his proposals than under Vice Pres Al Gore's and vows to spend coming days making case as emphatically as possible; is seeking to draw attention to his newly-released campaign document, Blueprint for the Middle Class, which distills his proposals for voters that Gore, with constant reference to 'working families,' has courted both assiduously and successfully (M) Gov. George W. Bush said today that he was determined to convince middle-income voters that they would fare better under his proposals than under Vice President Al Gore's, and he vowed to spend the coming days making that case as emphatically as possible. ''One of the big differences is that I want people controlling their lives,'' Mr. Bush said in a telephone interview that hewed to a theme he is working more and more aggressively: that Mr. Gore is bent on inflexible, federally mandated solutions. Gov. George W. Bush said today that he was determined to convince middle-income voters that they would fare better under his proposals than under Vice President Al Gore's, and he vowed to spend the coming days making that case as emphatically as possible. ''One of the big differences is that I want people controlling their lives,'' Mr. Bush said in a telephone interview that hewed to a theme he is working more and more aggressively: that Mr. Gore is bent on inflexible, federally mandated solutions. Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, sought to draw attention to a new campaign document, ''Blueprint for the Middle Class,'' which his aides released today. Essentially a 16-page, oversize pamphlet, it will be handed out at campaign events this week, and it distills his proposals for voters that Mr. Gore, with his constant references to ''working families,'' has courted both assiduously and successfully. Mr. Bush said the document was intended to put his agenda ''in a form where everybody can understand and people can see in specific what I have to offer.'' But the document and today's interview had additional, more specific purposes, advisers to Mr. Bush said. Tagged by Mr. Gore as a candidate on the side of big corporations and wealthy Americans, Mr. Bush was asserting that his policies would benefit all voters more than Mr. Gore's proposals would. Advisers said the phrase ''middle class'' in the document's title signaled that goal. The language also reflected opinion polls that showed some of Mr. Gore's most significant gains in the past month had been with voters in households earning  $50,000 to $75,000 a year. After the Democratic convention, at which Mr. Gore pointedly cast the race as a contest between ''the people,'' whom he pledged to champion, and ''the powerful,'' whom he said Mr. Bush represented, Mr. Bush's advisers made several adjustments. Today, Mr. Bush sought to draw attention to this new emphasis in interviews with a few reporters. The interviews were initiated by the campaign, the first time it had had Mr. Bush contact reporters to talk about his coming days of campaigning. Republican strategists said Mr. Bush was clearly trying to project a take-charge image and wrest control of the debate. Along those lines, Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, held a conference call with reporters to spell out the scope of the next six days. Mr. Fleischer said Mr. Bush would travel 6,076 miles from Monday to Saturday, visiting 12 cities in nine states that represented 160 of the 270 electoral votes needed to win. The Gore campaign responded to the document by accusing Mr. Bush of misleading voters with selective information. In what Mr. Gore's aides titled ''A Tale of the Tape,'' they noted that Mr. Bush's document was 2,644 words and had six pictures, while Mr. Gore's ''Prosperity for America's Families,'' an economic plan he unveiled earlier this month, had 69,042 words and no pictures. But Mr. Bush's aides said the document compressed information from a previously released, 457-page paperback book of speeches and policy prescriptions. The release of the document,  which did not include any new proposals, followed a speech on Saturday in which Mr. Bush attacked Mr. Gore's proposals in sharper language than ever before. Both developments underscored a shift in the Bush campaign, which is now focusing more intensely on the differences in the candidate's plans on Medicare, Social Security, tax cuts and education. ''I'm going to make this a contest on policy,'' Mr. Bush said. He said the race had reached a point where people were paying closer attention and needed to be reminded of where he stood, especially in comparison to Mr. Gore. ''One of the things about a campaign I've learned is timing is important,'' Mr. Bush said. ''When I give one speech, it doesn't necessarily soak in, so I'm going to continue to talk about what I intend to do and where we differ.'' Other comments he made suggested that the campaign had been prepared in the last seven weeks to try an array of approaches. He did not rule out making further attacks on Mr. Gore's ethics or character like the one in a television commercial several weeks ago that portrayed Mr. Gore as dishonest and politically inconsistent. Mr. Bush said he and his campaign would ''have to make those calls'' as the race proceeded. Asked whether his pledge to ''change the tone'' of politics would hurt his ability to raise questions about Mr. Gore's character, he said there was a difference between what a candidate might need to do in a campaign and how a candidate intends to govern. And he said he would govern in a more bipartisan, less acrimonious spirit than President Clinton and Mr. Gore had. That was another argument for his candidacy that he said he would be stressing. Mr. Bush said he wanted ''to remind people that I will be a different type of leader, something that hasn't been the case in the last eight years, something that will not be the case if the vice president becomes president.'' Advisers said today that the document was intended to appeal to voters in households that make $30,000 to $60,000 a year. According to a New York Times/CBS News Poll released last week, Mr. Bush still led Mr. Gore among voters in households in the $30,000 to $50,000 range, but now trailed among voters in households in the $50,000 to $75,000 range. One Bush adviser said today that middle-income voters in both groups cared deeply about whether their problems and aspirations were understood by candidates, and the adviser noted that Mr. Gore came out better in this regard. The adviser said Mr. Bush also needed to reverse the loss of support among women. Karl Rove, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign, described these voters as ''very practical.'' ''They want to know: what are you going to do for them, and how does it differ from the other guy,'' Mr. Rove said. That approach will be reflected in events this week, which will trace life, from birth to old age, and talk about how Mr. Bush's proposals take into account people at each stage. On Monday Mr. Bush will visit a maternity ward in Little Rock, Ark., to talk about his proposal to double the per-child tax credit to $1,000 from $500. On Tuesday, Mr. Bush will visit an elementary school in Chicago to talk about school safety. Mr. Bush said he was confident about his approach and about the race, which he said was ''neck and neck.''
 News analysis: now that voters have finally begun to pay close attention to presidential race, many strategists say Gov George W Bush must be particularly careful not to lose control of what has long been his most potent advantage over Vice Pres Al Gore, namely, his personal image; challenge for Bush campaign is to prevent public from developing perception that he is not quite ready for prime time; photo (M) Now that voters have finally begun to pay close attention to the presidential race, many strategists say that Gov. George W. Bush has to be particularly careful not to lose control of what has long been his most potent advantage over Vice President Al Gore: his personal image. For all the debate over who has the most gripping television commercials, an important way to see how a campaign is performing is in the day-to-day media coverage. By that measure, Mr. Gore has enjoyed nearly a month of flattering attention, and Mr. Bush -- while still neck and neck in the polls -- has been portrayed as a candidate struggling to recover from verbal flubs and tactical blunders, some of his own making and some entirely beyond his control. Now that voters have finally begun to pay close attention to the presidential race, many strategists say that Gov. George W. Bush has to be particularly careful not to lose control of what has long been his most potent advantage over Vice President Al Gore: his personal image. For all the debate over who has the most gripping television commercials, an important way to see how a campaign is performing is in the day-to-day media coverage. By that measure, Mr. Gore has enjoyed nearly a month of flattering attention, and Mr. Bush -- while still neck and neck in the polls -- has been portrayed as a candidate struggling to recover from verbal flubs and tactical blunders, some of his own making and some entirely beyond his control. The challenge for the Bush campaign, according to some of his own advisers and Republicans outside the campaign, is to prevent the public from developing the perception that he is not quite ready for prime time. The longtime view of many of these Republicans has been that Mr. Bush's political attraction is anchored as much in his personality as in his stands on issues: They say he comes across as a regular, upbeat guy without pretension, one who is appealingly self-confident and responsible, and one who is not afraid to say when he does not have an answer. The success of his ''compassionate conservative'' mantra was that Mr. Bush was not a scowling extremist but a sunny and appealing politician who could effectively carry the conservative message. Now, some of Mr. Bush's supporters and advisers sense that these appealing traits have not broken  through to voters. From his tongue-twisted explanations of his tax plan to his reluctance to accept a bipartisan commission's roster of debates and even to his vulgar comment about a reporter, Mr. Bush has seemed defensive, lacking in humor and easily flappable, these supporters say. Don Sipple, a Republican media consultant who worked for Mr. Bush when he ran for governor of Texas, said, ''If there is a substantial deterioration in voters' perceptions of his personal traits that is met with a commensurate rise on the part of Gore, that becomes very problematic.'' Michael K. Deaver, who was an image consultant for Ronald Reagan, said Mr. Bush's challenge reminded him of what his boss faced in 1980, when he was widely derided after saying that 80 percent of air pollution came from plants and trees. ''We had the problem of so-called misstatements and the jokes on late-night television,'' Mr. Deaver said. ''When you get into this you have to change your message dramatically. Bush has got some vulnerability on misspeaking and mispronouncing. The media are looking at him in a different way, and he has to be cognizant of that.'' Most polls so far show that the movement has been in Mr. Gore's column. He is gaining in popularity, and likability, while Mr. Bush is holding his own. But beyond the overall numbers, some pollsters in both parties said they had detected signs of erosion in how the governor is viewed as a person. Now that the months of publicity about Mr. Gore's inability to connect with voters has subsided in the glow of the Democratic National Convention and tightened polls, Democrats are happy to pronounce Mr. Bush as the one with the problem. Democratic officials made available a party poll of likely voters, completed on Thursday, in which respondents were asked whether Mr. Bush ''sometimes seems a little arrogant.'' While voters were divided on that question, the Democrats said they found an increase of several percentage points since the Republican convention in the number of people who said yes. Mr. Gore's ratings have shifted so fast, and so unexpectedly, that the newly warm feelings voters have toward him could evaporate. Last week, the Bush camp was clearly trying to nudge such a shift along, as it pointed to fresh accusations about the Democrats' solicitation of money from trial lawyers. Q. Whitfield Ayres, a Republican pollster, insisted that Mr. Bush's image troubles were the imagination of the media. ''The disparaging, sneering image of Governor Bush that you sense among the media elite is not reflected by most voters,'' Mr. Ayres said. ''That's why he maintains his strength in the polls.'' That may be the case. But there is no mistaking that these days, antics of Mr. Gore that might have been seen as forced and silly a month ago now are being described through the prism of the media and the pundits as evidence that the vice president, finally, is now comfortable allowing people to see his true disposition. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, said in an interview weeks ago that both sides had to take care because if one candidate was seen to be on an upswing, voters might be tempted to join up with a winner. Perhaps the best evidence that the Bush campaign is now worried about Mr. Bush's image -- or no longer sees that as his No. 1 advantage -- is its decision to focus more attention on issues and less on raising questions about Mr. Gore's character. But even some Bush advisers acknowledge that the strategy may be perilous because polls show that voters generally give Democrats higher marks on the issues. There is something of a circular phenomenon here. Mr. Bush's gaffes on the stump are nothing new, but they are being picked up more by the media because the context of the campaign has changed and the governor is no longer viewed as the towering favorite. The more critical coverage could contribute to a damaging of Mr. Bush's image, which, if reflected in the polls, could result in  still more critical coverage. ''Bush picked the worst time to start getting terrible press,'' said S. Robert Lichter, director of the Center for Media and Public Affairs. ''Journalists are setting the story line for the whole campaign.'' ''When you're doing well,'' he explained, ''journalists don't focus on your gaffes or goofs because they don't seem to make any difference. When he starts to falter, the residue of stereotypes comes back into play: that Bush is a lightweight.'' Bush officials have privately said that their biggest fear was that people would begin to question their candidate's weightiness. Now, many Republicans said, with the Olympics in progress, they are particularly worried that Mr. Bush will probably  not have a chance to define himself better until the first of his three debates with Mr. Gore, on Oct. 3. ''The next real step for Bush is to make a good showing at the debates,'' said Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. ''Bush is in the same kind of dangerous slide that Dukakis was in in '88 when he jumped into the tank and put the funny hat on.'' Mr. Deaver insisted there was ample time for the Bush camp to protect how he is perceived. The campaign, he said, should assert stricter control over Mr. Bush's public appearances and press for bolder events and policy proposals.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican candidate for president, recently cited enforcement of the six-month rule as evidence that Medicare was run by heavy-handed bureaucrats with little compassion for beneficiaries.
