 Letter from Dean Askounis says Vice Pres Al Gore's economic plan calls for new spending, which is inconsistent with experience of last eight years of economic prosperity Al Gore's recently released economic plan (front page, Sept. 7) is a study in contradiction. Al Gore's recently released economic plan (front page, Sept. 7) is a study in contradiction. The economic prosperity we enjoy today is due largely to two factors: the skillful handling of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve and the absence of government intervention. Mr. Gore argues that to continue this prosperity, the government needs to intervene with new spending. His position is inconsistent with our experience of the last eight years.
 Gore vs. Entertainment Ads  Vice President Al Gore and his Democratic running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, said that if the entertainment industry does not stop marketing violent films, recordings and video games to children, they would propose legislation or new regulatory authority allowing the federal government to sanction the industry. Mr. Gore said he would give industry officials six months to ''clean up their act.'' Police Raid Gang Faction  Seven people were being held on drug and weapons charges after police raids in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that resulted from an undercover investigation into one of the few surviving factions of the Latin Kings gang, the authorities said.
 Public Lives column profiles Frank J Fahrenkopf Jr, veteran Republican leader and co-chairman of Commission on Presidential debates whose allegiance is being questioned by some Republicans for urging Gov George Bush to reconsider proposal to skip two of three commission-organized debates; he says Bush campaign was making mistake, arguing that variety of formats serves public best; rebuts conventional wisdom that Bush will perform better if he confronts Gore in other than traditional behind-the-lectern format; photo (M) But some Republicans are questioning Mr. Fahrenkopf's allegiance these days. Besides his role as a party elder and his day job as president of the American Gaming Association, the trade group of the casino industry, Mr. Fahrenkopf is co-chairman of the Commission on Presidential Debates. That is the bipartisan group that the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush of Texas, snubbed by proposing to skip two of the three commission-organized debates. But some Republicans are questioning Mr. Fahrenkopf's allegiance these days. Besides his role as a party elder and his day job as president of the American Gaming Association, the trade group of the casino industry, Mr. Fahrenkopf is co-chairman of the Commission on Presidential Debates. That is the bipartisan group that the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush of Texas, snubbed by proposing to skip two of the three commission-organized debates. Mr. Fahrenkopf has urged the campaign to reconsider its decision to avoid the commission's debates, and he is optimistic that a deal will eventually be reached. On Friday, Mr. Bush's campaign appeared to be relenting, and the Bush and Gore camps are expected to meet with the commission's staff later this week. ''The most useful thing Fahrenkopf could do is step down,'' said a Bush adviser, who spoke Friday only on the condition that he not be identified by name. ''He's giving this commission an air of legitimacy. These debates should be done the old-fashioned way with negotiators for the two campaigns yelling and screaming and clawing at each other for a while and then reaching a deal.'' In 1996, Mr. Kirk clashed with President Clinton's re-election campaign, trying in vain to get the president to participate in all four commission-sponsored debates. Mr. Clinton took part in only three. Four years earlier, Mr. Clinton agreed to the commission's debates but Mr. Fahrenkopf had to lobby hard to get then-President Bush to participate. Eventually, the president agreed. Mr. Fahrenkopf does not buy the conventional wisdom that Mr. Bush will perform better if he confronts Mr. Gore across a television newsman's desk instead of in a traditional behind-the-lectern debate. Mr. Fahrenkopf argues that a variety of formats serves the public best. ''Bush stood toe to toe behind podiums with Ann Richards, the then-governor of Texas, and wiped the floor with her,'' he said. ''Likewise,'' he added, ''the mini-debate between Ross Perot and Al Gore took place on the Larry King show, and Al Gore was very, very good in that debate.''
 Excerpts from interview with Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman criticizing entertainment industry for marketing violence to children (M) Following are excerpts from an interview today with Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman: Following are excerpts from an interview today with Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman:
 Seven people are being held on drug and weapons charges after police raids in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that resulted from an undercover investigation into one of few surviving factions of Latin Kings gang; police say that group, led by Carlos Perez and Pedro Mendez, sold $15,000 worth of drugs every day (M) Seven people were being held yesterday on drug and weapons charges after police raids in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that resulted from an undercover investigation into one of the few surviving factions of the Latin Kings gang, the authorities said. Seven people were being held yesterday on drug and weapons charges after police raids in Bushwick, Brooklyn, that resulted from an undercover investigation into one of the few surviving factions of the Latin Kings gang, the authorities said. In addition to Mr. Perez and Mr. Mendez, both of 179 Jefferson Street, the police arrested Bienvenido Perez, 46, and his son Juan Perez, 25, both of 249 Melrose Street; Orlando Rodriguez, 31, of 1378 Bushwick Avenue; Diana Corchado, 27, also of 179 Jefferson Street; and David Jones, 26, of 1685 Norman Street in Queens.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman say they will propose legislation or new regulatory authority allowing federal government to sanction entertainment industry if it continues marketing violent products to children; Gore says he will give industry six months to make changes, after which he and Lieberman will encourage Federal Trade Commission to move against industry by using power to prohibit false and deceptive advertising; position, while not new for Lieberman, is departure for Gore, who has always stopped short of suggesting government-imposed restrictions on media marketing; says care would have to be taken to ensure that any enforcement does not violate First Amendment protections; acknowledges there has been no constitutional tests of use of deceptive advertising laws to challenge marketing strategies, as opposed to advertising content; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, said today that if the entertainment industry did not stop marketing violent films, recordings and video games to children they would propose legislation or new regulatory authority allowing the federal government to sanction the industry. In an extended interview on the veranda of the vice president's residence, Mr. Gore said he would give industry officials six months to ''clean up their act.'' If they do not, and if he and Mr. Lieberman win the November election, the vice president said he would encourage the Federal Trade Commission to move against the industry by using its power to prohibit false and deceptive advertising. Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, said today that if the entertainment industry did not stop marketing violent films, recordings and video games to children they would propose legislation or new regulatory authority allowing the federal government to sanction the industry. In an extended interview on the veranda of the vice president's residence, Mr. Gore said he would give industry officials six months to ''clean up their act.'' If they do not, and if he and Mr. Lieberman win the November election, the vice president said he would encourage the Federal Trade Commission to move against the industry by using its power to prohibit false and deceptive advertising. The position taken today by the Democratic candidates is not particularly new for Mr. Lieberman, who warned last year that entertainment industry leaders would ''invite legal restrictions on their freedom'' if they did not address public concerns about children's access to media violence. But it is quite new for Mr. Gore, who has always stopped short of suggesting government-imposed restrictions on media marketing, even during his wife's crusade against explicit rock lyrics. Mr. Gore said he understood that care would have to be taken to ensure that any enforcement did not violate First Amendment protections of speech. And he acknowledged that there had been no constitutional tests of the use of deceptive advertising laws to challenge marketing strategies, as opposed to advertising content. But in a clear appeal to voters concerned about moral issues, and particularly to women with children, Mr. Gore said he was determined to use the presidency to give parents more control over the cultural influences that bombard their children. As in past elections, the Democrats have collected millions of dollars in campaign contributions this year from the entertainment industry. But Mr. Gore, who has chastised the industry even as he solicited its wealthy leaders, suggested that he was not concerned about alienating his backers in Hollywood and New York City. Because Mr. Lieberman has been known in the Senate as a crusader against media violence, the Gore campaign has been eager to demonstrate that there is little distance between the two running mates on the issue. Mr. Gore, whose wife, Tipper, was among the first to call for warning labels on recordings with explicit lyrics, has also taken active stands on the topic. But several published reports over the years have suggested that Mr. Gore has taken strong anti-industry positions in public while backing away from them in private meetings with entertainment executives and contributors. While the F.T.C. report recommends that the entertainment industry better regulate the behavior of its companies, it pointedly does not propose the kind of legislation or new regulatory authority threatened by Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman. Jack Valenti, the president of the Motion Picture Association of America, said today that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman were ''very wise people'' who understood that ''the reason the F.T.C. did not recommend government intervention -- in a nonexistent problem, I might add -- is that they know such legislation would be dead on arrival in the first federal court that reviews it.'' Hilary Rosen, the president of the Recording Industry Association of America, said that Mr. Gore's threat of government action could be counterproductive. Several weeks ago, Ms. Rosen said, her industry voluntarily adopted guidelines against marketing recordings with explicit lyrics in publications that were read primarily by children under 16. Mr. Gore said he was convinced it could be done in cases where companies seem to be undermining their own rating and labeling standards by marketing inappropriate material to children. ''If the industry violates its own rules and actively misleads parents with advertising, then the industry should be held accountable,'' he said. ''If the industry promises parents that it will not market violent material to children and then proceeds to do so, then the industry's practices could constitute false and deceptive advertising.'' Mr. Lieberman joined Mr. Gore in calling the F.T.C.'s findings troubling. ''It obviously makes a mockery of their own rating system,'' he said of the entertainment industry. ''They've rated their own content and then not lived by their own rating.'' Both Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman have made a campaign tactic of attacking cultural influences. Mr. Gore, in his nomination speech, spoke of challenging ''a culture with too much meanness, and not enough meaning.'' Mr. Lieberman speaks of helping families ''win the competition against the popular culture.'' Those are lines that play particularly well with female voters, who are shown by polls to be more concerned than men about moral issues. And they are designed to help change the impression found in some polling that Republicans in general and the party's presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, in particular, would be better at upholding moral values than the Democrats and Mr. Gore. Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the Republican nominee ''believes there clearly needs to be greater responsibility'' shown by the entertainment industry. He said that Mr. Bush prefers that the industry impose its own restrictions rather than be regulated by the federal government. But the notion of regulating the entertainment industry is politically perilous for the Democratic ticket because of the party's longtime reliance on the industry as a source of campaign funds. As it is, some Hollywood figures have said they are uneasy with Mr. Gore's choice of Mr. Lieberman and have encouraged Democratic contributors to pocket  their wallets. In addition, the Gore-Lieberman campaign has received $928,000 from the industry, compared to $725,000 for the Bush campaign. On Thursday, Mr. Gore is to appear at a $5 million fund-raiser for the Democratic National Committee at Radio City Music Hall in New York City featuring a long list of entertainers, ranging from Bette Midler to Paul Simon to Ben Affleck. The following week, he is scheduled to attend another party fund-raiser, in Los Angeles, that is expected to generate contributions from Hollywood. Republicans have long maintained that the industry's financial clout with Democrats has compromised the Clinton administration's ability to use its bully pulpit to persuade entertainment executives to change their practices. A Gore administration, they say, would be no different. ''What I fear with the Gore-Lieberman ticket,'' said Senator Sam Brownback, a Kansas Republican, ''is that you'll hear words but see no action or real push to deal with the products produced by these billion-dollar companies because of the money they put into their campaigns.''
 Dick Cheney, Republican vice presidential candidate, is making some readjustments to combat reputation for woodenness, not unlike that of Vice Pres Al Gore; so-called 'tax families' have become fixture on campaign trail; began popping up after Gov George W Bush acknowledged that he needed to do better job explaining his proposed $1.3 billion tax cut and to counter Al Gore's contentions that cuts would mainly benefit wealthy; Cheney's ready agreement with Bush's vulgarity in describing New York Times reporter Adam Clymer gets its own share of attention in parts of news media; photo (M) All of this occurred during a week in which some Republicans, concerned about the skidding poll numbers of their ticket, began openly questioning the wisdom of Gov. George W. Bush in choosing Mr. Cheney. Some pointed to the questions raised about his compensation package with his previous employer, while others said his laid-back style came up short in comparison with his Democratic counterpart, Joseph I. Lieberman. Mr. Cheney is not exactly the kind of politician who goes around kissing babies. The opportunity came up on Wednesday when he met with the Lierenz family -- John, Sherry, and 9-month-old Jessalyn -- in Wilmington, Del., to talk about the benefits they could expect under Gov. George W. Bush's proposed tax cut. ''He kind of shook her hand,'' Mr. Lierenz said. They began popping up soon after Governor Bush acknowledged that he needed to do a better job explaining his proposed $1.3 billion tax cut, and to counter claims by Mr. Gore that the cuts would mainly benefit the wealthy. Mr. Cheney has even appropriated one of Mr. Gore's refrains, promising to fight for working families. One of Mr. Cheney's arguments is that Mr. Gore's more modest tax cut  relies too much on tax credits for which only some people will qualify. ''The Gore plan basically is really a spending program administered by the I.R.S. with a whole bunch of specific provisions in it that you get only if you have solar panels or drive a battery-powered car or if you're engaged in some kind of activity that they want to encourage,'' he said in Delaware. Of course, many of the tax families trotted out on the trail would benefit most from another tax credit: Mr. Bush's proposal to double the tax credit for families, to $1,000 per child. While it did not attract nearly as much attention as the vulgarity that Governor Bush let slip in front of an open microphone in Illinois last Monday while describing a New York Times reporter in what he thought was a private aside, Mr. Cheney's ready agreement with the assessment -- ''Oh, yeah, he is, big time'' --  got its own share of attention. ''Today, we all have great concern for our military -- its lack of readiness, its low morale,'' Mr. Popowski said, echoing a central theme of the Bush-Cheney ticket. ''Veterans regret this most of all. That wouldn't have been the case eight years ago when our commander in chief was George Bush and he and Dick Cheney were running the show. Then, excellence was in season for our fighting men and women -- big time. Big time.'' The crowd went wild.
 Gary Krist Op-Ed article takes form of a questionnaire in which Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush sound out the voting public on issues of tax cut, technology and the Internet, education, health care and Social Security; cartoon (M)
 President Clinton and Al Gore, holding all the high cards, folded and let the Russian obstruct a vital element of American defense of our major cities. President Clinton and Al Gore, holding all the high cards, folded and let the Russian obstruct a vital element of American defense of our major cities. That's the plain meaning of the Clinton-Gore decision to overrule Defense Secretary Bill Cohen, who leaned toward making it possible to deploy a limited defense as soon as it is ready. The urgency is to have a shield in place before North Korea and Iraq build the means to blackmail us with too-credible threats of mass destruction. So, with Al Gore's full approval, he decided not to decide -- to kick that can into the future, couching his indecision as ''an opportunity for President Putin and the next American president to reach a common position.'' We have here what should be a major issue in our presidential campaign. George W. Bush has spelled out his position: build and deploy the anti-missile system, which does not threaten Russia's deterrent, and not make it subject to a Putin veto. Al Gore takes the Clinton position: keep negotiating in hopes that Putin will change his mind and agree to amend the ABM treaty so as to allow the U.S. to deploy a shield against terrorist missiles -- perhaps too late.  Apparently Gore believes his powers of persuasion will be greater than Clinton's have been. But what if Putin strings Gore along the way he has diddled Clinton? If so, does Gore propose (a) to cave in, (b) to withdraw from the obsolete treaty, or (c) to continue the Clinton-Gore policy of kicking the can along while terrorists get the bomb and American cities lie defenseless? Will Gore propose more billions in loan guarantees to buy Putin's permission? Bush and his running mate should be hammering away at this survival issue. If Dick Cheney were the Republican serving in Clinton's cabinet, and if the President overruled him on the most important policy decision at the Pentagon, would he continue to serve and shut up? Cheney should call on the rebuffed defense secretary to put the public interest first, to step down and speak out. Would Gore continue this administration's feckless pursuit of Russian approval? Unless he becomes his own man and refuses to be vetoed, we have to assume Gore would continue Clinton's appeasement of Vladimir Putin.
 Governor Bush's Journey, 14th article in series on lives of presidential candidates, focuses on influence of father's legacy on his political career; Bush is loath to discuss manifold ways in which his life has been molded and prodded by father's and family's legacy; is extremely sensitive to questions relating to his political inheritance, notably over whether he is his own man; examination of his entire life suggests that almost everything he has achieved was in part because of his name and family connections, which opened doors that would otherwise have been closed; common theme runs through each stage of his life, namely, of hero worship of father leading to instinct to follow father's trail; many friends believe that, at some level, driving force of his career has been effort to honor father's legacy, or at least to please and emulate him, and that presidential bid is culmination of quest; photos (L) As the thrill of his father's election to the presidency in 1988 began to fade a bit, George W. Bush began to wonder what it would mean for him. As the thrill of his father's election to the presidency in 1988 began to fade a bit, George W. Bush began to wonder what it would mean for him. Mr. Bush, chilled by the implications of the report, ordered all extra copies destroyed, a longtime friend said. Yet simply by commissioning the report, he demonstrated an awareness of something he is usually loath to discuss: the manifold ways in which his life has been molded and prodded by his father's career and his family's legacy. One of the questions Mr. Bush is most sensitive about has to do with this inheritance: To what degree is he his own man? A look across his life suggests a fairly straightforward answer: almost everything he achieved, he did in part because of his name and family connections. Typically, his name opened doors that would otherwise have been closed, but once inside he impressed people with his energy and enthusiasm. If it were not for his background, Mr. Bush very likely would not have gotten into Yale, would not have become a baseball team owner, would not have become governor of Texas -- and would not be a presidential candidate. Yet much the same was said of John F. Kennedy, and even Vice President Al Gore benefited enormously when he first ran for Congress by carrying the name of his father, a former senator. When one steps back from any stage of Mr. Bush's life and examines his biography as a whole, one theme runs through each stage of his life: hero worship of his father, leading to an instinct to follow his father's trail. Many friends think that at some level, a driving force of George W.'s career has been an effort to honor his legacy and please his father, or at least to emulate him. Some acquaintances, though not all, even believe that this year's presidential bid is a culmination of that quest. ''What makes him tick?'' asked an old friend of both Bushes. ''It's Daddy.'' Yet his father's experience also taught Mr. Bush lessons about what to avoid, and in some respects he is campaigning this year as the anti-Dad. His campaign organization has a beyond-the-Beltway, down-home-Texan feel to it that his father's did not. It is led by old Texas buddies who, at least until recently, have run a disciplined and virtually leak-proof organization that is the opposite of President Bush's 1992 campaign, dominated by Washington politicos. Moreover, for all his father's efforts to enjoy pork rinds and boycott broccoli, Mr. Bush has a far more natural Bubba quality. More than his father, he genuinely seems delighted by the chance to work crowds. Mr. Bush comes across as by nature remarkably cheerful, relaxed and free of neurosis or inner conflict. But one exception creates a fascinating knot in the grain: his complex relationship with his father and his family legacy. Diane Paul was a serious girlfriend of Mr. Bush when he was in his mid-20's. She speaks very fondly of him, which is no surprise: Mr. Bush seems to be regarded more warmly by his ex-girlfriends than many men are by their wives. Ms. Paul says that that even during the period Mr. Bush has called his ''nomadic years,'' when he was partying aggressively and avoiding anything that hinted of a responsible career, he was casting about for a way to live up to his family. She remembers his speaking of his father and grandfather with such awe that she knew they were powerful role models. It was only when Mr. Bush was in his early 40's that his life took on a new direction, and this seemed to empower him. With baseball, Mr. Betts said, Mr. Bush not only tackled something his father had not done but did it very well. The son helped turn the Rangers around and presided over the construction of a grand new stadium, one of the best in major league baseball. George W. Bush is unconvinced by this analysis. Asked if this pattern of similar behavior was a coincidence, he shifted uncomfortably in his chair. This attitude mimics his father's famous discomfort with any probing of his psyche. Friends and family members say the entire Bush family is exceptionally averse to introspection, in part because of an ingrained notion that excessive reflection is wimpish and also because of a fear that journalists will pounce on any self-searching and exaggerate any vulnerabilities it reveals. One natural tactic for a young adult caught in the shadow of a powerful parent would be to flee it. The elder George Bush had escaped from his own powerful family by moving to Texas after graduating from college. And Jeb had set out in a new direction by majoring in Latin American studies in college, marrying a Mexican woman and working for a time as a banker in Venezuela, although in the end he, too, followed his father into politics, eventually being elected governor of Florida. George W., instead of fleeing that shade as Jeb did, embraced it -- and after college followed his father's route almost precisely. Yet this was a path tailor-made for frustration and disappointment: the elder George Bush enjoyed a career in the spotlight -- member of Congress, ambassador to the United Nations, chairman of the Republican National Committee, envoy to China, head of the Central Intelligence Agency -- while young George floundered, going nowhere. But what shines through in speaking to Mr. Bush's oldest acquaintances is the deep respect he has always felt for his father. Some acquaintances believe that Mr. Bush's political career arose from a desire to avenge his father's defeat, although Mr. Bush dismisses the idea. In any case, the interplay between father and son is a constant backdrop to the presidential contest. The younger Mr. Bush is very sensitive to suggestions that he is a princeling, and as a result keeps his father largely out of sight. But they speak often and remain very close, and the father remains a vast if barely seen presence hovering over the son's campaign. In some respects, friends say, Mr. Bush was closer to his mother, Barbara, and she was an equally powerful but very different force in molding the family. The father and grandfather were grand figures but also a bit remote, while Barbara, the disciplinarian, inspired less reverence and more fear. George W.'s looks come from his father, but his personality resembles his mother's. He shares her impetuousness, her dismissiveness of critics, and above all her rapier wit. Nothing is so central to Mr. Bush's style as his needling humor, his tendency to see just about everybody as a jousting partner, and all that borrows from his mother. So, one rainy winter night in Houston over Christmas vacation from Yale, a childhood friend named Doug Hannah drove George W. to Neiman-Marcus. Mr. Bush darted into the store and emerged soon afterward bearing a large diamond ring to give his beloved. ''I was impressed,'' Mr. Hannah recalled. ''But the whole thing seemed ill conceived to me.'' And to just about everybody else. Mr. Bush had been dating the woman, Cathy Wolfman, for only a short period, and his roommates at Yale were stunned when he returned from Christmas vacation with the news. In explaining how it came to pass, some friends turn not just to the obvious motivations -- Ms. Wolfman was a catch, a former high school cheerleader and now an excellent student at Rice University -- but also to some inner drive to follow the example set by his father, in love as in almost everything else. Another explanation is simply that Mr. Bush was famously impetuous, even rash, in making decisions. Friends had the impression that Mr. Bush was more in love with Ms. Wolfman than she with him, and he seemed hurt when they decisively split up after graduation and she moved to Washington. Within a year, she had married a young man who had just graduated from Harvard Business School. Mr. Bush took it very hard. Once more, he had come close to emulating his father's storybook life, but again he had fallen short. Initially reticent when the topic of the engagement came up in an interview, Mr. Bush later acknowledged that it had been a very difficult time. The Bush clan gets together each year at the family compound in Kennebunkport, Me., and in each generation there is a star around whom others revolve. Others echo the comment, emphasizing that while the Bushes are held together by tremendous affection and mutual support, there is also a good deal of rivalry in the mix. When George W. was playing tennis with his brother Marvin at Kennebunkport more than a dozen years ago, Marvin began to goad his brother about being behind -- until George W. charged across the court at his brother and chased him up the fence. That logic suggested Mr. Bush should move quickly into politics, and he thought about running for office in Texas in 1990. Somewhat later, Mr. Betts recalled, Mr. Bush promised that he would not run for office in 1990. Instead, he turned his focus on the Rangers, and on blazing his own trail to elective office. He quickly realized that by deviating from his father's route and going into baseball, he had gained credibility. ''It solved my biggest political problem in Texas,'' Mr. Bush told a reporter in his first baseball season as an owner. ''My problem was, 'What's the boy ever done?' '' Governor Bush's Journey  This is the 14th article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. The next installment will focus on George W. Bush and the Texas Rangers baseball team.
