 Former Rep Tom Downey, close adviser to Vice Pres Al Gore, says he received anonymously mailed package that involved material designed to prepare Gov George W Bush for his debates with Gore; Downey says he examined materials and gave them to his lawyer, who turned them over to FBI; Downey further says he will recuse himself from any further devate preparation with Gore (M) A close adviser to Vice President Al Gore said he had received an anonymously mailed package today that involved material designed to prepare Gov. George W. Bush for his debates with Mr. Gore. The adviser, former Representative Tom Downey of Long Island, N.Y., said he examined the materials briefly before giving them to his lawyer, who turned them over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation this afternoon. Mr. Downey, who has been helping Mr. Gore prepare for the Bush debates and was standing in for Mr. Bush in mock debates, also said he would recuse himself from any further debate preparation. A close adviser to Vice President Al Gore said he had received an anonymously mailed package today that involved material designed to prepare Gov. George W. Bush for his debates with Mr. Gore. The adviser, former Representative Tom Downey of Long Island, N.Y., said he examined the materials briefly before giving them to his lawyer, who turned them over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation this afternoon. Mr. Downey, who has been helping Mr. Gore prepare for the Bush debates and was standing in for Mr. Bush in mock debates, also said he would recuse himself from any further debate preparation. The Bush and Gore campaigns are to meet on Thursday to negotiate the debate schedule. If the candidates adhere to a plan set up by a bipartisan commission, the first debate will be on Oct. 3 in Boston. Campaign officials said they did not know if the materials sent to Mr. Downey had been stolen from the Bush campaign or were meant to trap the Gore adviser in some sort of dirty trick. Mr. Downey's lawyer, Marc Miller, said the material -- a videotape and a sheaf of papers -- arrived in an envelope postmarked Austin, Tex., where the Bush campaign has its headquarters. The Gore campaign was eager to dissociate itself quickly from the incident. After Mr. Miller called the F.B.I., campaign officials alerted The Associated Press that the packet had arrived and provided a detailed time line of Mr. Downey's actions. Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said of Mr. Downey: ''He's being very careful and very prudent. He's handled this exactly right. No one can raise any questions about how it's being handled. What to make of it, I don't know.'' Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said: ''We don't know what the Gore campaign claims to have in their possession, but we take it very seriously. We have asked our attorneys to review it to try to determine what they have.'' At an impromptu news conference today in Westminster, Calif., the chief spokeswoman for the Bush campaign, Karen P. Hughes, said that his campaign had not yet determined whether the materials Mr. Downey received were legitimate, but that she was not aware of any missing materials like the videotape or briefing papers. She said that Mr. Bush and a small group senior advisers had begun debate preparations last May. She said that while the earliest sessions were not videotaped, some later ones were. She said that only Mr. Bush and a few senior advisers had legitimate access to the video tapes. Ms. Hughes said that William M. Daley of the Gore campaign had called Mr. Evans today to tell him that they had received the materials. Asked whether the Gore campaign had handled the situation well, she said she had so few details that it was impossible to say. One reason the Gore campaign was eager to get the story out in a hurry was a fear that Mr. Gore's current political momentum might suffer from a perception of any improperly gained advantage. Ronald Reagan's presidential campaign was criticized in 1980 after it obtained secret briefing papers on the debate strategy of President Jimmy Carter. Today, when the package arrived at Mr. Downey's office, he happened to be preparing debate materials for Mr. Gore. ''It looked like our debate material,'' Mr. Downey said. Mr. Downey said he watched 60 to 90 seconds of the video, and saw Mr. Bush and Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, who is playing Mr. Gore in the mock debates, and another person he did not know.
 Gov George W Bush calls Vice Pres Al Gore's commitment to environment into question by saying that Clinton administration seriously neglects upkeep of national parks; Bush, walking along banks of salmon-filled river in Monroe, Wash, proposes spending additional $4.75 billion in federal money over five years to repair and maintain national parks; lashes out at Gore for not saying whether he supports breaching hydroelectric dams in Washington that have hindered spawning salmon; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush aggressively challenged Vice President Al Gore today on one of his signature issues, calling Mr. Gore's commitment to the environment into question by saying that the Clinton administration had seriously neglected the upkeep of national parks. Mr. Bush proposed spending an additional $3.75 billion in federal money over five years to repair and maintain them. And he framed that plan in terms of his own love of the outdoors, which he extolled from the wooded banks of a salmon-filled river here. Gov. George W. Bush aggressively challenged Vice President Al Gore today on one of his signature issues, calling Mr. Gore's commitment to the environment into question by saying that the Clinton administration had seriously neglected the upkeep of national parks. Mr. Bush proposed spending an additional $3.75 billion in federal money over five years to repair and maintain them. And he framed that plan in terms of his own love of the outdoors, which he extolled from the wooded banks of a salmon-filled river here. ''Under this administration, the parks are in worse shape than ever before,'' said Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee. ''Sewage flows untreated into the lakes and streams of Yellowstone National Park. Civil War relics have been soaked by a leaky roof at Gettysburg. ''For eight years,'' Mr. Bush added, ''this administration has talked of environmentalism while our national parks are crumbling.'' Mr. Bush did not stop there. He also lashed into Mr. Gore for not saying whether he supported breaching hydroelectric dams in Washington that have hindered spawning salmon. Environmentalists are pushing hard for such a measure. Mr. Bush opposes it, saying that technology should be developed to save both the dams and salmon, a position supported by many prominent Democratic officials in the state for economic reasons. Mr. Gore, who has courted the support of nationwide environmental groups, has said he would convene a summit of people on different sides of the issue to discuss possible resolutions. ''He's refused to say whether he would breach the dams or not,'' Mr. Bush said today, after first emphasizing his concern for salmon. He was standing on a piece of private property that, with government aid, had established a kind of salmon nursery to feed and fatten the fish and increase their chances of surviving and reproducing. ''Before the people of this good state vote,'' Mr. Bush said, ''I think you deserve an answer. I think you need to know where he stands on this important environmental issue.'' Mr. Bush had spent much of the past few weeks of the presidential campaign either on the defensive or immersed in subject matters unrelated to his chosen themes. But his strongly worded remarks were a clear attempt to seize the offensive against Mr. Gore and leave the vice president with some explaining to do. Mr. Bush was also tapping into issues of special concern to residents of Washington, the state on the West Coast that his aides feel he has the best chance of winning. At the least, the Bush campaign would like to do well enough along the West Coast, which Mr. Gore is counting on winning, to force the vice president to spend precious time and money here. After Washington, Mr. Bush was scheduled to spend two days in California. The environment is especially important to voters in this region and one reason they often tilt Democratic. But Mr. Bush has been devoting this entire week trying to blunt Democrats' typical advantages on health care, the environment and education. Mr. Gore's aides said today that Mr. Bush's environmental record in Texas contradicted his claims. The Sierra Club, a liberal advocacy group, echoed that assessment, quickly issuing a statement that expressed deep skepticism about the genuineness of Mr. Bush's commitment to national parks. The Gore campaign and the Sierra Club noted that Texas ranks near the bottom of states according to several environmental measures, including spending on parks. Mr. Gore's aides further noted that Mr. Bush supports oil exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, a wilderness area that Mr. Gore has pledged to protect. ''It's laughable that Bush would reinvent himself as an environmentalist,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. Mr. Gore's aides took issue with Mr. Bush's portrait of a national park system in decline. Literature distributed by the Bush campaign said that the Clinton administration, for the coming fiscal year, had requested a 22 percent decrease in financing for maintenance of national parks, to $180 million from $230 million. But Mr. Gore's aides said that those figures ignored the fact that the administration had developed other sources of revenue, outside the appropriation process, for the maintenance of parks. They also said that the administration was spending much more on parks than the last Republican administration -- that of Mr. Bush's father. Mr. Bush said the spending was too focused on converting more and more private land into public parks and that, as a result, there was a roughly $5 billion backlog of necessary maintenance work in parks. He said that he would eliminate this with the additional spending he was proposing, which he cast as a cultural and moral imperative. ''Our national parks contain America's memories and America's grandeur,'' Mr. Bush said in a 13-minute speech rife with poetic flourishes. He read it from teleprompters, an incongruous addition to the sylvan surroundings.
 Democrats and Republicans alike score entertainment industry for marketing violent movies, music and video games to children, Senate Commerce Committee hearing; Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Democratic vice-presidential nominee, tells committee that such marketing is outrageous and must stop; Lynne V Cheney, whose husband, Dick, is Republican vice-presidential candidate, says problem goes beyond marketing practices to products themselves; Cheney notes pointedly that Lieberman and his running-mate, Vice Pres Al Gore, plan to attend fund-raiser thrown by Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax movie studio; Weinstein and other movie executives refuse to appear at hearing, which is called to examine Federal Trade Commission report on marketing to underage customers; photo (M) Despite all the talk about the well-being of children, the well-being of the parties' presidential races was never far in the background. Mr. Lieberman, for example, mentioned Vice President Al Gore several times. If he and Mr. Gore are elected, he said, they intend to take action against the entertainment companies if they persist in their marketing practices with children. Mrs. Cheney, the former chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, noted pointedly that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman  planned to attend a fund-raiser this week thrown by Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax, the movie studio that is a subsidiary of the Walt Disney Company.
 Vice President Al Gore attended a Houston dinner in November 1995 to promote a budding relationship between the Democratic Party and a handful of powerful Texas trial lawyers. The relationship blossomed, producing $4 million in donations from the lawyers' firms since 1996. But it also produced some heavy-handed fund-raising that has recently drawn the scrutiny of federal campaign finance investigators. At the time of the dinner, the lawyers were deeply troubled by a bill passed by the Republican-led Congress that would have drastically overhauled the nation's litigation system by restricting the amount of money that people injured by faulty products could win in lawsuits. Two days after the dinner, Democratic officials asked Mr. Gore to call several lawyers who attended the dinner to ask each to give $100,000 to the party. Vice President Al Gore attended a Houston dinner in November 1995 to promote a budding relationship between the Democratic Party and a handful of powerful Texas trial lawyers. The relationship blossomed, producing $4 million in donations from the lawyers' firms since 1996. But it also produced some heavy-handed fund-raising that has recently drawn the scrutiny of federal campaign finance investigators. At the time of the dinner, the lawyers were deeply troubled by a bill passed by the Republican-led Congress that would have drastically overhauled the nation's litigation system by restricting the amount of money that people injured by faulty products could win in lawsuits. Two days after the dinner, Democratic officials asked Mr. Gore to call several lawyers who attended the dinner to ask each to give $100,000 to the party. Mr. Gore was asked to call Walter Umphrey, a prominent plaintiff's lawyer in Beaumont, Tex., but his aides say he did not make the call.  Two weeks later, Donald L. Fowler, then Democratic national chairman, was asked to call Mr. Umphrey to press him for a $100,000 check. On a briefing memorandum for the Fowler call, a Democratic Party aide, wrote these words for Mr. Fowler to tell Mr. Umphrey as the reason for the phone call, ''Sorry you missed the vice president,'' and then, ''I know'' you ''will give $100K when the president vetoes tort reform, but we really need it now. Please send ASAP if possible.'' Jim Kennedy, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said today: ''The Republicans and others have had this for more than 1,000 days and no one found it interesting until 1,000 hours before the election. That's curious, isn't it?'' Among those who criticized the veto was Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, who had pushed hard for the legislation. In a Wall Street Journal interview that year, Mr. Lieberman, now Mr. Gore's running mate, described the trial lawyers as ''a small group of people who are deeply invested in the status quo, who have worked the system very effectively and have had a disproportionate effect.'' This year, Mr. Gore has continued to woo the Texas trial lawyers, a strategy that has paid enormous dividends to the Democrats. In the years before the May 1996 veto, five prominent Texas lawyers -- Mr. Umphrey, John Eddie Williams Jr., the host of the dinner attended by Mr. Gore on Nov. 28, 1995, John O'Quinn, Wayne Reaud and Harold Nix -- and their law firms had given $747,700 to the Democrats. Since the veto, the five men and their firms have given a nearly $4 million to the Democrats, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit research group in Washington that monitors campaign finances. By contrast, according to the center, the five lawyers have given no money to the Republican Party, whose nominee for President, George W. Bush, has pushed aggressively as governor of Texas to limit jury awards and has pledged as a presidential candidate to ''curb frivolous lawsuits.'' Lawyers and law firms have already contributed nearly $5 million to Mr. Gore's presidential campaign -- nearly 10 percent of all the money the Gore-Lieberman campaign has raised, according to an analysis by the Center for Responsive Politics. Mr. Gore obviously is not counting on Texas this November, but it has still served as an important fund-raising stop, in large part because of trial lawyers. In March, for example, the vice president jetted to Houston to attend two fund-raisers that, combined, raised nearly $600,000 for the Democratic National Committee. One of these fund-raisers reunited Mr. Gore with Mr. Williams, whose law partner, Denman Heard, was host to 125 people who contributed $150,000 to the Democrats. Later, a dinner at the Houston home of H. Lee Godfrey, a partner in Susman Godfrey, a major litigation firm, raised $400,000 for the Democratic Party.
 Second Thoughts on Tax Cuts  Many Congressional Republicans believe the across-the-board tax cut pushed by Gov. George W. Bush does not aid their races and they have adopted a strategy emphasizing debt reduction and bite-size cuts.
 ''Dear United States Attorney Kelly and First Assistant Gorence: I write to accept Mr. Kelly's request that we provide them with additional credible and verifiable information which will prove that Dr. Lee is innocent. On the afternoon of Wednesday, Dec. 8, Mr. Kelly informed me that it was very likely that Dr. Lee will be indicted within the next three to four business days. In our phone conversation, Mr. Kelly told me that the only way that we could prevent this indictment would be to provide a credible and verifiable explanation of what he described as missing tapes.
 Many Congressional Republicans distance themselves from Gov George W Bush's $1.3 trillion, 10-year tax cut plan, calling instead for debt reduction and bite-size tax cuts, strategy that plays better in their races for re-election; some Republican lawmakers fear Bush is repeating mistake they made in 1999, pushing massive tax-cut proposal that found so little public support that they did not even try to override Pres Clinton's veto of measure; while Bush makes large tax cut centerpiece of his campaign, Congressional Republicans are focusing on specific tax cuts; some Republican strategists say talking about huge lump-sum tax cut gives Democrats opportunity to attack it as sop to wealthy (M) While many of them refuse to criticize the $1.3 trillion tax-cut plan proposed by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Republican candidates and incumbents on the campaign trail and in Congress have distanced themselves from his 10-year plan. While many of them refuse to criticize the $1.3 trillion tax-cut plan proposed by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Republican candidates and incumbents on the campaign trail and in Congress have distanced themselves from his 10-year plan. Pat Tiberi, an Ohio Republican who is running for the House seat being vacated by Representative John R. Kasich, said voters were ''not especially'' intrigued by Mr. Bush's tax plan. Some Republican lawmakers say that Mr. Bush is repeating the mistake they made in 1999 when they pushed a tax-cut plan that totaled $800 billion over 10 years. After President Clinton refused to sign the bill, Republicans found so little public support for the proposal that they did not even try to override the veto. Republican candidates for the House and Senate are running television advertisements that mostly focus on specific tax cuts, like ending the marriage penalty. Among those candidates who are taking a more cautious approach is Representative Rick A. Lazio, who is in a tight race with Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Senate seat from New York and who has proposed a more modest tax-reduction plan than Mr. Bush. In contrast, Mr. Bush has made his large tax cut the centerpiece of his campaign, a move that baffles some Congressional Republicans. ''Bush is trapped,'' said an aide to a Republican House leader who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''He's where we were in 1999. He's talking about a big tax plan this year. Voters just want to know what's in the tax plan, the components, not a big number.'' Some Republican strategists say that talking about a huge lump-sum tax cut gives Democrats the opportunity to attack it as a sop to the wealthy. Indeed, the Bush campaign has in recent days tried to counter such attacks by showcasing families at campaign rallies and detailing how the tax-cut plan would aid them. ''People are not aware of what the Bush package calls for,'' said Linda DiVall, a Republican pollster. ''If they are just looking at the overall package and hear Gore talk about tax cuts for the wealthy, they tend to win. If we break down the tax package, we tend to win.'' To be sure, some Republicans embrace Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan. And some Republicans say a major reason for any differences in emphasis is the differences in the offices that Mr. Bush and Congressional candidates are seeking. While presidential candidates tend to campaign on grand themes, those running for the House and Senate tend to push more measured proposals and more measured goals. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, disputed the notion that there was any significant difference in emphasis between what the Republican presidential candidate is pushing on the stump and what Republican candidates for Congress are emphasizing. Choosing to push smaller tax cuts rather than rallying around Mr. Bush's tax-reduction plan has not necessarily made things easier for Republicans. Thus the Republicans' plan only commits $42 billion in new funds -- or about 16 percent -- of the surplus for debt reduction. The idea is aimed at giving Republicans a politically palatable opening position in the budget negotiations with the White House, but the effect is to push them even farther away from Mr. Bush, who seldom mentions debt reduction. Democrats gleefully pointed out the differences between the Republicans' new stress on reducing the national debt and Mr. Bush's emphasis on slashing tax rates. ''Did he get the message that tax cuts are out?'' chortled Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat. ''They should make some ads and send a subliminal message to George Bush that tax cuts are not popular. Big time, as we say.''
 Another factor is Vice President Al Gore's rise in some statewide polls. If that trend holds, Mr. Koster might get less help from Gov. George W. Bush than some analysts were predicting earlier this summer. ''When Bush's numbers were much higher, everyone expected there'd be coattails,'' Mr. Koster said. ''But we're running this campaign like it all depends on us.''
 And by any measure, the primary election dealt a significant blow to Mr. Ramirez, the man who has been at the helm of the Bronx Democratic organization, the man who is regularly consulted by Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton. And by any measure, the primary election dealt a significant blow to Mr. Ramirez, the man who has been at the helm of the Bronx Democratic organization, the man who is regularly consulted by Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
 Bruce Ornstein letter, commenting on Sept 13 article, says subliminal appearance of word 'rats' in political ad by Bush presidential campaign criticizing Vice Pres Al Gore's Medicare proposals was intentional, contrary to Bush's assertions Re ''Bush Says Rats Reference in Ad Was Unintentional'' (news article, Sept. 13): Re ''Bush Says Rats Reference in Ad Was Unintentional'' (news article, Sept. 13): I am not only insulted by this attempt to subliminally influence my voting decision, but I am also deeply offended by George W. Bush's feeble efforts to cover it up. Is this what he means when he says he will bring integrity and character back to the White House?
 If Mr. Lieberman follows your recommendation and the Gore-Lieberman ticket is defeated, then a highly respected senator will be removed from national public life. If Mr. Lieberman follows your recommendation and the Gore-Lieberman ticket is defeated, then a highly respected senator will be removed from national public life.
 Tom Reed Op-Ed article says new degree to which big business is cannibalizing its own small partners is new fault line in US economy that has capacity to put traditional political alliances up for grabs; says it has become difficult for Republican ticket to champion small-business banner in new and fundamentally different fight between competing capitalists, given George W Bush's and Dick Cheney's personal and political ties to corporate America; says groups of traditional Republican voters are therefore behaving like working-class Democrats of old because of greater threat to livelihoods than big government ever posed; drawing (M) In this new, fundamentally different fight between competing capitalists, it would be difficult for the Republican ticket to champion the small-business banner, given George W. Bush's and Dick Cheney's personal and political ties to corporate America. The Democrats, therefore, have the opening they need to lay claim once again to being champion of the little guy. Al Gore's populist rhetoric and Joseph Lieberman's service on the Senate Small Business Committee may help them articulate just what is at stake in this new cleavage in American politics (although Mr. Lieberman's longtime links to Connecticut's big insurance companies could pose a problem). But can they ally the Democratic Party in two months with the 13 million small-business voters who have been hammered for two decades with the message that Democrats are their enemies?
 William Safire Op-Ed column decries 'snickering campaign' aimed at Gov George W Bush's verbal gaffes (M) Ridicule focused on minor characteristics is nothing new; we taunted Lyndon Johnson and Jimmy Carter about their regional accents, and made one of our most athletic and physically coordinated presidents, Gerald Ford, into an incredible klutz. Until recently Al Gore was the butt of jokes about his wooden demeanor and forlorn use of earth tones to achieve alpha-masculinity. Ridicule focused on minor characteristics is nothing new; we taunted Lyndon Johnson and Jimmy Carter about their regional accents, and made one of our most athletic and physically coordinated presidents, Gerald Ford, into an incredible klutz. Until recently Al Gore was the butt of jokes about his wooden demeanor and forlorn use of earth tones to achieve alpha-masculinity. Now a withering fusillade of  sneers is being fired at the campaign of George W. Bush. It began with a question that few could answer about the names of foreign potentates; his embarrassment at thus being mousetrapped incurred the hooting of pundits who keep those names on crib sheets. He stumbles over words unfamiliar to him: in the manipulated hoo-hah about the flash of the last four letters of ''bureaucrats'' on a TV spot, Bush's rejection of ''subliminal'' ads came out ''subliminable.'' This brought catcalls from commentators who would praise their own dogged efforts as indefatigable if they could pronounce it. Manipulated hoo-hah? The ''rats'' frame, which lasted a thirtieth of a second, was first noted publicly with amusement by Tony Snow, a former speechwriter for President Bush, on a Fox TV program on Aug. 28. Nobody noticed (proof again that if an event is not reported in The New York Times, it hasn't happened). But Snickery Central in Nashville noticed, and the Gore campaign held the precious information for two weeks to be recycled for maximum effect after Labor Day. It was then passed to The Times, which dutifully noted the Gore source and gave the story front-page treatment, which led to this week's media frenzy. Gore, primed well in advance, expressed profound ''disappointment'' at this Orwellian mass hypnosis. Joe Lieberman bowed his head, presumably in prayer for the Republic in its moment of peril. Why did this hyped hysteria drive the reading on the Snickery Scale toward 10, its highest level? Because the TV spotmaker's miscue gained resonance from a previous snicker-generator: the locker-room derogation of a colleague of mine by Bush, unaware of a nearby live microphone. (People forgive politicians for using such language in private about journalists; more damaging was Thomas Dewey's ''idiot engineer.'') Snickery Central made the most of it. For days after Bush's foolish scatological reference (thankfully not a career-ending ethnic slur), Gore spokesmen slyly repeated the phrase's compound adjectival component, ''major-league,'' which succeeded in causing mild after-snickers. Listen for Gore in debate using ''major-league'' rather than ''world-class.'' Thus has the room of politics been filled with gaffe gas, awaiting a blooper's spark to ignite an explosion of derision that echoes endlessly through the media. Bush even endured a pop from the mythical DAM (Mothers Against Dyslexia). Democratic partisans equate  Bush's occasional verbal stumbles with Gore's too-careful verbal legalisms, like ''community outreach'' to conceal illegal fund-raising, and his Clintonesque obfuscations like ''no controlling legal authority.'' That ignores motive: Better an honest bumble or dopey crack than a practiced evasion. But the snickermongers now encouraging the bashing of Bush have to worry about another swing of the pendulum. A need for the appearance of fair play may soon induce some current Bush-bashers to turn elitist smirks on Gore or even Hillary. At that point, we can hope that the symbiotic spinmeister-media snickering campaign, demeaning to voters and candidates, will be condemned as ''negative.'' Then the silly sniping will give way to the worthier business of assessing Bush's grasp of foreign affairs and the teachers' and trial lawyers' grasp of Gore. The rhetoric of ridicule has its traditional place; don't knock the mock. But September has seen the shadowboxing on debates (Bush's fault), the primacy of piety (Gore's fault), the play of contradictory poll guesswork as news (the media's fault), sustained inattention (the public's fault), and the failure to sneer snappily at the snickering campaign (my fault). Eight weeks to a fateful decision; let's all shape up.
 James Carville's Democratic hosts at Manhattan restaurant have special menu printed for him listing rat as ingredient of dishes to commemorate Republican advertisement by Bush campaign; Paul Newman and Tim Robbins lead Manhattan rally in support of Screen Actors Guild and American Federation of Television and Radio Actors strike against advertising industry; premiere party for film Almost Famous is held, New York City; photo (M) In fact, there were rats all over the menu, so to speak. His hosts at the restaurant, knowing that he was coming in, printed a special menu for him to commemorate a certain Republican advertisement by the Bush campaign.
 Vice Pres Al Gore keeps low profile as allies work to make most of Gov George W Bush's campaign troubles; Gore, on his seventh 'school day,' visits Lewiston High School in Lewiston, Me; Gore campaign plans to turn its full attention to debates with Bush in next week; photo (M) As his allies worked to make the most of Gov. George W. Bush's campaign troubles, Vice President Al Gore went about the hard work of not making news today, manufacturing gauzy pictures in a Maine high school and re-emphasizing policy positions that seem to be touching a chord. To the extent possible, Mr. Gore and his aides have no desire to distract attention from the recent streak of unfavorable stories about the Bush campaign. Their strategy is essentially to run out the clock during this stage of the campaign, letting Mr. Bush struggle on his own. As his allies worked to make the most of Gov. George W. Bush's campaign troubles, Vice President Al Gore went about the hard work of not making news today, manufacturing gauzy pictures in a Maine high school and re-emphasizing policy positions that seem to be touching a chord. To the extent possible, Mr. Gore and his aides have no desire to distract attention from the recent streak of unfavorable stories about the Bush campaign. Their strategy is essentially to run out the clock during this stage of the campaign, letting Mr. Bush struggle on his own. Then the Gore campaign plans to turn its full attention to debates with Mr. Bush, which will be the subject of a critical meeting between the campaigns on Thursday, and to battling the better-financed Republicans on the airwaves. And so today, Mr. Gore came to Lewiston High School in southern Maine, where he devoted most of the day to a series of photo-friendly encounters that conveyed his concern about education. As he did so, his aides drew attention to a letter written by two Democratic senators asking the Federal Communications Commission to investigate a Republican television commercial that, they asserted, may have violated a 1974 federal rule against subliminal advertising. Mr. Gore said nothing on that topic today, leaving the task to Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon and Senator John B. Breaux of Louisiana. The senators wrote the F.C.C. to express their concern about a Republican National Committee advertisement that fleetingly shows the word ''rats'' in a single frame. Mr. Gore flew from Maine to Boston this afternoon for a rally with his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, and a fund-raiser that was expected to collect close to $2 million for the Democratic National Committee. But the day's primary imagery came from the Gore campaign's eight-hour occupation of Lewiston High. Throughout the day, Secret Service agents patrolled the corridors along with hall monitors, and bomb-sniffing dogs examined students' backpacks. Mr. Gore's speeches were repeatedly interrupted by intercom announcements from the principal's office, and the vice president sampled school cafeteria cuisine, downing two cheeseburgers and some french fries. It was the seventh ''school day'' of Mr. Gore's campaign. As always, he spent the night before at the home of teachers, in this case Donald and Susan Jalbert, both of whom teach at the school. Mr. Gore arrived about 1 a.m., stayed up talking with the Jalberts and their two children until 2, and then rose at 6:15 a.m. to eat the blueberry scones that Mrs. Jalbert had been baking since 4:30. All the while, cameras recorded the scenes. If there was a slip in the stagecraft, it was only that Mr. Gore, in his meeting with teachers, allowed himself to be photographed while seated beneath a picture labeled ''prehistoric man.'' Mr. Gore devoted a midday session with students and teachers in the library to promoting his plans for making college more affordable. ''Coming out of high school, kids in middle-class families are under a lot of pressure, and their parents are under a lot of pressure,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Many of them have no idea where they're going to get the money to pay tuition.'' Mr. Gore's proposals include increasing an existing federal tax deduction so that families could deduct 28 percent of annual tuition payments -- up to $10,000 in tuition for each child -- instead of the current 20 percent. That proposal has been criticized by the Bush campaign because it would only assist those who pay taxes, and would thus exclude many low-income families. Mr. Gore's aides said that those families are already eligible for a variety of federal college grants. Mr. Gore would also create savings accounts that would allow parents to make pre-tax contributions that would be matched by the federal government and could be withdrawn without penalty to pay for college tuition. And he would create new tax-free accounts, similar to 401(k) accounts, that would permit individuals and their employers to put money away for adult learning and training.
 Vice President Al Gore said, ''Passage of a strong hate crimes law will send a clear message that we value everyone in our society, and we will work together to oppose those who use hate to divide us.''
 BUSH EXPANDS MESSAGE TEAM -- With the presidential contest now a dead heat, Gov. George W. Bush has added a Washington-based Republican consultant, Ed Gillespie, to his communications team to help sharpen his campaign message. Mr. Gillespie, 39, has been senior adviser to the House majority leader, Representative Dick Armey of Texas, director of policy and communications for the House Republican Conference and a senior staff member at the Republican National Committee. He was one of six Washington advisers named by the Bush campaign earlier this year when national Republicans complained that the Austin-based Bush campaign was too insular. His hiring for the new job comes at a time when Vice President Al Gore has caught Mr. Bush in the polls and some Republicans have been urging Mr. Bush to sharpen his campaign themes. BUSH EXPANDS MESSAGE TEAM -- With the presidential contest now a dead heat, Gov. George W. Bush has added a Washington-based Republican consultant, Ed Gillespie, to his communications team to help sharpen his campaign message. Mr. Gillespie, 39, has been senior adviser to the House majority leader, Representative Dick Armey of Texas, director of policy and communications for the House Republican Conference and a senior staff member at the Republican National Committee. He was one of six Washington advisers named by the Bush campaign earlier this year when national Republicans complained that the Austin-based Bush campaign was too insular. His hiring for the new job comes at a time when Vice President Al Gore has caught Mr. Bush in the polls and some Republicans have been urging Mr. Bush to sharpen his campaign themes. ATTACK ON SOFT MONEY -- Three advocates of stronger campaign finance laws asked a federal court in Washington yesterday to rule that coordination of advertising and other expenditures between a presidential candidate and a political party represents an illegal campaign contribution. The three -- Fred Wertheimer, president of Democracy 21; Scott Harshbarger, president of Common Cause, and Archibald Cox, the former Watergate special prosecutor -- argued that the use of so-called soft money by the Democratic National Committee and Republican National Committee on behalf of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush constituted a ''massive'' violation of election law. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have accepted $68 million in public funds for the general election and are not supposed to receive any other direct contributions. Under federal law, soft money commercials are not supposed to advocate the election or defeat of a specific candidate, and the advertising campaigns are not supposed to be coordinated with candidates. CLOSE RACE IN FLORIDA -- Two new polls indicate that Vice President Al Gore's support among voters in Florida has surged and that he now is neck and neck with Gov. George W. Bush, who once appeared to have a lock on the state's 25 electoral votes. The first poll, conducted by the Mason-Dixon survey group for several Florida media outlets, found Mr. Bush only two percentage points ahead; the second poll, conducted by the University of Connecticut's polling organization, showed the contest dead even. MOBILIZING ON ABORTION RIGHTS -- Abortion rights groups are planning a multimillion-dollar effort to mobilize women to vote for Vice President Al Gore. The campaign is being led by the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League and Planned Parenthood and is being partly financed by the Turner Foundation, established by the media magnate Ted Turner to deal with world population growth and environmental concerns. ''We have identified 2.9 million women in key states and will be contacting at least 2.1 million of them by phone to persuade them how important this election is to preserve reproductive choice,'' Kate Michelman, the league president, said. Anti-abortion forces are using similar tactics to help George W. Bush.
