 Toward the end of a State Department reception for the winners, held by Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and attended by Tipper Gore, one of the Monk Institute's supporters, Camilo talked about himself. Mr. Almendra had taught him since he was 4, he said, adding that he worshiped the Puerto Rican player Giovanni Hidalgo, also one of the judges.
 Ms. DeParle said that she had known Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic candidate for president, for more than two decades. ''I'm one of his biggest fans,'' said Ms. DeParle, who, like Mr. Gore, is from Tennessee. ''I want to do everything I can to help him be elected and to do a great job with the Medicare program. The vice president is a friend. But I don't have any plans to join a Gore administration. I feel ready to get back to the private sector, and that's what I'll be pursuing over the next several months.''
 ''You need Al Gore, Joe Lieberman and Jim Maloney,'' he told more than 3,000 people who filled an outdoor amphitheater for the rally. Mr. Clinton, who campaigned earlier in the day in Westchester County for his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, in the New York Senate race, also included her in that package. The commercial, which also showed former President Bush and Senator John McCain of Arizona, sought to portray Mr. Maloney as dishonest by referring to the 1997 conviction of his brother, Robert Maloney, on charges of violating federal campaign finance laws. The advertisement accused Mr. Maloney of letting ''his brother take the fall.''
 Another factor in the conservatives' relative quiet is that they have reason to bide their time, mindful that Gov. George W. Bush could win the White House and smooth the way for many of their causes. Mr. Sanford summed up the prevailing sentiment of his conservative colleagues and the Republican leadership this way: ''Let's not make waves, so we don't cause a train wreck, because it will all be fixed when Bush gets in.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore makes appearance on Oprah Winfrey television show in Chicago, where Democratic presidential nominee portrays himself as sensitive and devoted family man; visits elementary school in Belleville, Ill, where he repeats ultimatum that entertainment industry stop marketing violence to children; Republican rival Gov George W Bush says Gore lacks credibility on issue because Democrats have received more than $13 million in contributions from entertainment industry; photo (M) Oprah Winfrey knew that it might be a rough day at the office. Before introducing Vice President Al Gore to her audience today, television's high priestess of self-revelation told her fans that she had always ''stayed away from politicians'' as guests because she never felt she could have an honest conversation with them. ''After 15 years,'' she said, ''I thought, O.K., I need to try to penetrate that wall.'' But after an hour with Mr. Gore seated beside her in a yellow leather armchair, Ms. Winfrey had done little more than chip away at the mortar. In the interview, which was broadcast from Ms. Winfrey's studio in Chicago, Mr. Gore revealed little that was new, though viewers did learn that his favorite book is ''The Red and the Black'' by 19th century French novelist Robert Stendahl; that his favorite movie is the quirky 1983 Scottish film ''Local Hero,'' and that his favorite cereal is Wheaties. Oprah Winfrey knew that it might be a rough day at the office. Before introducing Vice President Al Gore to her audience today, television's high priestess of self-revelation told her fans that she had always ''stayed away from politicians'' as guests because she never felt she could have an honest conversation with them. ''After 15 years,'' she said, ''I thought, O.K., I need to try to penetrate that wall.'' But after an hour with Mr. Gore seated beside her in a yellow leather armchair, Ms. Winfrey had done little more than chip away at the mortar. In the interview, which was broadcast from Ms. Winfrey's studio in Chicago, Mr. Gore revealed little that was new, though viewers did learn that his favorite book is ''The Red and the Black'' by 19th century French novelist Robert Stendahl; that his favorite movie is the quirky 1983 Scottish film ''Local Hero,'' and that his favorite cereal is Wheaties. And yet, Mr. Gore may have achieved much of what he wished. On a show with 22 million viewers a week, three-fourths of them women, the Democratic presidential nominee portrayed himself as a sensitive and devoted family man. Ms. Winfrey also asked Mr. Gore about the sloppy kiss he planted on his wife at the Democratic Convention, and twice showed videotape of the prolonged smooch. Mr. Gore then explained that ''this is a partnership and she is my soulmate,'' a choice of words that elicited appreciative applause from the largely female audience. Ms. Winfrey then pitched in by showing a short film illustrating the firmness of the Gores' marriage. Mr. Gore appeared at ease with Ms. Winfrey, who will interview his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, on Sept. 19. But for most of the show, Mr. Gore stuck closely to his campaign script. When Ms. Winfrey asked him why she should vote for him, he responded,  ''I'm for the people, not the powerful.'' When she relayed a question from an online viewer about the greatest problem facing the country, he replied that ''we need more meaning in our national life.'' Perhaps his least scripted responses came after the cameras blinked off, when Mr. Gore lingered in the studio for about 20 minutes to take more questions from Ms. Winfrey and the audience. When a woman asked about Mr. Bush's ''problems'' with alcohol, Mr. Gore said he did not make any judgments about his opponent, that he took Mr. Bush at his word that ''he's had a personal transformation and a period of growth.'' Mr. Bush, 54, has said he drank more than he should have until he swore off alcohol 14 years ago. Ms. Winfrey also asked Mr. Gore after the taping whether there were things he could say now about President Clinton's relationship with Monica S. Lewinsky that he could not say at the time. ''Did you and Tipper talk about it over dinner and say, 'Can you believe?' '' she asked. ''I'm not giving you any exact quotes,'' Mr. Gore said. ''You're in the ballpark.'' In the broadcast, Ms. Winfrey had fun playing a game of ''favorite things'' with Mr. Gore. Favorite subject in school, she asked. ''Hmmm, science,'' he responded. Favorite teacher: ''Dean Stambaugh, who was my art teacher.'' Favorite quote: ''Hmm, ah, Bob Dylan: those who are not busy being born are busy dying.'' Favorite time of year: ''Springtime.'' Favorite thing to sleep in: ''A bed.'' All-time favorite musical group: ''Beatles.'' Favorite meal: ''Chinese.'' Favorite childhood memory: ''Playing baseball with my dad.'' From Chicago, Mr. Gore flew to Belleville, Ill., for a meeting on education at Westhaven Elementary School. There, he repeated his ultimatum, first issued on Sunday, that the entertainment industry stop marketing violent films, recordings and video games to children. Mr. Bush today told reporters that Mr. Gore was ''short of credibility on the issue'' because the Democrats have received more than $13 million in contributions from the entertainment industry. The Republicans have received nearly $9 million from the same source. Mr. Bush said that as president he would ''absolutely talk with C.E.O.'s in Hollywood, those who produce the products that oftentimes pollute our children's mind.'' Also at the school forum, Mr. Gore was asked by a woman about what he could do as president to bring prayer back to the classroom. After joking that there would always be prayer in schools as long as there are arithmetic tests, Mr. Gore said that ''in some school settings the impression is given that it's wrong if a student wants to exercise or display his or her faith or engage in a truly voluntary prayer that the school employees have nothing to do with.'' THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT  Correction:  September 13, 2000, Wednesday  An article yesterday about Oprah Winfrey's interview with Al Gore used a misspelled pen name and a nonexistent given name for the author of ''The Red and the Black,'' which Mr. Gore described as his favorite book. The pen name is Stendhal, not Stendahl; Robert is not part of it. An article yesterday about Oprah Winfrey's interview with Al Gore used a misspelled pen name and a nonexistent given name for the author of ''The Red and the Black,'' which Mr. Gore described as his favorite book. The pen name is Stendhal, not Stendahl; Robert is not part of it.
 Board of National Rifle Assn defies expectations by declining to endorse Gov George W Bush for President at its final meeting of year, making it very unlikely that Bush will receive group's formal endorsement before Election Day; officials say they do not want to provide Democrats new fodder for attacking Bush; will spend millions of dollars supporting Bush and trying to discredit Vice Pres Al Gore as threat to gun ownership; recent polls suggest organization, while popular in many Republican areas, is viewed negatively by large numbers of independent suburban voters whom Bush is trying to court, particularly women (M) Defying expectations, the board of the National Rifle Association declined to endorse Gov. George W. Bush for president at its final meeting of the year on Saturday. The development makes it very unlikely that Mr. Bush will receive the group's formal approval before Election Day, N.R.A. officials said today. That does not mean, however, that the rifle association will sit out the election. Far from it: the  organization intends to spend millions of dollars supporting Mr. Bush and trying to discredit his Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, as a threat to gun ownership. Defying expectations, the board of the National Rifle Association declined to endorse Gov. George W. Bush for president at its final meeting of the year on Saturday. The development makes it very unlikely that Mr. Bush will receive the group's formal approval before Election Day, N.R.A. officials said today. That does not mean, however, that the rifle association will sit out the election. Far from it: the  organization intends to spend millions of dollars supporting Mr. Bush and trying to discredit his Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, as a threat to gun ownership. But officials of the association said today that they did not want to provide the Democrats new fodder for attacking Mr. Bush, and so had decided to withhold a formal endorsement. Polls suggest that the N.R.A., while popular in many Republican areas, is viewed negatively by large numbers of the independent suburban voters whom Mr. Bush is trying to court, particularly women. ''Our goal is to do no harm'' to Mr. Bush, one N.R.A. official said, noting that the group was already pouring money into the race to help the governor. Mr. Bush has had a good working relationship with the rifle association in Texas. But he has tried to maintain a polite distance from the group during the campaign, and aides said today that he had not sought the group's endorsement, or its neutrality. The Gore campaign has described the rifle association as ''the Bush gun policy team'' and has accused Mr. Bush of working ''hip holster to hip holster'' with the gun lobby. And Handgun Control Inc. has been running an advertisement in several swing states featuring a previously disclosed film clip of Kayne Robinson, an N.R.A. vice president, telling a friendly audience that if Mr. Bush is elected, ''we'll have a president where we work out of their office.'' Once averse to getting involved in politics, the 129-year-old rifle association did not begin endorsing presidential candidates until the 1980's. But since then, it has been solidly in the Republican camp, endorsing Ronald Reagan in 1980 and 1984, and George Bush in 1988. The group did not endorse President Bush in 1992 or Bob Dole in 1996, because of differences on some issues, but it spent millions of dollars attacking Bill Clinton. Joe Sudbay, political director of Handgun Control, said he was not surprised that the rifle association had not endorsed Governor Bush, because ''they've become a real albatross for candidates,'' particularly among women. Mr. Sudbay added that the rifle association did not need to trumpet its support for Mr. Bush because it was already making clear to its four million members -- through speeches by its leaders, Web site postings and mailings -- that it wanted him elected. Indeed, officials of the rifle association said today that there would soon be a new round of mailings and, perhaps, television advertisements attacking Mr. Gore in several important swing states where gun ownership is high, including Pennsylvania, Michigan, Missouri and Ohio. Accusing Mr. Gore of trying to play down his support for strong gun-control laws, one N.R.A. official said: ''The guy's tried to reinvent himself on our issue since the convention. He makes statements that even I could agree with about supporting the Second Amendment. But come on. Look at the record. And we will certainly be reminding our members of that record.''
 Editorial says Vice President Al Gore crossed line that no Democratic presidential candidate ever should in threatening to aim punitive legislation at entertainment industry for allegedly marketing violence to children; says party has tradition of protecting free expression, and that Gore and running mate Sen Joseph Lieberman are betraying it by advocating what would amount to government censorship (M) In threatening to aim punitive legislation at the entertainment industry, Vice President Al Gore has crossed a line that no Democratic presidential candidate should ever cross. His party has a tradition of protecting free expression. Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman, betray that tradition by advocating what would amount to government censorship. Mr. Gore's statements came as the Federal Trade Commission produced a report requested by President Clinton after the ghastly shooting at Columbine High School. In it, the commission charges that the producers of movies, music and computer and video games have marketed inappropriate material to young people, violating the spirit of their own ratings system. The F.T.C. recommended tightening enforcement of ratings curbs, a step that the industry should consider as a matter of civic responsibility and political prudence. In threatening to aim punitive legislation at the entertainment industry, Vice President Al Gore has crossed a line that no Democratic presidential candidate should ever cross. His party has a tradition of protecting free expression. Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman, betray that tradition by advocating what would amount to government censorship. Mr. Gore's statements came as the Federal Trade Commission produced a report requested by President Clinton after the ghastly shooting at Columbine High School. In it, the commission charges that the producers of movies, music and computer and video games have marketed inappropriate material to young people, violating the spirit of their own ratings system. The F.T.C. recommended tightening enforcement of ratings curbs, a step that the industry should consider as a matter of civic responsibility and political prudence. But in delivering the report, the Trade Commission chairman, Robert Pitofsky, cautioned against setting up a federal ''thought police.'' Mr. Gore tried to skirt that problem by saying he would back legislation to give the F.T.C. broader power to punish the entertainment industry for ''deceptive advertising,'' but that he would do so in a way ''consistent with the First Amendment.'' That is sophistry that seems to reinforce the charge by the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, that Mr. Gore will say anything to get elected. Moreover, as the F.T.C. noted in its report,  there is no concrete evidence linking violent or sexual content in popular culture with the violent actions of teenagers with guns. That does not mean that the industry can refuse to help parents exercise control over what their children watch. But that must be done through voluntary labeling and a rigorously enforced rating system. The Gore-Lieberman approach glosses over the fact that R-rated movies are not barred to teenagers. The rating requires that those under 17 be accompanied by an adult. Barring the marketing of R movies on television shows that have a large teenage audience would violate the rights of other viewers of these shows who are 18 and older.
 MARK McKINNON, consultant to George W. Bush. [A22] MARK McKINNON, consultant to George W. Bush. [A22]
 Through it all, Mr. Buchanan maintains that he has no regrets about quitting the Republican Party. Four years ago, he electrified his supporters -- the ''pitchfork brigades'' -- with his upset victory in the New Hampshire primary. He switched parties last October after his renewed quest flatlined as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas moved for the Republican nomination. ''Did you watch this year's Republican Convention?'' Mr. Buchanan asked about a party he feels has abandoned conservative bedrock to ape President Clinton's centrist techniques. ''Bush would have put me down in the basement with all the other conservatives. I still feel liberated.''
 LIEBERMAN RETURNS TO TEXAS  For the second time in four days, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman,  the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, traveled to Texas yesterday, and spoke at four events in Dallas and in the Austin area, raising $1.7 million for the Democratic National Committee. On Friday, Mr. Lieberman held a forum in a low-income neighborhood in Houston to attack Gov. George W. Bush's record on children's health care. Yesterday, at the Austin home of Thomas J. Meredith, who directs Dell Computer's venture capital fund, Mr. Lieberman spoke to 150 people at a $5,000-a-couple luncheon. LIEBERMAN RETURNS TO TEXAS  For the second time in four days, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman,  the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, traveled to Texas yesterday, and spoke at four events in Dallas and in the Austin area, raising $1.7 million for the Democratic National Committee. On Friday, Mr. Lieberman held a forum in a low-income neighborhood in Houston to attack Gov. George W. Bush's record on children's health care. Yesterday, at the Austin home of Thomas J. Meredith, who directs Dell Computer's venture capital fund, Mr. Lieberman spoke to 150 people at a $5,000-a-couple luncheon. TRYING TO EXPLAIN THE SLIPS  During the campaign, Gov. George W. Bush has demonstrated a sometimes tortured relationship with the language, saying ''hostile'' when he meant ''hostage,'' ''terrier'' when he meant ''tariff'' and ''vile'' when he meant ''vital.'' An article in the latest issue of Vanity Fair magazine suggests that Mr. Bush has dyslexia and is being skewered by reporters for a tendency beyond his control. Karen P. Hughes, the director of communications for the Bush campaign, said the magazine's sympathy for Mr. Bush was misplaced. Ms. Hughes said that while one of Mr. Bush's brothers, Neil, has dyslexia, the Republican presidential nominee does not. ''In the case of this story,'' Ms. Hughes said, ''fiction is stranger than truth.'' FOR NOW, A TOSS-UP  Four new national polls -- those for Time, Fox News, CNN/USA Today and NBC/The Wall Street Journal -- showed little change in the presidential race since Vice President Al Gore closed the gap with Gov. George W. Bush after the Democratic National Convention. None of the polls, released over the weekend, have  Mr. Gore ahead by more than three points, about the same spread that many polls released a week earlier showed. So with about eight weeks until Election Day, the race appears to be a toss-up -- at least for the moment. One caution: A fifth poll, conducted for Newsweek, has Mr. Gore ahead by a more comfortable eight percentage points.
 Reed E Hundt letter on Sept 9 article notes broadcast networks are required by law and tradition to carry three prime-time presidential debates at no cost; urges Gov George W Bush's campaign to abide by tradition The Bush campaign is reconsidering whether to take part in the debates on free broadcast TV that the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates has arranged (news article, Sept. 9). As this matter is negotiated by the campaigns and with the commission, I hope that all are aware that the broadcasters will carry three debates in prime time, at no cost, to every home not by accident but because of the law. The Bush campaign is reconsidering whether to take part in the debates on free broadcast TV that the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates has arranged (news article, Sept. 9). As this matter is negotiated by the campaigns and with the commission, I hope that all are aware that the broadcasters will carry three debates in prime time, at no cost, to every home not by accident but because of the law. Specifically, broadcasters have obtained their licenses on the condition that they serve the ''public interest,'' and the tradition has been that they show three debates and all at the same time. The Bush campaign should abide by this tradition so that the debates are seen by the widest possible audience and Americans can best learn how the major candidates stand on the issues.
 Lee Bergman letter on Sept 9 editorial agrees Sen Joseph I Lieberman should resign from Senate race in Connecticut; notes Gore-Lieberman victory would enable Gov John G Rowland to name Republican as Lieberman's Senate successor You are right that Senator Joseph I. Lieberman should resign from the Senate race in Connecticut (editorial, Sept. 9). Should the Gore-Lieberman ticket win, the possibility of a Democratic majority in the Senate would be weakened greatly when the ensuing senatorial vacancy is filled by Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut, a Republican. You are right that Senator Joseph I. Lieberman should resign from the Senate race in Connecticut (editorial, Sept. 9). Should the Gore-Lieberman ticket win, the possibility of a Democratic majority in the Senate would be weakened greatly when the ensuing senatorial vacancy is filled by Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut, a Republican.
 The gist of the commission's findings was reported Sunday based on interviews with officials familiar with the report. Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, took note of the study and said that if elected, they would offer legislation or new regulations to crack down on the entertainment industry if the industry did not take steps to comply with the recommendations of the Federal Trade Commission within six months. Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, agreed today that the entertainment industry needed to rein in its marketing practices. But he questioned Mr. Gore's credibility, saying the vice president had not previously taken a strong stand against violence in entertainment.
 Gov George W Bush presses efforts to attract older voters by telling aging residents of Clearwater, Fla, that his plans for changing Medicare and providing prescription drug benefits would give them control over their health care, while Al Gore's would give them only government-run health maintenance organization; move underscores threat he suddenly faces from Gore; although aides previously talked of Florida as almost certain Republican win, recent polls classify it as toss-up; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush told older residents in Florida today that his plans for changing Medicare and providing prescription drug benefits would give them control over their health care, while Vice President Al Gore would give them only ''a government-run'' health maintenance organization. ''Seems like to me we need to trust seniors to be able to tailor a plan to meet each person's needs,'' Mr. Bush said during a town hall-style meeting at a large retirement complex early this afternoon in Clearwater, near Tampa. ''The federal government ought to be humble enough to allow you to make choices.'' Gov. George W. Bush told older residents in Florida today that his plans for changing Medicare and providing prescription drug benefits would give them control over their health care, while Vice President Al Gore would give them only ''a government-run'' health maintenance organization. ''Seems like to me we need to trust seniors to be able to tailor a plan to meet each person's needs,'' Mr. Bush said during a town hall-style meeting at a large retirement complex early this afternoon in Clearwater, near Tampa. ''The federal government ought to be humble enough to allow you to make choices.'' Mr. Bush's visit here today was intended to help sell the proposal he unveiled last week to coax Medicare recipients to select from a variety of government-subsidized private health insurance plans that include prescription drug benefits. But it also underscored the potency of the threat that Mr. Bush is suddenly facing from Mr. Gore. Although aides to Mr. Bush once talked about Florida, where his brother Jeb is governor, as an almost certain win, recent polls classify the state as a toss-up, and Mr. Bush was scheduled to spend part of Tuesday and part of next week here as well. ''I plan quite a few visits here,'' Mr. Bush said at the St. Petersburg-Clearwater International Airport, where he arrived from Austin, Tex. His brother greeted him at the airport and later introduced him at the retirement complex, a campaign stop that reflected the disproportionate number -- and influence -- of older voters in Florida. In his talk at the retirement center, Mr. Bush offered a broadly drawn portrait of Mr. Gore's plans for prescription drug coverage. ''My opponent's point of view,'' he added, was to create ''only one government-run H.M.O. You'll be thrown into it. That's where you're going to end up -- in a government-run H.M.O.'' With his description of a big, scary, arrogant federal government, Mr. Bush sought to distill his policy differences with Mr. Gore, who has called for strengthening Medicare and adding prescription drug coverage within the entitlement program. But Mr. Bush was also providing a hint of how he might -- and might not -- incorporate the copious and often unsolicited advice that his campaign has been receiving from Republican strategists and other political analysts ever since Mr. Gore emphatically erased Mr. Bush's lead in polls. Many of those experts maintain that Mr. Bush should float above the details of issues like health care on which Democrats in general and Mr. Gore in particular seem to enjoy more voter confidence. To some extent, Mr. Bush heeded that counsel, using health care as a prism through which he wanted voters to see the disagreements between him and Mr. Gore on the role of the federal government. Mr. Bush essentially cast himself as the genuine populist. ''We shouldn't have this concept that the federal government is all  wise and all knowing,'' he said. He also said that his Medicare plan could actually be enacted, an allusion to failed health-care initiatives during the Clinton administration and an assertion that he could be more effective in office than Mr. Gore. But Mr. Bush also waded into the brambles of the issue itself, telling his audience that under Mr. Gore's plan, they would have to make binding decisions about their coverage before they turned 65 and would, in some cases, pay more for prescription drugs than they currently do. ''Tell your friends and neighbors to use the calculator to make sure you look at the fine print -- the fine print -- before people buy into a program that's going to mean more of the same,'' Mr. Bush said. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said that Mr. Bush's characterizations of Mr. Gore's proposal were misleading or erroneous and that Mr. Gore, in strengthening Medicare, would be giving older Americans a guarantee of benefits that Mr. Bush would not. ''Bush puts seniors off on the tender mercies of the insurance companies,'' Mr. Hattaway said. Mr. Bush's focus on health care marked the beginning of a week in which his aides said he would confront Mr. Gore on issues like the environment and education that are  considered Democrats' strong suits. They said that their goal was to remind people that Mr. Bush is ''a different kind of Republican,'' one of the campaign's longstanding catch phrases, and that Mr. Bush was armed with ''real plans for real people,'' the campaign's newest slogan. The Bush campaign's target, clearly, is the pivotal group of undecided centrist voters without predetermined allegiances to either party. Mr. Bush's stylistic efforts to reinvigorate his candidacy were also on display today. Instead of looking down at his audience of several hundred from a stage, he stood at eye level with them, pivoting this way and that as he answered questions about a variety of issues. Just before his remarks, Mr. Bush met privately with three women who, according to campaign officials, would fare better under Mr. Bush's proposals for Medicare and prescription drug coverage than they would under Mr. Gore's. This represented the campaign's newly aggressive effort to put human faces on Mr. Bush's policy proposals. But while Mr. Bush's aides cited facts and figures to buttress their claim about the trio of supporters, reporters did not meet or have access to them. Mr. Bush was acutely conscious of the age and political interests of his audience, making a point of telling them that he would protect their Social Security benefits and that those benefits would not be endangered by his sweeping tax cut proposal. He moved through the arithmetic of that equation more fluidly than he had in recent weeks.
 Rachelle Marshall letter on Sept 8 article holds members of Pres Clinton's cabinet may be taking part in Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign because they oppose Gov George W Bush's policies Your report about the degree to which members of the Clinton cabinet are taking part in Vice President Al Gore's campaign (''Gore Gets Powerful Help From Cabinet,'' Sept. 8) lists several factors that may be responsible, including President Clinton's investment in getting Mr. Gore elected and Mr. Gore's need to have ''marquee names'' vouch for his participation in making important decisions. Your report about the degree to which members of the Clinton cabinet are taking part in Vice President Al Gore's campaign (''Gore Gets Powerful Help From Cabinet,'' Sept. 8) lists several factors that may be responsible, including President Clinton's investment in getting Mr. Gore elected and Mr. Gore's need to have ''marquee names'' vouch for his participation in making important decisions. But a more compelling reason for their involvement may be simply that these knowledgeable people regard Gov. George W. Bush's positions on issues like abortion, the environment, tax cuts, Medicare and Social Security as dangerous. The cabinet members may be working hard for Mr. Gore simply because they believe his election would be in the best interests of the country.
 Dispute Over G.O.P. Ad  The word ''RATS,'' a fragment of the phrase ''bureaucrats decide,'' pops up in a frame of a Republican television commercial that assails Vice President Al Gore's proposal for a Medicare prescription benefit. The ad's producer asserted that what appeared to critics to be an effort to deliver a subliminal message had been ''purely accidental.'' Gov. George W. Bush told an elderly audience that his plans for Medicare and prescription benefits would give them control of their health care, while Mr. Gore's would give them ''a government-run H.M.O.'' The board of the N.R.A. declined to endorse Mr. Bush for president. Officials said members feared that Democrats would use the gun group's endorsement to attack Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore appeared on ''Oprah'' and portrayed himself to its largely female audience as a sensitive and devoted family man. Editorials: Unworthy pandering by Mr. Gore; a vanishing security case; tribulations and triumphs in sports; choices for the New York primary.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.
 In a 30-minute speech at Elmira College, Mr. Lazio, the Republican nominee for Senate from New York, laid out a far more ambitious plan than that of Gov. George W. Bush, who wants to spend $13.5 billion over five years. Mr. Lazio's plan would come close in cost to the one proposed by his Democratic opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton, whose education proposals call for $123 billion in new spending in the next decade, her aides said tonight. In a 30-minute speech at Elmira College, Mr. Lazio, the Republican nominee for Senate from New York, laid out a far more ambitious plan than that of Gov. George W. Bush, who wants to spend $13.5 billion over five years. Mr. Lazio's plan would come close in cost to the one proposed by his Democratic opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton, whose education proposals call for $123 billion in new spending in the next decade, her aides said tonight.
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed column on 2000 presidential campaign warns Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore against underestimating basic fairness and intelligence of American electorate; says both have gotten into their worst trouble when they have done so (M) My wife was buying groceries at the Giant supermarket shortly after Al Gore chose Joe Lieberman as his running mate. It was a Friday, and as the checkout lady bagged my wife's groceries, she was left at the end with two breads -- one a Sabbath challah and the other a Roman Meal sandwich loaf. The checkout lady picked up the two breads, put them in a bag together, looked at my wife with a little smile and said: ''I think the Roman Meal and challah can go together, don't you?'' My wife told me she was sure it was the grocery lady's little commentary on the Gore-Lieberman ticket. I tell that story when people ask if I think Americans will actually vote for a ticket with a Jewish vice-presidential candidate. Sure, for some Mr. Lieberman's religion will be a negative, but I have no doubt most Americans will judge him on his merits, which thus far have only elevated his popularity. My wife was buying groceries at the Giant supermarket shortly after Al Gore chose Joe Lieberman as his running mate. It was a Friday, and as the checkout lady bagged my wife's groceries, she was left at the end with two breads -- one a Sabbath challah and the other a Roman Meal sandwich loaf. The checkout lady picked up the two breads, put them in a bag together, looked at my wife with a little smile and said: ''I think the Roman Meal and challah can go together, don't you?'' My wife told me she was sure it was the grocery lady's little commentary on the Gore-Lieberman ticket. I tell that story when people ask if I think Americans will actually vote for a ticket with a Jewish vice-presidential candidate. Sure, for some Mr. Lieberman's religion will be a negative, but I have no doubt most Americans will judge him on his merits, which thus far have only elevated his popularity. Consider Gov. George W. Bush's lengthy dodging of the official presidential debates. Mr. Bush had a complicated explanation about how it was really Mr. Gore who was dodging the debates, because he wouldn't go on ''Larry King'' or ''Meet the Press'' first. But that didn't fly. Eskimos in their igloos in Alaska could see that Mr. Bush was running away. Australian aborigines tuning in by satellite could tell that Mr. Bush was dodging Mr. Gore. That's why, when you listened to Mr. Bush accusing Mr. Gore of avoiding the debates, you just wanted to say: ''Am I wearing a sign that says 'Stupid' on it?'' A politician should never put such a question on voters' lips. Mr. Bush seems to have gotten the message. Al Gore's low point -- the moment that deflated his whole primary campaign -- was when he declared that he believed that the Cuban refugee Elian Gonzalez should not automatically be reunited with his father, but that the case should be resolved in family court -- and that none of this had to do with Florida politics. People are always ready to accept a certain amount of pandering, but they resent it when it goes to a point of insulting their intelligence. Mr. Gore's recent rebound surely has to do with the fact that, having long underestimated voters by appealing to them with various disguises and Alpha Male routines, he finally settled on running as, well, Al Gore. His convention speech basically said: I'm a wonk, I'm a bore, but I love my wife, I believe in government, and I know from experience in Washington how to make things work at home and abroad. That was a person a lot more people thought they might like as president. And on the question of his association with Mr. Clinton's scandals, Mr. Gore declared: Don't worry, I'm my own man. Mr. Bush, by contrast, has run as himself from the start. And while aspects of his personality are clearly appealing to voters, his inability to consistently put sentences together -- and the holes in his knowledge that lead him to calling Greeks ''Grecians'' and to other eyebrow-raising bloopers -- have forced him to essentially say to voters: Don't worry, I won't be my own man. For instance, last week Mr. Bush introduced Colin Powell at a campaign event by saying: ''The next man I introduce used to be in government. And if all goes well . . . [he will be in my cabinet too].'' Message to voters: Don't worry, I won't be driving alone. Powell will be there in the front seat, along with dad's other old advisers. But this may not be a bad strategy, because it addresses what voters worry about with Mr. Bush.
 An article on Sunday about the importance of Pennsylvania in the presidential race misstated the name of the Wilkes-Barre newspaper in which a columnist, Steve Corbett, wrote about a meeting between George W. Bush and Bishop James C. Timlin of Scranton. It is The Times Leader, not The News-Leader. An article on Sunday about the importance of Pennsylvania in the presidential race misstated the name of the Wilkes-Barre newspaper in which a columnist, Steve Corbett, wrote about a meeting between George W. Bush and Bishop James C. Timlin of Scranton. It is The Times Leader, not The News-Leader.
 Republican television commercial on prescription drugs, which criticizes plan being offered by Vice Pres Al Gore, seems to contain subliminal message aimed at discrediting Gore; fragments of phrase 'bureaucrats decide,' deriding Gore's proposal, dance around screen with word 'rats' popping up in one frame and displayed larger than any other word in commercial; Alex Castellanos, producer of commercial for Republican National Committee, insists use of word is purely concidental; Bush and Gore campaign officials comment; photos (M) The announcer starts by lauding George W. Bush's proposal for dealing with prescription drugs, and criticizes the plan being offered by Vice President Al Gore. Fragments of the phrase ''bureaucrats decide'' -- deriding Mr. Gore's proposal -- then dance around the screen. The announcer starts by lauding George W. Bush's proposal for dealing with prescription drugs, and criticizes the plan being offered by Vice President Al Gore. Fragments of the phrase ''bureaucrats decide'' -- deriding Mr. Gore's proposal -- then dance around the screen. The advertisement then declares, ''The Gore prescription plan: bureaucrats decide.'' After being alerted by an eagle-eyed Democrat in Seattle, aides to Mr. Gore examined the advertisement frame by frame, spotted the suspicious word and gave a copy of a slowed-down version to The New York Times. But several Republican and Democratic advertising consultants who were told of the commercial, as well as many independent academics, said they were startled that such a word would appear and said it appeared to be a subliminal attempt to discredit Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush's chief media consultant, Mark McKinnon, said he had not noticed the word ''rats'' when he reviewed the advertisement before it was broadcast. Most people probably have not noticed either, although some people who watched a tape of the commercial at normal speed today -- albeit very carefully -- said it was visible. Jim Ferguson, the president of Young & Rubicam, who heads the Bush campaign's group of Madison Avenue advertising consultants, seemed astonished when told of the advertisement. ''That's unbelievable,'' he said. ''I hope we haven't stooped to that. That's pretty bad. I thought that was illegal anyway.'' But Ronald C. Goodstein, a marketing professor at Georgetown University's business school who has studied subliminal advertising, said the word ''rats'' could have the effect of ''making people feel more negative toward Gore,'' although he said there was ''no way that people are going to switch votes because of it.'' According to the Gore campaign, the word was spotted by Gary Greenup, a 64-year-old retired Boeing technical writer in Seattle. To be sure of what he saw, Mr. Greenup taped the commercial soon after it was first broadcast in late August and slowed the tape down to reveal the word. Mr. Greenup called the King County Democratic Party, which alerted the Gore campaign.
 Many health experts and veterans of past Medicare wars say last decade has shown immense difficulties in making changes to Medicare program, like those proposed by Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush and Democratic rival Vice Pres Al Gore; say philosophical differences between both parties over how to reshape program are large and enduring; note health maintenance organizations and other managed care insurance plans, which could play central role in Bush's proposal, are no longer viewed as easy cure-all that can both control health care costs and deliver better care; Bush proposal revolves around how much Medicare should be turned into a competitive marketplace, in which beneficiaries are given fixed amount each year and are expected to choose among variety of health plans, much as federal employees do; Gore supports 'modernization' plan advanced by Clinton administration in 1999, but has focused campaign on shoring up traditional program and adding prescription drug benefit to it; many Democrats are convinced that Republicans cannot abide huge, government-run social insurance program and have always wanted to privatize it; Republicans say Democrats are less interested in policy improvements than in creating concern among elderly voters every election year with dire warnings about what Republicans will do to Medicare (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas confidently proposed last week that as president he would put an overhaul of Medicare on the ''fast track,'' directing a new White House task force to send legislation to Congress within nine months to transform the 35-year-old government insurance program into an efficient, largely private health care marketplace. But many health experts -- and sadder but wiser veterans of past Medicare wars -- say the last decade has shown the immense difficulties in accomplishing such changes. The philosophical differences between the two parties over how to reshape Medicare are large and enduring. Health maintenance organizations  and other managed care insurance plans, which could play a central role in Mr. Bush's proposal, are no longer viewed as an easy cure-all that can both control health care costs and deliver better care. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas confidently proposed last week that as president he would put an overhaul of Medicare on the ''fast track,'' directing a new White House task force to send legislation to Congress within nine months to transform the 35-year-old government insurance program into an efficient, largely private health care marketplace. But many health experts -- and sadder but wiser veterans of past Medicare wars -- say the last decade has shown the immense difficulties in accomplishing such changes. The philosophical differences between the two parties over how to reshape Medicare are large and enduring. Health maintenance organizations  and other managed care insurance plans, which could play a central role in Mr. Bush's proposal, are no longer viewed as an easy cure-all that can both control health care costs and deliver better care. Dr. Altman and others praise Mr. Bush for addressing the Medicare issue, including the need to provide some relief for the cost of prescription drugs. And many experts agree that Medicare, a program that was  designed in the 1960's, needs to be reconstructed to reflect the realities of modern medicine -- not to mention the coming wave of retiring baby boomers, who will double the number of Medicare beneficiaries in the next 30 years. Vice President Al Gore supports a ''modernization'' plan advanced by the Clinton administration last year, aides say, although he has focused in his campaign on shoring up the traditional program and adding a prescription drug benefit to it. But as is so often the case in health policy debates, the details of creating a Medicare ''modernized for our times,'' as Mr. Bush puts it, are a matter of intense dispute. At its root, the debate over the Bush proposal revolves around how much Medicare should be turned into a competitive marketplace, in which beneficiaries are given a fixed amount each year and are expected to choose among a variety of health plans, much as federal employees do. Mr. Bush is careful to say that the elderly can stay with the traditional fee-for-service Medicare program if they like, but critics assert that the traditional program will be inexorably weakened, in part because it is likely to retain the frailest and sickest population. ''The politics are lethal,'' said Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, who led a bipartisan Medicare commission that ended in a deadlock in early 1999. ''Been there, done that,'' he said of Mr. Bush's statement last week that he would convene another Medicare task force to draft new legislation. Under Mr. Bush's proposal, the bipartisan task force would build on the work done by the earlier commission, considering Mr. Bush's own plan as well as possible improvements. Its recommendation to Congress would get an expedited final vote by the end of 2001 under ''fast track'' provisions Mr. Bush would ask Congress to agree to in advance, if all went according to plan. Mr. Bush's allies assert that the political hurdles can be overcome with the right leadership in the White House. And they say that the real-world problems with Medicare H.M.O.'s can be resolved with a less bureaucratic approach than the one now exercised by the Health Care Financing Administration, the federal agency that oversees Medicare and the H.M.O.'s that participate. The current experience with Medicare H.M.O.'s ''is not a good indicator of potential problems,'' said Gail Wilensky, a top Bush health adviser who ran the health care administration under President George Bush. She said the rules had changed too often, the regulations were too burdensome and the payment increases to H.M.O.'s were often too low. Mr. Bush is proposing a very different system for private health plans in Medicare than the one that exists, Dr. Wilensky said. ''While I don't want to pretend that this is going to be easy,'' she said, ''there was a period when many analysts, and members of Congress, thought the basic idea'' of this proposal ''was something they could support.'' Under the Bush proposal, which Dr. Wilensky said was broadly patterned after the work of the Breaux commission, the traditional fee-for-service program would be preserved, but it would be required to compete with other plans. ''What that would mean is that a lot of beneficiaries would have to go to managed care because they couldn't afford the premiums of traditional fee-for-service Medicare,'' Sarah Bianchi, a Gore adviser, said. Dr. Wilensky rejected that assertion. This exchange, though, illustrates the political difficulties of the Bush approach. While some versions of this competitive model have support across party lines, some Democrats contend that it marks a fundamental shift away from the guaranteed benefits, a 35-year-old entitlement, of the Medicare program. Republicans counter that it will provide Medicare beneficiaries with new options and benefits -- like a variety of prescription drug plans -- that the government cannot match, while still guaranteeing every beneficiary a core benefit package. The experience of the Breaux commission, which is regularly praised by Mr. Bush, is instructive. As a similar proposal took shape on the commission, the 17-member panel broke down on party lines; it needed 11 votes to make a formal recommendation. While Mr. Bush often hails the commission's proposal as bipartisan, only two Democrats on the panel -- Mr. Breaux and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska -- supported it; eight Republicans did. The Clinton administration's restructuring proposal also seeks to encourage more competition among private health plans, but keeps traditional Medicare out of the competition. In general, Democrats assert that they have been good stewards of Medicare, noting that its hospital trust fund is projected to be solvent until 2025. And Mr. Gore is campaigning hard on his vow to put Medicare in a ''lock box'' so that its $400 billion in surpluses cannot be used for tax cuts or other new spending. In line with Mr. Gore's positioning as the defender of traditional Medicare, some health advocates expect him to pick apart Mr. Bush's plan for Medicare as he picked apart former Senator Bill Bradley's health care plan in the primaries. Dr. Judith Feder, the dean of policy studies at Georgetown University, formerly a top Clinton health adviser, said she found it ironic that Mr. Bush would propose a task force, ''given the experience of '93-94.'' She added, ''Surely that indicates that complex issues are not likely to be dealt with in a swift way.''
