 Graham Lustig, the artistic director of the American Repertory Ballet, presented ''Cadenza,'' in which Jennifer Cavanaugh and Bat Abbit, in 18th-century jackets and tights, suggested Baroque dancers always askew. Henryk Gorecki's music gave rhythmic support to the abrupt shifts of weight and the darting dynamics drawn from fencing postures. The conceit had wit but wore thin despite the admirable dancers.
 To reassure readers baffled by Bob Herbert's Sept. 7 column, ''Bush's Medicare Fix,'' I am pleased to reaffirm Congressional Republicans' strong support for Medicare and those who depend upon it. To reassure readers baffled by Bob Herbert's Sept. 7 column, ''Bush's Medicare Fix,'' I am pleased to reaffirm Congressional Republicans' strong support for Medicare and those who depend upon it. The Medicare reforms that Gov. George W. Bush envisions are based on proposals that have been advanced by members of both parties. Medicare can be saved and strengthened for tomorrow's elderly, but we must first choose the path of bipartisanship and rational discussion.
 Because of a production error, Page A23 was omitted from some copies in the New York region yesterday and replaced by a page reprinted from the Monday paper. The omitted page carried the continuation of the front-page article about the political issue of overhauling Medicare; an article about Gov. George W. Bush's campaign emphasis on health care; and an article on the National Rifle Association's decision to help Mr. Bush by withholding its official endorsement. Any reader wishing a copy of the missing page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992. E-mail: quality@nytimes.com. (Include a postal return address.) Because of a production error, Page A23 was omitted from some copies in the New York region yesterday and replaced by a page reprinted from the Monday paper. The omitted page carried the continuation of the front-page article about the political issue of overhauling Medicare; an article about Gov. George W. Bush's campaign emphasis on health care; and an article on the National Rifle Association's decision to help Mr. Bush by withholding its official endorsement. Any reader wishing a copy of the missing page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992. E-mail: quality@nytimes.com. (Include a postal return address.)
 Every Thursday evening, Marilyn Robinson, executive director of the Nashville Minority Business Center, drives from her office to the Gore-Lieberman campaign headquarters and works the phones for three hours, canvassing voters throughout the country. ''Most of what I do at work is persuading others to fund and support our various programs. It's no different with potential voters,'' said Ms. Robinson, who also puts in a Saturday morning shift at Gore headquarters. ''I like that I bring what I do best, selling and speaking, into the political process.'' Every Thursday evening, Marilyn Robinson, executive director of the Nashville Minority Business Center, drives from her office to the Gore-Lieberman campaign headquarters and works the phones for three hours, canvassing voters throughout the country. ''Most of what I do at work is persuading others to fund and support our various programs. It's no different with potential voters,'' said Ms. Robinson, who also puts in a Saturday morning shift at Gore headquarters. ''I like that I bring what I do best, selling and speaking, into the political process.'' To campaign managers, these executives are golden because they can get things done. Consider Jose Forquet, a 34-year-old vice president at Goldman, Sachs in New York, and Joe Bogosian, a 35-year-old lawyer at McGuire Woods Consulting in Washington. A couple of years ago, Mr. Forquet, an independent, and Mr. Bogosian, a Republican, each had a plan to promote George W. Bush for president by creating advocacy groups -- of Hispanic executives in Mr. Forquet's case, and of young professionals in Mr. Bogosian's. But then the men were introduced to each other in late 1998 by a mutual friend who knew of their political activism, and before long they had developed a more ambitious project. Working with a Bush campaign official, they drafted a proposal for creating an e-mail database to recruit corporate managers, lawyers and other young professionals to take part in fund-raisers and other activities for the Republican Party. In March 1999, they traveled at their own expense to Mr. Bush's campaign headquarters in Austin, Tex., to seek its official endorsement.  ''The exact same skills required of selling a start-up firm to venture capitalists applied'' in winning over the Bush camp to the idea, Mr. Bogosian said. They got the green light, and YP4W.com -- or Young Professionals for George W. Bush -- was born, along with a national networking organization of the same name with chapters in 30 cities. The site was so successful, in fact, that the Bush campaign took it over and now runs it out of Austin as part of a coalition of Web sites and voter groups. Mr. Forquet and Mr. Bogosian continue to head the New York and Washington chapters of the networking organization. Even political neophytes have high expectations of themselves if they have a business background. Rochelle Pachtman, founder of the public relations firm Pachtman Communications in Manhattan, says she jumped into the fray just a few weeks ago to lend a hand to the Gore campaign because the race was so tight and she thought she might actually make a difference.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column on how George W Bush has taken to explaining his economic plans by pulling out four dollar bills to represent projected budget surplus, and demonstrating how he would allocate money; says that, unfortunately, Bush's arithmetic is wrong (S) George W. Bush has lately taken to explaining his economic plans by pulling out four dollar bills to represent the projected budget surplus. Two dollars, he explains, will be used to support Social Security; one to pay for new programs like prescription drug insurance; and one will be used to cut taxes. ''I think it's fair, I think it's right that one quarter of the surplus go back to the people who pay the bills,'' he declared last week. Nice rhetorical device; too bad about the arithmetic. An honest presentation, using numbers from Mr. Bush's own economists, would allocate not $1 but $1.40 to tax cuts, only 45 cents to new programs -- and would admit that he got 25 of those 45 cents by violating his own party's promise not to touch either the Social Security or Medicare surpluses. George W. Bush has lately taken to explaining his economic plans by pulling out four dollar bills to represent the projected budget surplus. Two dollars, he explains, will be used to support Social Security; one to pay for new programs like prescription drug insurance; and one will be used to cut taxes. ''I think it's fair, I think it's right that one quarter of the surplus go back to the people who pay the bills,'' he declared last week. Nice rhetorical device; too bad about the arithmetic. An honest presentation, using numbers from Mr. Bush's own economists, would allocate not $1 but $1.40 to tax cuts, only 45 cents to new programs -- and would admit that he got 25 of those 45 cents by violating his own party's promise not to touch either the Social Security or Medicare surpluses. I am not making this up. The Congressional Budget Office projects a surplus over the next decade, including Medicare and Social Security, of $4.6 trillion. As I pointed out last month, this is unrealistically optimistic, but never mind. One quarter of that surplus is $1.15 trillion. Meanwhile, Mr. Bush's economists concede that his tax plan will reduce the surplus by $1.6 trillion. So representing the cost of the tax cut by just one of those four dollar bills is a $450 billion misstatement. And on the other side, Mr. Bush's proposed spending on new programs is far lower than that other dollar bill would suggest -- about 10 percent of the surplus, not 25 percent. Indeed, some of Mr. Bush's penny-pinching comes as a shock. With all his huffing and puffing about America's military decline, who would have thought that he proposes to increase defense spending by less than 2 percent? Clearly, Mr. Bush remains convinced that he can play by his own rules -- that it doesn't matter whether what he says is true, as long as he lays on the charm. But the story of the bogus bills also reminds us just how bad an idea that tax cut -- originally offered, say the political reporters, to ward off Steve Forbes -- really is. After all, Mr. Bush's routine with the dollar bills isn't just a piece of stagecraft. It's his way of saying that there's plenty of money to play with: that he can secure the future of retirees, give a big tax cut and still have plenty left over -- one dollar out of four! -- for popular new programs. But that just isn't so, as Mr. Bush's own plan demonstrates. Suppose that we agree (as both parties have) that tax cuts and new spending should not cut into the Social Security and Medicare surpluses -- the surpluses those trust funds are now running to prepare for the demographic deluge, the time when baby boomers stop paying in and start collecting benefits. That, even using those unrealistic surplus projections, immediately takes $2.40 of Mr. Bush's four dollars off the table, leaving at most $1.60 to be divided between tax cuts and new spending. And a prudent plan would set aside a good part of that $1.60, both because the surplus projections are probably too optimistic and because our current peace and prosperity aren't guaranteed to last. But Mr. Bush has already promised to give away $1.40 in tax cuts. What that leaves him for new spending is not the whole dollar he waves at his audiences, but at most 20 cents. And that isn't enough. Now that Mr. Bush has caved on the issue of prescription drug insurance -- though he still claims that he can get it at bargain prices -- the additional spending proposed in his plan amounts to about 45 cents out of his four dollars. How does he find the extra 25 cents? Through selective absent-mindedness. Congressional Republicans have solemnly pledged to put both Social Security and Medicare in ''lock boxes,'' that is, not to count their surpluses as available funds. But while Mr. Bush's number-crunchers ostentatiously put the Social Security surplus aside, Medicare somehow goes unmentioned. The bottom line is that because of that tax cut, Mr. Bush's economic plan cannot be both coherent and honest -- and in fact it is neither. So what is Mr. Bush thinking as he stands up there with those dollars in his hands? Does he know that he is saying things that aren't so? Or is he so unfamiliar with his own economic plan that he thinks he is telling the truth? Either way, shame on him.
 It was a big deal last month when Vice President Al Gore gave his wife, Tipper, a full-mouthed smooch on national television. But the gasping over that was nothing compared with the months of huffing and puffing over air kisses that Hillary Rodham Clinton exchanged last year with Suha Arafat, wife of the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat. It was a big deal last month when Vice President Al Gore gave his wife, Tipper, a full-mouthed smooch on national television. But the gasping over that was nothing compared with the months of huffing and puffing over air kisses that Hillary Rodham Clinton exchanged last year with Suha Arafat, wife of the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat.
 Jane Troy letter comments on September 11 article on Vice Pres Al Gore's concern about cultural influence on children Re ''Gore Takes a Tough Stand on Violent Entertainment'' (front page, Sept. 11): Re ''Gore Takes a Tough Stand on Violent Entertainment'' (front page, Sept. 11): If Al Gore is so concerned about cultural influences on our children, his best move as president will be to see that the arts (music, fine arts, drama and dance) are given enough resources to return to their place in the curriculums of all public schools, starting in the earliest grades. With exposure to the best, and a chance to make art themselves, children will naturally become more discerning. Moreover, Mr. Gore can strongly support the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities, fearlessly protecting them from the philistines. That, too, will have a salutary effect on our national cultural life. Then there will be far less need to censure.
 Ernest G DeNegris letter disputes Sept 12 editorial criticizing Vice Pres Al Gore for accusing entertainment industry of marketing violence to children I am disappointed that your Sept. 12 editorial ''Unworthy Pandering by Mr. Gore'' did not mention that Al Gore and the Democrats have received significant financing from the entertainment elite. Rather than proposing more government oversight, why not go the personal-accountability route and refuse money from a group that may well be as damaging to America's youth as Big Tobacco? I am disappointed that your Sept. 12 editorial ''Unworthy Pandering by Mr. Gore'' did not mention that Al Gore and the Democrats have received significant financing from the entertainment elite. Rather than proposing more government oversight, why not go the personal-accountability route and refuse money from a group that may well be as damaging to America's youth as Big Tobacco? If Mr. Gore wants to make a statement, he can do so in a powerful way by returning money from Hollywood.
 Paul Schwartz letter disputes Sept 12 editorial criticizing Vice Pres Al Gore, who accused entertainment industry of peddling violence to children (S) Re your Sept. 12 editorial criticizing Al Gore for his proposal to stop the marketing of inappropriate entertainment material to children: Re your Sept. 12 editorial criticizing Al Gore for his proposal to stop the marketing of inappropriate entertainment material to children: Personally, I applaud Mr. Gore's courage in criticizing a traditional ally of his party. Children are impressionable, and even if the violence and sex that the media exposes them to don't cause criminal behavior, they contribute to a lowering of standards of civility and respect.
 Correction of Sept 12 article about Oprah Winfrey's interview with Al Gore; information on Stendhal explained An article yesterday about Oprah Winfrey's interview with Al Gore used a misspelled pen name and a nonexistent given name for the author of ''The Red and the Black,'' which Mr. Gore described as his favorite book. The pen name is Stendhal, not Stendahl; Robert is not part of it. An article yesterday about Oprah Winfrey's interview with Al Gore used a misspelled pen name and a nonexistent given name for the author of ''The Red and the Black,'' which Mr. Gore described as his favorite book. The pen name is Stendhal, not Stendahl; Robert is not part of it.
 For Republicans, the shift in emphasis from tax cuts and toward reducing the debt is an effort to take the money off the table, rein in spending and protect them from Mr. Clinton's attacks on their tax cuts. It is also a move to put Mr. Clinton in an awkward position, since he and Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, both support paying down the debt. Democrats portrayed the request as an effort to jump on a more popular bandwagon and as a split from the direction Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, is headed in with his large tax-cut package. ''We smell a rat,'' said Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader. ''If it's a one-year plan, it's a gimmick. If it's a 12-year plan, they're divorcing themselves from their presidential candidate, George Bush, because George Bush has committed all of that surplus to a tax cut.'' A spokesman fpr Mr. Bush, Ari Fleischer, said that the Bush plan would eliminate the debt by 2016. The Gore plan would eliminate it by 2012.
 Editorial on subliminal 'rats' ad that has become latest fiasco of George W Bush's presidential campaign, Memo to the Bush campaign team: Can you spell backfire? For the moment, at least, it is spelled RATS, and Gov. George W. Bush must be seething despite his labored attempt to shrug off ''conspiracy theories'' about his campaign's latest fiasco. That, of course, was the insertion of the word RATS in capital letters into a television ad attacking Vice President Al Gore over the issue of prescription drugs for Medicare. Memo to the Bush campaign team: Can you spell backfire? For the moment, at least, it is spelled RATS, and Gov. George W. Bush must be seething despite his labored attempt to shrug off ''conspiracy theories'' about his campaign's latest fiasco. That, of course, was the insertion of the word RATS in capital letters into a television ad attacking Vice President Al Gore over the issue of prescription drugs for Medicare. News of the ad, coming after the governor's embarrassing problems with an open microphone 10 days ago, launched a new round of jokes and questions about his technologically challenged campaign. Even a studiously somber Vice President Al Gore expressed puzzlement over the strangeness of the episode. Other Democrats were predictably gleeful, and Paul Begala, a party strategist, questioned whether an organization that cannot handle the rewind button can be entrusted with the nuclear button. Smart Republicans know that, all kidding aside, this is a fraught moment for the Bush campaign. The governor's malapropisms are becoming standard comic fare. Yesterday he referred four times to ''subliminable'' techniques. Meanwhile a conservative publication, The Weekly Standard, features on its cover a worried-looking Mr. Bush beside the slightly panicky-sounding headline ''How Bush Can Win.'' Being an object of doubt and ridicule can quickly become a serious problem for a presidential candidate. Just ask Michael Dukakis. Forceful damage control would be Mr. Bush's smartest move. He has already pulled the ad. But since subliminal messages are regarded as unethical by the ad industry and unfairly deceptive by the Federal Communications Commission, Mr. Bush should go further. He needs to find out how it got on the air in the first place, especially since Alex Castellanos, who produced the commercial for the Republican National Committee, has not kept his story straight. Mr. Castellanos originally told Richard Berke of The Times that the use of the word was ''purely accidental.'' Yesterday he said he was using a ''visual drumbeat designed to make you look at the word bureaucrats.'' That sounds to us like a declaration of intent to use subliminal techniques by Mr. Castellanos, who is known as a creator of attack ads. If Mr. Bush really means that such techniques are not acceptable to his campaign, perhaps he should sever his connection with Mr. Castellanos. When a presidential campaign has the stumbles, such decisive action by the nominee can be a step toward getting back on message, a place Mr. Bush has hardly visited in the last two weeks.
 Both bills have made it through most of the hazardous committee process. Some fear they will not survive a floor vote because the Republicans may not want to give President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore two big election-year victories on the environmental front. In truth, these would be big victories for everyone, Republicans included, not least because several powerful Republican committee chairmen have been crucial to their progress so far. The biggest enemy now is inertia on the part of the Republican leadership. Both bills have made it through most of the hazardous committee process. Some fear they will not survive a floor vote because the Republicans may not want to give President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore two big election-year victories on the environmental front. In truth, these would be big victories for everyone, Republicans included, not least because several powerful Republican committee chairmen have been crucial to their progress so far. The biggest enemy now is inertia on the part of the Republican leadership. The bill before Congress authorizes $1 billion for the first wave of projects. Gov. Jeb Bush has already promised $200 million, Florida's share of the first-year costs. The ball is now in Congress's court. The measure that emerged from committee in July, thanks largely to Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, is now ready for a floor vote in the Senate.
 Race is Neck-and-Neck As Gore Gains, Poll Shows  A New York Times/CBS News Poll shows 42 percent of registered voters favoring Vice President Al Gore and 39 percent favoring Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Gore is now as highly regarded as Mr. Bush on matters of character, leadership and personal popularity. Mr. Gore has made substantial gains among women, independent voters and middle-income groups. While Mr. Bush's support has ebbed somewhat overall, he has the overwhelming support of men, Midwesterners and Southerners. Mr. Bush said the brief appearance of the word ''rats'' in a campaign commercial was a fluke and not an attempt to send a subliminal message about Mr. Gore. Editorials: The latest oil shock; Congress's obligation to nature; subliminal headache for Mr. Bush.
 Dick Cheney realized $20.6-million profit last month as he cashed in most of stake in Halliburton Company to join George W Bush on Republican presidential ticket; photo; sales came before he announced he will forfeit some stock options if ticket is elected, and he did not disclose that he had already sold large part of his Halliburton holdings (S)
 Latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that Vice Pres Gore has shaken persistent sense that he is not particularly likable and is now as highly regarded as rival George W Bush on matters of character, leadership and overall personal popularity; 44 percent of those polled now have favorable opinion of Gore, to 42 percent for Bush; graph; table; poll shows neck-and-neck presidential race, with 42 percent of voters backing Gore if election were today to 39 percent for Bush, four percent for Ralph Nader and two percent for Patrick Buchanan; 47 percent of Gore supporters and 38 percent of Bush backers acknowledge reservations; 63 percent of public thinks Gore cares about problems of ordinary people; many also cite Democratic convention and choice of Joseph Lieberman as running mate (M) Vice President Al Gore has shaken the persistent sense that he is not particularly likable and is now as highly regarded as Gov. George W. Bush on matters of character, leadership and overall personal popularity, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. Now that public opinion has settled somewhat since the Democratic convention nearly four weeks ago, and voters say they are far more interested in the race, the survey makes clear that Mr. Gore's enhanced fortunes are deeper and more sustained than a postconvention glow. Vice President Al Gore has shaken the persistent sense that he is not particularly likable and is now as highly regarded as Gov. George W. Bush on matters of character, leadership and overall personal popularity, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. Now that public opinion has settled somewhat since the Democratic convention nearly four weeks ago, and voters say they are far more interested in the race, the survey makes clear that Mr. Gore's enhanced fortunes are deeper and more sustained than a postconvention glow. Mr. Gore has achieved substantial gains among women, independent voters and those from middle-income groups. While Mr. Bush's support has diminished somewhat over all, he retains the overwhelming support of men, Midwesterners and Southerners. The poll shows that the presidential race is neck and neck and that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are facing off in the tightest competition just after Labor Day in 20 years. Forty-two percent of registered voters said they would back Mr. Gore if the election were held today, and 39 percent said they would vote for Mr. Bush. Four percent said they would back Ralph Nader, the Green Party nominee, and 2 percent would favor Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party. Mr. Gore has gained on Mr. Bush in recent weeks, but not to a degree that is statistically significant. The nationwide telephone poll, conducted Saturday through Monday with 843 registered voters, has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points. And there was some encouraging news for Mr. Bush in the numbers. Forty-seven percent of Mr. Gore's supporters said they had reservations about him; only 38 percent of Mr. Bush's backers registered concerns about their candidate. By far the most pronounced shift in the survey is the marked improvement in the public's perceptions of Mr. Gore. For months, Americans said they found Mr. Gore's positions on various issues more appealing than Mr. Bush's, but the vice president's most persistent problem was that voters said they had significant misgivings about him on issues of character. Now, while Mr. Bush has held his own in retaining impressive favorability ratings, Mr. Gore's favorability ratings have increased substantially -- to the point where the two men are now equally popular. Forty-four percent of voters say they have a favorable view of Mr. Gore, while 29 percent have an unfavorable view. Mr. Gore has not done that well by this measure for years. In recent months, the public either had more negative views of Mr. Gore than positive ones, or, more recently, had given him positive ratings that equaled his negatives. In a striking example of how perceptions have transformed, voters no longer view Mr. Bush as the runaway winner in the November election. They are now split on whether Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush will make it to the White House. As recently as two months ago, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore on this question by more than 20 percentage points. Voters are also more confident in Mr. Gore's ability to deal wisely with an international crisis. Forty-nine percent said they were confident in Mr. Gore, a gain from 43 percent in a Times/CBS poll in July. Mr. Bush's standing on that issue has remained steady at 46 percent. While 63 percent of the public thinks Mr. Gore cares about the needs and problems of ordinary people -- a figure that has not changed since July -- Mr. Bush has shown some slippage. Forty-nine percent say that Mr. Bush cares about ordinary people, a decline from 55 percent in July. It is not altogether clear what has prompted the more kindly feelings toward Mr. Gore. But in follow-up interviews yesterday, many voters who now back Mr. Gore said they were impressed by what they saw at the Democratic convention. Repeatedly, they said, Mr. Gore seemed to be coming into his own and moving out of President Clinton's shadow. Voters said they thought the government -- not insurance companies -- would do a better job of providing coverage to the elderly for prescription drugs. Mr. Gore was seen as more likely than Mr. Bush to succeed in reducing the cost of prescription drugs for the elderly. Mr. Bush has proposed allowing private insurance companies to compete for Medicare clients, while Mr. Gore has proposed adding a subsidy for prescription drug coverage to the current Medicare plan. While Mr. Bush has recently accused the administration of presiding over a weakening of the military, the issue did not register much with voters. And many seemed confused about the state of the nation's missile defense capability. Half the voters agreed with Mr. Bush's assertion that the military has weakened under Mr. Clinton. Just under half said it had either strengthened or stayed the same over the last eight years. While Mr. Bush has repeatedly called upon Mr. Gore to elevate the discourse and not sink to harsh commercials, voters gave the vice president higher marks for his advertising campaign. Two-thirds of voters said Mr. Gore was spending more time explaining what he would do as president than he was spending attacking Mr. Bush; half said the same of Mr. Bush. More than a third of voters have seen advertisements for Mr. Bush, and they are divided over whether they mostly explain things about Mr. Bush or attack Mr. Gore. About a third have seen advertisements for Mr. Gore. But those viewers, decisively, say Mr. Gore's commercials explain things about Mr. Gore rather than attack Mr. Bush. In the voter interviews, many said Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut spiced up the ticket, especially when Mr. Lieberman was compared with Dick Cheney, who even many Republicans say has not been as beneficial to Mr. Bush as a running mate. ''The move to choose Lieberman took a lot of guts and was brilliant,'' said Nati Gottlieb, 53, an insurance salesman in Philadelphia. ''That move stopped Bush dead in his tracks and started his current momentum.'' Despite such comments, the poll reinforced the accepted wisdom that running-mate choices do not matter much. Mr. Cheney and Mr. Lieberman are each well liked, and each is about twice as likely to be viewed favorably as unfavorably. But most people still have no opinion of them. And more than half of the voters said the selections did not make them any more, or less, inclined to vote for Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore. On the topic of televised debates, a subject that has dominated much of the campaign news in recent weeks, 49 percent said they believed Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush wanted to debate; 21 percent said only Mr. Gore wanted to debate and 10 percent said only Mr. Bush wanted to take part. Eighty-six percent said the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates should hold the events; the Bush campaign had earlier sought other sponsors. ''It's going to be one of the best horse races we've had in the country since Kennedy and Nixon,'' said Senator Peter G. Fitzgerald, Republican of Illinois. ''The Bush campaign is going to have to do most everything right between now and November to win. And it will not be easy.''
 Bush Asserts Control  Gov. George W. Bush is reducing his informal meetings with reporters in the hope that they will focus more on his scheduled events.
 George W Bush has cut back on off-the-cuff talks with reporters after finding that reporters preferred those informal moments to his staged events; photo (S) The presidential race may be neck and neck, but there is one place Gov. George W. Bush has cut back on his campaigning. The rear of his own plane. Until a few days ago, the Republican nominee would stroll the aisle of the campaign's chartered Boeing 757 to chat with reporters traveling with him. But the visits became fewer and farther between after Mr. Bush's aides found that the networks preferred those informal moments to the staged events of the day. And reporters, in turn, began to object when the campaign insisted that the governor's conversations at 30,000 feet had to be off the record. The presidential race may be neck and neck, but there is one place Gov. George W. Bush has cut back on his campaigning. The rear of his own plane. Until a few days ago, the Republican nominee would stroll the aisle of the campaign's chartered Boeing 757 to chat with reporters traveling with him. But the visits became fewer and farther between after Mr. Bush's aides found that the networks preferred those informal moments to the staged events of the day. And reporters, in turn, began to object when the campaign insisted that the governor's conversations at 30,000 feet had to be off the record. ''We discovered they were using shots from the plane on the evening news,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. ''And because Gore wasn't doing 'avails' like that, the networks were using shots from his events.'' After months of romancing the media, the Bush campaign is learning about the downside of courtship. Unlike the campaign of Vice President Al Gore, which has strictly limited the candidate's access, Mr. Bush and his advisers have provided a steady diet of the kind of ''availabilities'' that reporters crave. Even on days that he can anticipate tough encounters -- as on the morning last week when articles appeared quoting prominent Republicans expressing worries about the state of the Bush campaign -- the governor met with reporters. In providing the access, Mr. Bush's aides have also learned how piercing the double-edged sword can be, for making the governor available almost every day has given reporters and camera crews a greater degree of autonomy within the highly controlled confines of a presidential campaign. Mr. Gore, by contrast, was for weeks this summer virtually unavailable for daily questions from reporters, a practice that may have irritated the media, but certainly gave him tighter control over the ideas and images the campaign sought to convey. As the experience of the photo opportunities on the Bush plane demonstrated, access does not guarantee cooperative coverage. In fact, Mr. Bush appears at times to grant the media license to knock him completely off his message. When, for instance, Mr. Bush surprised the media last month with an admission aboard the campaign plane that he had to do a better job of  making clear his plan for a tax cut, some reporters used his candor as the foundation for stories about a campaign in disarray. The pattern continued today, as Mr. Bush appeared on the tarmac of Orlando International Airport and faced several questions about a report in The New York Times that the word ''rats'' shows up for a split second in an anti-Gore commercial by the Republican National Committee. CNN led its midafternoon newscast today with its follow-up to the report. ''No detail is too small or too fleeting to cause a controversy,'' a CNN anchor noted. In its piece about Mr. Bush's tarmac appearance, the network also pointed out that Mr. Bush mispronounced ''subliminal'' four times. Nelson Warfield, who served as Bob Dole's press secretary during the 1996 presidential campaign, said: ''Another day of message lost for a guy in a neck-and-neck race. The Bush campaign is a highly disciplined operation, and I think they are convinced their message will penetrate. He doesn't want to become a bumbler and he isn't yet. But this is not a helpful thing.'' In what sometimes can sound like an echo of his former rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona, the governor often speaks of his respect for reporters as if he genuinely likes them. In a question-and-answer session Mr. Bush held with workers at a high-technology company in Warrendale, Pa., on Friday, the first two questioners were critical of what they saw as the way the press distorted Mr. Bush's campaign themes. ''There's an interesting relationship between me and the media,'' Mr. Bush told the employees at the company, Marconi Communications. ''I need them to get my message out, and sometimes it comes out fairly and sometimes, frankly, I don't care for the coverage. But that's O.K. Sometimes I answer the question, they think its O.K. Sometimes I answer the questions, they don't like it.'' Today, it was Mr. Bush and his staff who did not like the questions. As the plane headed to St. Louis, Ms. Hughes served reporters cubes of cheese as she called the article about the rats reference ''the cheesiest story'' she had ever read. For the first time since his loss in the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Bush has had to endure a sustained period of bad news, reported by many of the people he says he respects. The recent events range in significance from his failed effort to impose his own plan for debates to smaller gaffes and strategic miscues that have become frequent distractions. The campaign and the reporters who follow it say there has been no perceptible deterioration in their relationship. Indeed, some in the traveling press corps report a kind of admiration for Mr. Bush's resilience. Still, some political professionals wonder whether the trouble Mr. Bush has faced recently will force a shift in the relationship between the governor and the journalists. ''The press is the most jealous mistress of all,'' Mr. Warfield said. ''And Bush has been very smart in recognizing the demands of the care and feeding of the press. The question is how he continues that, now that he's hit a rough patch.'' Some reporters following Mr. Bush say that on some days, the themes and issues the campaign emphasizes, especially health care and education, are retreads that force them to pursue other story lines. And ever more often, the story of the day is what the latest polls are saying. Mr. Bush's decision to visit this state, previously thought to be safely in his column, itself became the dominant story on Monday, when the governor was in Clearwater and West Palm Beach, talking about health care. For example, the lead paragraph in The Palm Beach Post's front page story on Mr. Bush's noted that Mr. Bush's campaign here was ''nowhere near the sure thing he hoped it would be.''
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on year of the rat, from television's Survivor program to word flashed on screen during campaign ad for George W Bush (S) Gore campaign aides went nuts when they figured out that a Republican ad lacing into the vice president on prescription drugs had one frame that flashed the word ''RATS'' in big white letters, as a Cubist fragment of the word ''bureaucrats.'' The hullabaloo, I think, is preposterous. One RATS, and Bush is a SNAKE? Whiny and babyISh Gore aides are BLOWING IT out of proportion. The NOtion that W. is so ADdled by Al Gore that he has resorted to being  cryptoGRAPHIC in going after hIS critics is utterly WITHOUT merit. It was surely unINTENTional. A GOPher couldn't dig a bigger hole than Al Gore does when he makes these AD hominem ATTACKS with his supercilious sound BITEs about how he's ''never seen anything like'' the RATS. Autumn should be BIG picture TIME. Why IS everyone piling on poor Governor Bush, never thanKING him for bringing a new tone to politics, always treating him as a fRAT boy? To suggest THAT MANiacal desperation drove those fine Bush professionals in Austin to HAStily approve a brainwashing ad is a cANard OUT OF CONTROL -- bEGOne, pundits! THIS WAS just more evidence that the Gore camp is packed with reNOwned SLIPpery strategists who will get their comeUPpance in November. Before Gore OFficials continue this misguided COURSE of railing against the REPUBLICANS, they should remember that most TV viewers are not rePLAYing the ad in slow motion, frame by frame, in some Paul-McCartney-is-dead moment. So why go BALListic at THAT one little WAYward word fragment? THE truth is, it's BUSH league that the Gore TEAM TURNS to deMEANing its rival WHEN IT FALLS BACK on snitching and peddling gaffes to reporters. REMEMBER that Al Gore may be leading now, but he is still struggling to claim any votes in the SOUTH, from the mountains of North CAROLINA to the beaches of Dade County. What about the real issues Americans care about, like your drug prICEs and YOUR pressing questions about school STAFFing? The Gore cabal should stop beRATing the Bushies because, BOY, do they look silly. wouldn't it be better to TALK ABOUT the merits of the Bush plan to secure LOWer-cost drugs for our aging paRENTs? It's simply a Gore cALumny. The Democrats should learn to stop tattling and play by the RULES. REMEMBER, IT'S only THE middle of September. It's not too late to reCOVER your lead. Chin UP, Mr. Bush, your critics are just STUPID!
 Japanese officials charge that the move toward sanctions in Washington has been politically driven, reflecting an effort by Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, to rebuild strained relations with environmental groups.
 George W Bush defends Republican television commercial that, in attacking Al Gore's plans for health care, includes fleeting, almost undetectable, image of word 'rats'; denies intending sublimal message; aides counter with complaint about Democratic ad containing altered New York Daily News page; photo (M) As yet another of his campaign days skidded onto unexpected ground, Gov. George W. Bush today defended a Republican television commercial that, in attacking Vice President Al Gore's plans for health care, includes a fleeting, almost undetectable image of the word ''rats.'' Mr. Bush said that the word, which is on screen for one-thirtieth of a second and can be seen with clarity only by freezing a videotape of the advertisement, was a fluke, not a deliberate subliminal message to voters about his opponent. As yet another of his campaign days skidded onto unexpected ground, Gov. George W. Bush today defended a Republican television commercial that, in attacking Vice President Al Gore's plans for health care, includes a fleeting, almost undetectable image of the word ''rats.'' Mr. Bush said that the word, which is on screen for one-thirtieth of a second and can be seen with clarity only by freezing a videotape of the advertisement, was a fluke, not a deliberate subliminal message to voters about his opponent. ''Conspiracy theories abound in American politics,'' Mr. Bush said early this morning at an airport news conference in Orlando, Fla., trying to make light of the situation. But, he added, ''I am convinced that this is not intentional.'' ''One frame out of 900 is hardly a conspiracy, it seems like to me,'' Mr. Bush said. Mr. Bush's aides also sought to turn the tables on the Gore campaign, which alerted The New York Times about the ''rats'' reference, by pointing to a Democratic advertisement released a week ago that they considered misleading. That advertisement, which criticized Mr. Bush over health care in Texas, used a headline from The New York Daily News in such a way that made it look as if it were on the front page when in fact the article ran inside the paper. ''I would say that this is a case of somebody doing something that was a) deliberate and b) clearly designed to mislead,'' said Mr. Bush's chief media adviser, Mark McKinnon.  ''Because of that the D.N.C. ad should be subject to much greater scrutiny.'' Rick Hess, a spokesman for the Democratic Party, insisted that the commercial was fair because Mr. Bush's photograph and a smaller headline about the article did appear on the cover of The Daily News. While Mr. Bush and his aides dismissed the ''rats'' detail of the Republican commercial as unintentional and unimportant, their need to explain it underscored the difficulties he has faced in recent weeks. Every several days, with uncanny regularity, Mr. Bush has found himself dealing with surprises, errors or distractions, sometimes of his own making, that throw his campaign off course and threaten to blunt his efforts to regain some of the ground he seems to have lost to Mr. Gore. It happened last week with the debate over presidential debates and with an incident in which Mr. Bush, unaware that a nearby microphone was working, uttered a vulgarity about a reporter whose coverage he deemed unfair. It happened the week before that, when the Republican National Committee released a commercial, with the Bush campaign's permission, that challenged Mr. Gore's truthfulness and political consistency. Mr. Bush woke up this morning with the intention of focusing on his health care proposals at events in Orlando and St. Louis. Both Florida and Missouri are crucial battlegrounds in the presidential election, and Mr. Bush's onetime lead in polls in those states has vanished. And beyond that topic lay another that had nothing to do with the issues that Mr. Bush wanted to discuss. A profile of him in Vanity Fair suggests that he mixes up words from time to time because he has dyslexia. The first dozen or so questions at his news conference were about the Republican commercial. The next several were about the magazine article. Mr. Bush said that he does not have dyslexia. ''Amazing what happens when you run for president,'' Mr. Bush said, reflecting on the questions coming his way. But later, at a town-hall-style meeting in St. Louis, Mr. Bush seemed buoyant as he talked for a full hour about a variety of issues. It provided a marked contrast to his demeanor earlier, when he at times showed signs of shakiness. Mr. Gore's aides, barely able to contain their delight over the latest distraction to bedevil the Bush campaign, jumped on the news about the commercial, which was reported this morning. Today, they criticized Mr. Bush for not issuing a direct apology for the commercial. One senior aide said he was convinced that the fleeting reference to rats was not accidental. Mr. Gore, campaigning in Ohio with his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, told reporters, ''I think it's a disappointing development.'' In Orlando, Mr. Bush said he did not condone subliminal advertising, but did not think it was the aim of this commercial and would not order the commercial pulled because it was already scheduled to conclude its run on Wednesday. Mr. Bush said he had seen the commercial several weeks ago and had not noticed the word rats. ''We don't need to play cute politics,'' Mr. Bush said, seeming to mean both that the party did not have to and that it should not. ''I'm going to win this election based upon issues. ''But nevertheless, in order to put people's minds at ease, I will say loud and clear this kind of practice is not accepted,'' Mr. Bush said. Mr. Bush seemed to be commenting not just on the theoretical practice of such a device but on any insinuation that he and other Republicans were using it. In West Palm Beach, Fla., where he began his day, a woman in a diner that he visited mentioned the brewing controversy. ''They read everything into anything, don't they?'' Mr. Bush told her, apparently referring to reporters.
 Op-Ed article by Jerry J Jasinowski, president of National Assn of Manufacturers, says he has long known Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman as smart capable men with good handle on what makes American economy tick; says he is bewildered by Gore's campaign attacks on business and corporate America in general (S) I've known Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman for years. They are smart, capable men who have a pretty good handle on what makes our economy tick. But judging from their comments in recent days, I'm a bit bewildered. In his speeches, Mr. Gore attacked ''big oil,'' ''the pharmaceutical companies,'' ''big polluters'' -- in short, corporate America in general. I've known Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman for years. They are smart, capable men who have a pretty good handle on what makes our economy tick. But judging from their comments in recent days, I'm a bit bewildered. In his speeches, Mr. Gore attacked ''big oil,'' ''the pharmaceutical companies,'' ''big polluters'' -- in short, corporate America in general. Suddenly business is the enemy. Why, I'm not sure, since the Clinton-Gore team takes such great pains to boast about the economic achievements of the past eight years, including the 22 million new jobs generated by the free enterprise system. Consider the words of Mr. Lieberman in his recent book, ''In Praise of Public Life'': ''We New Democrats believe that the booming economy of the 1990's resulted more from private sector innovation, investment and hard work than from government action.'' But great success of business in creating good jobs seems to be lost in this campaign. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman are creating an atmosphere of division between employers and employees at a time when workers and their employers are partners as never before. The newfound angry populism of the Gore-Lieberman ticket distorts the true picture of the American economy and fosters resentment rather than cooperation.
 The Buchanan camp hailed the  decision by the commission and signaled Mr. Buchanan's emphatic return to the national campaign after a month's recuperation for gall bladder surgery. He is to deliver an address on Monday at Bob Jones University in Greenville, S.C. The Bob Jones campus became an issue for the Republicans during the primaries when Gov. George W. Bush of Texas spoke there, despite critics' complaints that the university banned interracial dating and had a history of anti-Catholicism. ''We can now move forward with our campaign and go after Al Gore and George W. Bush and take our issues to the American public,'' declared Tim Haley, Mr. Buchanan's campaign manager.
 Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman are appearing together more often than president candidates in memory, reflecting benefits Lieberman has brought to ticket; Lieberman clearly loosens up famously stiff vice president and they clearly enjoy each other's company; photo in Cincinnati (S) Before Vice President Al Gore set foot on the stage this afternoon in front of a raucous crowd of 2,000 supporters at Cincinnati State Technical and Community College, there came The Testimonial. ''Al Gore has been a friend of mine for almost 15 years, and he's a man of family and faith,'' Senator Joseph I. Lieberman told the already enthusiastic audience. ''Al Gore is a man of courage.'' Before Vice President Al Gore set foot on the stage this afternoon in front of a raucous crowd of 2,000 supporters at Cincinnati State Technical and Community College, there came The Testimonial. ''Al Gore has been a friend of mine for almost 15 years, and he's a man of family and faith,'' Senator Joseph I. Lieberman told the already enthusiastic audience. ''Al Gore is a man of courage.'' This scene has quickly become a chestnut for the Democrats' national ticket, repeated with slight variations from city to city and very likely to be heard again Wednesday when the two men travel to Boston. More than any other presidential and vice-presidential nominee in recent memory -- with the possible exception of Mr. Gore and President Clinton in 1992 -- Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman have made a habit of appearing in tandem. The practice defies the conventional wisdom that running mates should split up to cover as many electoral bases as possible. But campaign officials say it will continue through November, reflecting the benefits they believe Mr. Lieberman has brought to the ticket, benefits that Gore aides concede have exceeded their hopes. The Democrats see tactical advantages in joint campaigning, but the most compelling factor may be the one Gore aides are least comfortable addressing openly: It is clear, they agree, that Mr. Lieberman loosens up the famously stiff vice president, making him a more effective candidate. ''They're good friends, and campaigning is a stressful experience that's easier when it's shared with someone,'' said Tad Devine, a senior strategist for Mr. Gore. Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore's campaign manager, said, ''They just enjoy each other. You may even see some foursomes out there, with the spouses.'' His aides say that Mr. Gore may not be adept at whipping up a crowd, but that he performs best before groups that are already enthusiastic. Mr. Lieberman, they say, effectively gets audiences ready for the vice president. Mr. Lieberman's easy manner and constant joking leaven Mr. Gore's tendency toward seriousness, and the vice president, like others on the campaign, has not escaped his teasing. At a recent forum in Portland, Ore., Mr. Gore, noting that his wife, Tipper, had a master's degree in psychology, said that in recent years, ''Her psychology practice is almost entirely devoted to me.'' Since the Democratic convention last month, Mr. Lieberman has made campaign appearances on 19 days. On 12 of those days, including the four-day boat tour he and Mr. Gore took down the Mississippi River, he has made at least one appearance with the vice president, and often two or three a day. By contrast, in the same period, Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential nominee, has campaigned with Gov. George W. Bush on four days. ''A lot of people still have this feeling that Gore isn't quite sincere, that he's too serious, he's too cautious'' Mr. Lowi said. ''Lieberman brings that Hubert Humphrey-like joy to the experience of campaigning, and he sounds like he really believes what he's saying. ''And he's a living reminder to people that Gore can make a very bold, very well-received move,'' Mr. Lowi said. ''That is, picking Lieberman.'' Mr. Lieberman is best known for criticizing Mr. Clinton's private behavior, for opposing vulgarity and violence in popular entertainment, and for talking frequently about his own Jewish faith. Mr. Gore's aides have made no secret that it was his reputation as a morally upstanding man, as much as anything else, that appealed to the vice president, whose own image has been sullied somewhat by questions about improper fund-raising in the 1996 campaign. ''He can talk about Gore as a first-hand witness and credential him as a person and as a leader in a very credible way,'' Mr. Devine said. Mr. Lieberman's main role in their joint appearances has been to introduce the vice president with boasts about his accomplishments. And he is performing an important service for a presidential candidate whose own bragging -- like his claim to having a hand in creating the Internet -- has sometimes been clumsy and, however accurate, widely mocked. Mr. Lieberman reminds audiences that Mr. Gore volunteered for service in Vietnam, that he supported an overhaul of welfare, that he voted for United States entry into the Persian Gulf war, and that he helped preside over a booming economy. ''I don't think anybody who is fair would disagree with this comment,'' Mr. Lieberman said today, ''that Al Gore has been the most effective and successful vice president in the history of the United States of America.''
 Mr. Fiennes's advice? He told KARENNA GORE SCHIFF that she should bring her father, Al Gore, to see the play, because it is ''a great tutorial for power.''
 G Carter Bentley letter deplores use of subliminal advertising by presidential campaign of Gov George W Bush to deride Medicare proposals of Vice Pres Al Gore As a social psychologist, I take issue with the statement of Mark McKinnon, George W. Bush's chief media consultant, that '' 'Rats' is not a message.'' Many psychological studies have shown that such subliminal messages are effective in influencing people's attitudes. Their effectiveness is achieved by influencing how people interpret ambiguous information. As a social psychologist, I take issue with the statement of Mark McKinnon, George W. Bush's chief media consultant, that '' 'Rats' is not a message.'' Many psychological studies have shown that such subliminal messages are effective in influencing people's attitudes. Their effectiveness is achieved by influencing how people interpret ambiguous information. In our culture, the word ''rats'' has connotations of sneakiness, manipulation and deception. When the term is presented in the ad, it encourages people to mistrust Al Gore, his policies and the Democratic Party in general.
 Nikki Slocum letter comments on Sept 12 article on use of subliminal advertising by presidential campaign of Gov George W Bush to deride Medicare proposals of rival Vice Pres Al Gore; says ad will likely do most damage to society by casting doubt on most fundamental principle of civil cultures, namely, trust The Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee should trash this ad and never do one like it again. This low in political discourse insults and demeans all of us.
 BUSH AND THE HANDSHAKE -- Gov. George W. Bush said he would have tried to avoid a handshake with President Fidel Castro of Cuba, unlike President Clinton at a United Nations summit last week. ''It broke a long tradition of signaling opposition to Castro,'' Mr. Bush said on Monday while in Florida, a state where Cuban-American relations are a major issue. But he stopped short of directly criticizing Mr. Clinton. ''The president did what he did,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I would have tried to avoid the handshake.'' BUSH AND THE HANDSHAKE -- Gov. George W. Bush said he would have tried to avoid a handshake with President Fidel Castro of Cuba, unlike President Clinton at a United Nations summit last week. ''It broke a long tradition of signaling opposition to Castro,'' Mr. Bush said on Monday while in Florida, a state where Cuban-American relations are a major issue. But he stopped short of directly criticizing Mr. Clinton. ''The president did what he did,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I would have tried to avoid the handshake.'' GORE IS DEFENDED ON TEMPLE VISIT -- The California woman who helped organize Vice President Al Gore's 1996 visit to a Buddhist temple in California where campaign money was illegally raised says Mr. Gore should ignore criticism about the visit and instead should be proud that he did it. The woman, Maria Hsia, who was found guilty in March of making false statements about the event, argues in an interview in The New Yorker magazine that Mr. Gore should tell his critics that his visit was ''no different from people visiting the black churches or any churches or a Jewish temple.'' More than $100,000 was illegally raised for Democrats during the event, and Republicans have made Mr. Gore's attendance an integrity issue. Ms. Hsia, who is awaiting sentencing for causing false statements to be filed with the Federal Election Commission, could receive up to 25 years in prison. A Justice Department task force continues to investigate the temple event, as well as other 1996 campaign finance activities involving Mr. Gore. CONCERT RAISES $1 MILLION -- Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper, last night attended a fund-raising concert in Camden, N.J., that collected $1 million for the Democratic National Committee. It was the first of three fund-raising events for the Democrats this week, to be followed by a concert in Boston on Wednesday night and one at Radio City Music Hall in New York City on Thursday night. The Camden concert included a tribute to Mr. Gore by former Senator Bill Bradley, who was defeated in this year's Democratic primary.
 Four Republican senators have previously voted with Democrats on patients' rights. The 46 Senate Democrats hope they can pick up the votes of a few more Republicans in view of the fact that Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, and Democratic candidates for Congress hammer the issue almost every day.
