 But Democrats warn that because the measure calls for such action for only one year, Republicans will try to divert more of the following year's  surplus into tax cuts if they gain control of the White House. They point out that Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, has pledged to enact a $1.3 trillion tax cut spread out over 10 years.
 Op-Ed article by Gov Jeb Bush of Florida describes in detail how his state replaced traditional affirmative action policies with race-neutral and legally defensible strategies to expand diversity and opportunity in higher education; says result is that in first year, minority enrollment increased by 12 percent for students entering system for firs time; drawing (M) Jeb Bush is governor of Florida.
 Now this is a guy who's supposed to be romancing the suburban women voters. People, how many times do we have to point out that women do not like men who yell? This is the cardinal law of modern American politics, not to mention modern American life. Why do you think the Republicans nominated George W. Bush? Why is Al Gore spending so much time hanging around Joe Lieberman? It's because they are non-yell guys. (Dick Cheney does not generally raise his voice, but he always looks as if he wants to.)
 Vice Pres Al Gore and his running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, headline star-spangled musical benefit for their party at Radio City Music Hall in New York City; some of popular music's best-known names attend, highlighting spree of copious fund-raising that Republicans say undercut this week's Democratic crusade against entertainment industry's marketing practices; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, headlined a star-spangled musical benefit for their party last night, highlighting a spree of copious fund-raising that Republicans said undercut this week's Democratic crusade against the entertainment industry's marketing practices. Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, headlined a star-spangled musical benefit for their party last night, highlighting a spree of copious fund-raising that Republicans said undercut this week's Democratic crusade against the entertainment industry's marketing practices. Four hours before the concert began with a song by the rock star Sheryl Crow, the Republican national chairman, Jim Nicholson, stood outside the concert hall and accused the Democrats of hypocrisy. Earlier in the day, Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, used strong language to make a similar point. ''I hope America gets to see all the inconsistencies of how this man is conducting his campaign and what he's telling the people,'' Mr. Bush said in an interview with a Fox TV affiliate in Los Angeles. Even David Letterman got in on the act. In his monologue, before interviewing Mr. Gore on the CBS ''Late Show,'' Mr. Letterman told audience members that the program would double as ''a special Al Gore fund-raiser'' and warned that Mr. Gore ''will be out here a little bit later to collect your $1,000.'' Mr. Nicholson said it was disingenuous to take the entertainment industry's money only days after Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman strongly criticized it for marketing violent films, recordings and video games to children, a charge leveled in a Federal Trade Commission report this week. ''Al Gore says he stands with the people against the powerful,'' Mr. Nicholson said. ''There are few more powerful special interest groups in this country than the entertainment industry. But with whom does he stand tonight: the parents whose young kids are having their minds polluted and their souls corrupted by Hollywood, or the powerful Hollywood elite who put money in his pocket?'' Gore aides and spokesmen for the entertainment executives emphasized that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman had criticized only the industry's marketing techniques, not the content of its products. Furthermore, said Jennifer Backus, a Democratic National Committee spokeswoman, ''Al Gore and Joe Lieberman aren't afraid to tell their friends that they disagree with them.'' In fact, Mr. Gore confronted the issue directly in his remarks at the concert, where he received heavy applause as he was introduced. The Radio City concert was the capstone of a remarkable period of concentrated fund-raising by the Democrats, who believe the political landscape now favors their presidential ticket on every level but one: money. The need to collect millions in a hurry has played a dominant role in the Gore-Lieberman campaign's scheduling in recent weeks as the two candidates, both together and apart, have attended major fund-raisers virtually every day. On Wednesday, for instance, the two Democrats spent the afternoon and evening in Massachusetts, a state they are heavily favored to win, so they could attend a fund-raiser in Boston that raised nearly $2 million. As he thanked the donors for their gifts, Mr. Gore told them he supported campaign finance reform. This week alone, Mr. Gore has attended fund-raising concerts in Camden, N.J., Boston and New York City that are expected to bring in more than $9 million for his party. Mr. Lieberman has attended two of those events and others on his own that should raise more than $4 million, Ms. Backus said. Next week, Mr. Gore will mine California, first at a party fund-raiser in Los Angeles on Monday that is expected to collect close to $3 million, most of it from entertainment industry sources. Among those organizing that event are Rob Reiner, the actor and director; Haim Saban, a producer of children's television shows; and Alan Horn, president and chief operating officer of Warner Brothers. On Tuesday, Mr. Gore will head north to Silicon Valley for an event that should garner $1 million. Because of his involvement in questionable Clinton administration fund-raising practices, most notably his 1996 visit to a Buddhist temple in California where money was raised illegally, Mr. Gore is viewed as vulnerable on campaign financing. ''He'll say things that the public wants to hear,'' Mr. Bush said in the television interview, ''and then do things that don't match his message, whether it's the Buddhist temple or saying that he's for campaign finance reform and then accepting thousands of dollars in soft money.'' Last July, Peter S. Knight, deputy chairman of the Democratic National Committee and one of Mr. Gore's chief fund-raisers, assembled the party's top financial officials at the campaign's headquarters in Nashville and told them they had to raise $25 million in hard money by the end of September to support Mr. Gore's candidacy. The fund-raisers thought the task was nearly impossible.
 Appraisal of Republican National Committee commercial offering critical assessment of Vice Pres Al Gore's education proposals, in terms of accuracy (M) The Republican National Committee began broadcasting a new commercial, ''Let's See/ Education,'' in Michigan and Pennsylvania on Monday. The spot, produced by Alex Castellanos's firm, takes aim at the investigation into fund-raising by the Clinton-Gore campaign in 1996 and then offers a critical assessment of Vice President Al Gore's education proposals. The Republican National Committee began broadcasting a new commercial, ''Let's See/ Education,'' in Michigan and Pennsylvania on Monday. The spot, produced by Alex Castellanos's firm, takes aim at the investigation into fund-raising by the Clinton-Gore campaign in 1996 and then offers a critical assessment of Vice President Al Gore's education proposals. ON THE SCREEN -- The 30-second commercial, like other Republican spots, uses a small television screen on a kitchen counter to show flickering images of Mr. Gore. The vice president is seen speaking to a crowd, answering questions behind the lectern in the White House briefing room (it appears to be his ''no controlling legal authority'' news conference) and addressing the Democratic National Convention last month. Text superimposed over the images cites the number of people indicted and convicted and who took the Fifth Amendment or fled the country in the fund-raising investigation. On education, the text reads ''No real testing'' and ''No Testing No Accountability.'' The final text refers viewers to the Republican National Committee Web site gorewillsayanything.com. THE SCRIPT -- A female announcer: ''Al Gore is promising campaign finance reform. Can I believe him? Because of Gore's last fund-raising campaign, 22 people have been indicted, 12 convicted, 70 took the Fifth Amendment and 18 witnesses fled the country. ''Now Al Gore is promising more accountability in our schools. And that sounds good. Until you find out he doesn't require any real testing. And no testing means no accountability. ''Just more politics, from Al Gore.'' On education, the advertisement is accurate in stating that Mr. Gore would not require mandatory nationwide standardized testing for students. But Mr. Gore does propose voluntary national tests for fourth-grade reading and eighth-grade math, and he encourages states to participate in the National Assessment of Educational Progress, an exam administered nationally to a sample of students. Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, would require states to participate in the national test and would demand that they impose mandatory reading and math tests in third through eighth grades. SCORECARD -- The spot tries to use the 1996 campaign finance scandal to undercut Mr. Gore's credibility on a wholly unrelated issue, education reform. The mixed message leaves little time for a meaningful contrast of the two candidates' positions on school testing, an important policy difference that Mr. Bush hopes will attract female voters.
 Mr. Clinton's plan to visit Vietnam has been widely discussed at the White House for months. But his chief of staff, John D. Podesta, and aides to Vice President Al Gore all said that the visit could not occur until after the election was over. ''It's just too fraught with complex issues,'' one of Mr. Clinton's top advisers said recently, recalling the accusations in the 1992 presidential campaign that Mr. Clinton dodged the draft while at Oxford University in England, thereby avoiding service in Vietnam. ''Gore's people, understandably, did not want reminders of Clinton's past distracting from the messages of the campaign.''
 Bush Accepts 3-Debate Plan  Gov. George W. Bush withdrew objections to a bipartisan panel's debate schedule, agreeing to three 90-minute prime-time encounters with Vice President Al Gore next month on college campuses in Boston, Winston-Salem, N.C., and St. Louis. Mr. Bush said reports that raised fresh questions about Mr. Gore's fund-raising efforts suggested that the vice president ''may have crossed a serious line.'' Gore at Musical Fund-Raiser  Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman headlined a musical benefit for the Democratic Party in Manhattan that featured many popular music stars. Republicans said the event undercut recent Democratic efforts to curb entertainment industry marketing practices.
 James G Collins letter George W Bush should not be faulted for his fortune of birth, when problem is entire system by which campaigns are financed (S) ''Membership Has Its Privileges,'' by Frank Rich (column, Sept. 9), may have been directed toward the character of Gov. George W. Bush, but he should not be faulted for his fortune of birth. The problem is the whole system by which campaigns are financed. ''Membership Has Its Privileges,'' by Frank Rich (column, Sept. 9), may have been directed toward the character of Gov. George W. Bush, but he should not be faulted for his fortune of birth. The problem is the whole system by which campaigns are financed.
 Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, headlined a star-spangled musical benefit for the Democratic Party that was sponsored by three top entertainment executives, a move that Republicans said undercut recent Democratic criticism of the industry's marketing practices. Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, headlined a star-spangled musical benefit for the Democratic Party that was sponsored by three top entertainment executives, a move that Republicans said undercut recent Democratic criticism of the industry's marketing practices. Hours before the concert began in Radio City Music Hall, the Republican national chairman, Jim Nicholson, stood outside the hall and accused the Democrats of hypocrisy. He said it was disingenuous for Mr. Gore to take the entertainment industry's money days after harshly criticizing it for marketing violent films, recordings and video games to children.
 Veronica Manlow letter, noting that individuals are shaped by cultural context they inhabit, says that changing violent messages conveyed by films and video games will affect values and behaviors of those who are most impressionable: children; applauds Al Gore for recognizing issue (S) Popular culture in the United States, whether we like it or not, is what gives us our distinctive identity as Americans. Changing the messages that popular films and video games convey will affect the values and behaviors of those who are most impressionable: children. Al Gore is to be applauded for recognizing this.
 Gov George W Bush's campaign is distracted by repeated questions from reporters about commercial criticizing Vice Pres Al Gore's prescription drug plan, which fleetingly features word 'rats' in large, white letters; that ad was created by Alex Castellanos, chief advertising architect for Republican National Committee and master of political attack ad; political professionals have long viewed him as master of brass-knuckles campaigning; they are not surprised to hear he is under scrutiny again; photos (M) Now Mr. Castellanos's work is under sharp scrutiny again. This week, Democrats attacked the Republicans for running a commercial produced by Mr. Castellanos that fleetingly featured the word ''rats'' in large, white letters. The image was a fragment of the word ''bureaucrats'' in a commercial criticizing Vice President Al Gore's prescription drug plan. The episode created a major distraction for the party's presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who was repeatedly questioned by reporters about the spot over two days. And it nearly cost Mr. Castellanos his job. (Republican Party officials now say they believe he did not intentionally use the word, and he will continue making hard-edged commercials for them. The commercial is no longer running.) After helping on Vice President George Bush's 1988 presidential campaign, Mr. Castellanos returned to Mr. Helm's payroll in 1990 and 1996. Three weeks ago, Mr. Bush intervened to kill a Republican Party advertisement developed by Mr. Castellanos because he thought the spot used misleading quotes to attack Mr. Gore's credibility.
 Mrs. Clinton, after her visit to the diner, flew to New York City to attend a fund-raiser at Radio City Music Hall with Vice President Al Gore. On Friday, she plans her first joint campaign appearance with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the Democratic vice presidential nominee and someone she is counting on to shore up support from Jewish voters.
 If the unified service is created, they and their customers would have access to listings throughout most of the borough. (The South Shore service essentially covers the area south of Flatbush to the shore; Mid-County covers Flatbush, Bushwick, Bedford-Stuyvesant and East New York, and Bay Ridge-Bensonhurst covers those communities.)
 Mayor Rudolph W Giuliani criticizes Pres Clinton for granting clemency last year to group of imprisoned members of FALN, a Puerto Rican nationalist group, and he criticizes Vice Pres Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton for their positions on the action; photo (M) Saying that he was noting the first anniversary of the release from prison of members of a Puerto Rican nationalist group, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani criticized President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton yesterday for their positions on the action. Saying that he was noting the first anniversary of the release from prison of members of a Puerto Rican nationalist group, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani criticized President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton yesterday for their positions on the action. Mr. Giuliani criticized Mr. Clinton for granting clemency to members of the group, the F.A.L.N., who were released last Sept. 10, and for trying at the same time to boost Mr. Gore's standing with Puerto Rican voters. He criticized Mr. Gore for not taking a position on the issue. Then he criticized Mrs. Clinton for changing her position. Republicans said that the mayor's criticism of the Clintons and Mr. Gore yesterday had nothing to do with his statements on Monday. ''This is an issue I felt very strongly about when I was running for, considering running, involved in the race for the Senate, whatever you want to describe it, whatever I was doing,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''So some time ago I said to them, at an appropriate time, I would like to speak out on this.'' Mr. Gore, the mayor noted, was campaigning in the city yesterday. He added that Republicans ''felt that this was an appropriate time to do it.''
 Kosovo Quandary  House and Senate negotiators are debating a deadline to pull G.I.'s from Kosovo, putting Gov. George W. Bush on the spot. Kosovo Quandary  House and Senate negotiators are debating a deadline to pull G.I.'s from Kosovo, putting Gov. George W. Bush on the spot.
 Gov George W Bush withdraws all his objections to bipartisan commission's debate schedule and agrees to three 90-minute prime-time encounters with Vice Pres Al Gore next month on college campuses in Boston, Winston-Salem, NC, and St Louis; Bush and Gore will debate under original conditions laid out months ago by Commission on Presidential Debates; decision amounts to retreat by Bush campaign from its efforts over last two weeks to move some of debates to television studios, shorten them and designate who moderators should be; aides to Bush dropped their efforts to orchestrate events in face of mounting criticism from fellow Republicans and growing sense that issue has become distraction; dates for debates are Oct 3, Oct 11 and Oct 17; vice-presidential debate will be held Oct 5 in Danville, Ky; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush withdrew all his objections to a bipartisan commission's debate schedule yesterday, agreeing to three 90-minute prime-time encounters with Vice President Al Gore next month on college campuses in Boston, Winston-Salem, N.C., and St. Louis. The agreement, announced after a four-hour meeting in Washington of top officials of the Bush and Gore campaigns and representatives of the Commission on Presidential Debates, means that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore will debate under all the original conditions laid out months ago by the panel, which has organized the nationally televised forums in every presidential election since 1988. Gov. George W. Bush withdrew all his objections to a bipartisan commission's debate schedule yesterday, agreeing to three 90-minute prime-time encounters with Vice President Al Gore next month on college campuses in Boston, Winston-Salem, N.C., and St. Louis. The agreement, announced after a four-hour meeting in Washington of top officials of the Bush and Gore campaigns and representatives of the Commission on Presidential Debates, means that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore will debate under all the original conditions laid out months ago by the panel, which has organized the nationally televised forums in every presidential election since 1988. The decision amounted to a wholesale retreat by the Bush campaign from its efforts over the last two weeks to impose its own schedule, moving some of the debates from campuses to television studios, shortening some of them from 90 minutes to 60 minutes and designating moderators like Larry King and Tim Russert. Last Friday, in the face of mounting criticism from fellow Republicans and a growing sense that the issue was becoming a distraction, aides to Mr. Bush announced they were dropping the plans to seek an alternative series of debates. But they continued to insist they were opposed to aspects of the commission plan, like staging the first debate in Boston, near the John F. Kennedy Library, because it commemorated a Democrat. Yesterday, the Bush campaign conceded even those points. Under the agreement, the candidates are to meet at the University of Massachusetts in Boston on Oct. 3; Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem on Oct. 11 and Washington University in St. Louis on Oct. 17. The vice-presidential contenders are to debate for 90 minutes at Centre College in Danville, Ky., on Oct. 5. The terms, precisely those the commission spelled out when it unveiled the debate locations in January, were accepted months ago by the Gore campaign. During a fund-raiser last night in San Diego, Calif., Mr. Bush said: ''By the way, we agreed on three debates tonight. And I can't wait. ''I know the man is a great debater, a great debater,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to Mr. Gore. ''But what America wants is a leader.'' Earlier, Donald L. Evans, Mr. Bush's campaign chairman, said the governor was ''looking forward to a free-flowing, substantive, real and genuine discussion of all the issues.'' William M. Daley, the chairman of Mr. Gore's campaign, concurred. Other Bush officials sought to portray the outcome as less than a setback, saying they were pleased that,  as the details are being worked out, the commission is still considering the kind of informal formats Mr. Bush had sought. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said the governor had always thought the public would be better served by more casual discussions than by ''the canned and stilted formats that have been the case in past presidential debates.'' Still, some political professionals wondered whether the Bush campaign had badly miscalculated by offering a counterproposal and trying to make it appear that Mr. Gore was the reluctant debater when he refused to agree to Mr. Bush's terms. The Bush campaign even ran a television commercial taunting the vice president on the issue after Mr. Bush unveiled his debate plan on Sept. 3. In addition to 60-minute debates of CNN's ''Larry King Live'' and ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, the Bush plan called for participation in one commission forum, in St. Louis. ''We're ecstatic that we'll be the first presidential debate for 2000,'' said Annemarie Lewis-Kerwin, a spokeswoman for the University of Massachusetts in Boston, the site to which the Bush campaign raised its most serious objections. The university has had to raise about $2 million from corporate sponsors and the state Legislature to stage the event, Ms. Lewis-Kerwin said, and it had already spent about $300,000 when Mr. Bush's proposed a plan that threatened to scuttle the Boston debate.
 But in recent months, the administration has eased some minor sanctions, allowing, for example, the American purchase of food and carpets and Iranian purchase of food and medical supplies. Neither Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, nor Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, has expressed any intention of lifting economic sanctions against Iran. But after Mr. Bush had chosen him as his running mate, Mr. Cheney told ABC News that he now agreed with Mr. Bush's statement that he would leave sanctions in place. ''If I sign on as his No. 2, so to speak,'' he said, ''I would expect to make my views known, to express my thoughts to him privately.''
 Gov George W Bush turns news report that raises fresh questions about Vice Pres Al Gore's fund-raising efforts into bludgeon against Gore; at issue is report that Justice Dept has started preliminary investigation into Democrats' fund-raising from trial lawyers in 1995 and 1996; Bush says it is 'disturbing' to consider that Gore may have solicited campaign contributions linked to presidential veto (M) Gov. George W. Bush quickly turned a news report that raised fresh questions about Vice President Al Gore's fund-raising efforts into a bludgeon against Mr. Gore today, saying the vice president ''may have crossed a serious line.'' ''The appearance is really disturbing,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech to a convention of National Guard members. His remarks about the vice president's ethics were decidedly more forceful than his standard fare. Gov. George W. Bush quickly turned a news report that raised fresh questions about Vice President Al Gore's fund-raising efforts into a bludgeon against Mr. Gore today, saying the vice president ''may have crossed a serious line.'' ''The appearance is really disturbing,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech to a convention of National Guard members. His remarks about the vice president's ethics were decidedly more forceful than his standard fare. ''Americans are tired of investigations and scandals,'' Mr. Bush added. ''And the best way to get rid of them is to elect a new president, who will bring a new administration, who will restore honor and dignity to the White House.'' Mr. Bush was referring to an article on Thursday in The New York Times that reported the Justice Department had started a preliminary investigation into the manner in which Democrats raised money from trial lawyers in 1995 and 1996. The article also established Mr. Gore's role in nurturing the relationship between the Democratic Party and a group of wealthy Texas lawyers who are the subjects of the investigation. Mr. Bush made a point of referring to the situation at his first campaign event today, the speech to the National Guard members. Although their conference was in Atlantic City, Mr. Bush spoke to them by satellite feed from Newport Beach, Calif. Most of his speech was about the need to strengthen the military, but Mr. Bush fashioned a transition near the end into Mr. Gore's fund-raising efforts. Mr. Bush said he would not only ''renew the bond of trust'' between the president and people in the military, but also ''restore the bond of trust between the president and all Americans.'' ''Just today,'' Mr. Bush continued, ''there are new revelations about the potential misuse of the White House for fund-raising purposes, new evidence that my opponent may have crossed a serious line -- solicitation of campaign contributions linked to a presidential veto. The appearance is really disturbing.'' Mr. Bush's use -- twice -- of the word ''restore'' was a telling measure of his eagerness, after several weeks on the defensive, to put Mr. Gore in a similar position. Mr. Bush usually says that he wants to ''uphold'' the honor and dignity of the presidency, and his occasional use of ''restore'' became the centerpiece of a news conference several weeks ago, at which reporters noted that the latter word was much more loaded. Mr. Bush said  there was no special intent behind it. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said today that Mr. Bush's remarks represented ''the fact that George W. Bush and the Republicans are resorting back to Rule No. 1 of the Republican playbook: attack, attack, attack.'' After addressing the National Guard, Mr. Bush visited a high school in Santa Ana to talk about education, an issue that he hopes will appeal to California voters.
 House and Senate negotiators fight over deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo, renewing clash with Pres Clinton and putting Gov George W Bush on spot, since he lobbied Senate Republicans to drop similar provision earlier this year; at issue is proposal to cut off money for 6,000 US ground forces in Kosovo by Apr 1; similar measure was rejected in Senate last May after several Senators said they were swayed by Gov Bush, who called it 'legislative overreach' that would tie his hands if he became president; Clinton warns that imposing arbitrary deadline for withdrawal could send dangerous signal of uncertain American resolve to Pres Slobodan Milosevic before that country's elections scheduled for Sept 24 (M) House and Senate negotiators are fighting over a deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo, renewing a clash with President Clinton and putting Gov. George W. Bush on the spot again, since he lobbied Senate Republicans to drop a similar provision earlier this year. House and Senate negotiators are fighting over a deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo, renewing a clash with President Clinton and putting Gov. George W. Bush on the spot again, since he lobbied Senate Republicans to drop a similar provision earlier this year. In May, the Senate rejected a similar measure, 53 to 47, with at least two or three Republicans saying they were swayed by Governor Bush, who called it a ''legislative overreach'' that would tie his hands if he became president. But House Republicans quietly attached a comparable provision to the Pentagon's $310 billion budget bill for fiscal year 2001. The dispute comes at an awkward time for Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, who has accused the Clinton administration of allowing the military's combat readiness to erode, in part by dispatching American forces on far-flung peacekeeping missions to places like Kosovo. A spokesman for Mr. Bush, Ray Sullivan, said today that the governor objected to the Republican-written language for the same reasons that he balked at the Senate provision in May. ''He views it as a legislative overreach on the powers of the president,'' said Mr. Sullivan, who added that Congressional Republicans were aware of Mr. Bush's views.
 Analysis of Gov George W Bush's turnabout regarding campaign debate schedule and format; says Bush's representatives felt they had no other choice but to cut their losses and stop regular pounding Bush has been taking in news media for what looks like nervousness about formal debates (M) What  Gov. George W. Bush did today was an extraordinary turnabout. After weeks of objections to the debate schedule that the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates had been proposing, he suddenly agreed to all of it: three encounters with Vice President Al Gore, on the dates that the commission proposed, in the locations that the commission specified. What  Gov. George W. Bush did today was an extraordinary turnabout. After weeks of objections to the debate schedule that the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates had been proposing, he suddenly agreed to all of it: three encounters with Vice President Al Gore, on the dates that the commission proposed, in the locations that the commission specified. But by the time Mr. Bush's representatives sat down with the debate commission's officials today, they really had no other choice. They had to cut their losses and stop the regular pounding that Mr. Bush had been taking in the news media for what looked like a nervousness about formal debates. And they had to move on, because a continuing debate over debates threatened to be yet another distraction for a campaign bedeviled by too many of them. They knew that for Mr. Bush to communicate his chosen message to voters, he had to put an end to the extraneous story lines. Today's agreement spoke volumes about the change in the Bush campaign's fortunes over the last several weeks. Before, Mr. Bush enjoyed a considerable advantage over Mr. Gore in the polls, and for a front-runner, debates always represent more of a risk than an opportunity. But Mr. Bush now seems to be trailing by a few percentage points, and for an underdog, debates hold the promise of mixing up the dynamic, changing the momentum. ''Bush needs debates,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster, ''because with debates, you can shake up the political environment.'' Debates also represent one of the rare times when a candidate can speak directly to an enormous number of voters, without having to rely on the conduit of journalists, and for Mr. Bush, that is more attractive than ever before. That has happened to Mr. Bush again and again, and those mishaps coupled with the realignment of the candidates in the polls, changed the narratives associated with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. All at once, it was Mr. Bush who could not gain his footing, and Mr. Gore who loped with an unbroken stride. ''This is Bush's chance to get his message out unfiltered, uncensored, unedited,'' Mr. Luntz said. ''And that's exactly what he wants. And that's exactly what will get his campaign back on track.'' Mr. Bush had wanted debates that were less formal, and shorter. His aides had proposed having only one 90-minute commission debate, and two 60-minute ones on television news programs. The news program debates would not have been carried by all the major networks. Mr. Bush's communications director, Karen P. Hughes, insisted today that he might still get his wish for a more spontaneous exchange between the candidates. As the candidate played hard to get, she said, the debate commission grew agreeable to talking about creative, spontaneous formats for the debates. But the Bush campaign has not received any firm agreement along those lines. So Mr. Bush and his advisers appear to be taking something of a gamble, worth it to them now because the holdout had not worked to their advantage, any further holdout may bring only them more grief, and they need to move their focus to putting Mr. Gore on the defensive. A Bush campaign adviser said that while events had clearly been moving toward an agreement on debates, today's deal may well have been sealed by the emergence of newly critical appraisals of Mr. Gore's fund-raising efforts. At last, the Republican official said, Mr. Gore was on the hot seat. And Mr. Bush's advisers knew that if they did not reach an agreement on debates today, they might help Mr. Gore out of that uncomfortable spot by keeping Mr. Bush in one. ''This decision was locked in by the fact that Bush finally got some traction, after weeks of no traction,'' the official said. ''They don't want to take that away.''
 EVERYBODY IS A COMEDIAN -- They will both be keeping their day jobs, but Vice President Al Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, tried their hand at comedy yesterday. Coached by his daughter Kristin, a professional comedy writer, Mr. Gore made jokes at the expense of his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, on CBS's ''Late Show'' with David Letterman. Mr. Gore showed a film of him and Mr. Lieberman before a microphone at a rally. ''Hey Joe,'' Mr. Gore whispered, ''I've got to go on the Letterman show. That show is so lame.'' Mr. Lieberman responded, ''Oh yeah, big time.'' Mr. Lieberman appeared on NBC's ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien'' and Comedy Central's ''The Daily Show with Jon Stewart.'' To prepare for the vice presidency, Mr. Lieberman told Mr. Stewart: ''I've been watching old Carson reruns to learn from Ed McMahon what I should do. 'Yes, sir, I never thought of that, that was brilliant.' '' Mr. Lieberman, the first Jew on a major party's national ticket, told Mr. O'Brien that he and Vice President Al Gore are considering new slogans, like ''Gore-Lieberman: no bull, no pork'' and ''With malice toward none, but a little guilt for everyone.'' BACK TO BOB JONES -- By loudly criticizing Hollywood for its glorification of violence and sex, the Republican and Democratic presidential tickets have stolen one of the issue horses Patrick J. Buchanan has ridden in his many campaigns. Not to be outdone, Mr. Buchanan, who now appears to be the official candidate of the Reform Party, has scheduled a speech for Monday on ''Hollywood and the Cultural War,'' which a press release described as a ''battle cry.'' The site of the speech is almost as telling as the subject: Bob Jones University in Greenville, S.C., a favorite conservative audience of Mr. Buchanan's and one that Gov. George W. Bush addressed this year before the South Carolina primary. Mr. Bush was criticized for that appearance because of certain university policies, but this has never bothered Mr. Buchanan. ''It'll be a good one,'' promises Mr. Buchanan's press director, Brian Doherty.
