 The bridegroom, 42, is a vice president for business development and strategic marketing at ColumbusNewport, a lobbying and venture banking firm in Arlington, Va. He worked in the State Department during the administration of George Bush as a deputy assistant secretary of the Bureau of Diplomatic Security, overseeing training of foreign law-enforcement officers and emergency evacuation plans for United States embassies and consulates. He graduated from Canisius College in Buffalo and received a master's degree in public administration from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
 Pennsylvania Looms Large In the Presidential Race  Pennsylvania is one of a handful of states where experts say the presidential race of 2000 will be decided. So the state is under something of a siege. Gov. George W. Bush has been to the state 14 times, and Vice President Al Gore had made no fewer than 17 campaign visits. When Vice President Al Gore incorporated ''working families'' into his rhetoric, he pointed a finger at a central fact of American life: most of the nation's 72 million families feel they cannot make ends meet.
 THE host of ''Weekend Edition With Scott Simon'' on National Public Radio has a voice that's just right for reading a bedtime story to a child. Yet Mr. Simon's observations and questions never put you to sleep, whether he is reporting on Al Gore, a hospital in Kosovo, surfing or the death of his cat. (He did an obituary for her on the air.) THE host of ''Weekend Edition With Scott Simon'' on National Public Radio has a voice that's just right for reading a bedtime story to a child. Yet Mr. Simon's observations and questions never put you to sleep, whether he is reporting on Al Gore, a hospital in Kosovo, surfing or the death of his cat. (He did an obituary for her on the air.)
 Polls indicate that while Mr. Nader, now as in 1996, has no chance of becoming president, he has enough support to steal some votes from Al Gore in some states, no small thing in a close election. Or as Mr. Garskof put it the other day, something he helped start now has ''a potential to hurt something I believe in.'' He has begun warning Nader supporters not to ''throw away'' their vote on a ''dream,'' arguing that Mr. Nader, for all the good things he supports, like a cleaner environment,  cannot win. Go with someone who can win, he says, go with Al Gore and brother-in-law Lieberman, a team that once it wins will have the power to genuinely do something for the environment.
 Dick Cheney, who helped lead Gerald R Ford's campaign against Jimmy Carter in 1976 presidential election, devised a strategy that resembles the one Vice Pres Al Gore seems to be using against Gov George W Bush today (S) So would that old plan provide some insight into what Mr. Cheney might now be telling his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush? So would that old plan provide some insight into what Mr. Cheney might now be telling his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush? Whoa! Isn't that Al Gore's plan?
 All sorts of groups and candidates seized on the parade to promote their causes. Green Party members distributed leaflets for their presidential candidate, Ralph Nader, while several marchers held placards reading ''Hevesi for Mayor in 2001'' -- a reference to the ambitions of the city's comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi. Hundreds of members of the Sheet Metal Workers' Union carried signs saying, ''Working Families for Gore,'' although bystanders had a sign saying, ''Pro-Labor, Pro-Life, No Gore.''
 Mr. Cheney was in Connecticut to chant the Bush campaign's newest populist slogan, ''Real plans for real people.'' Of course, the Halliburton gazillionaire may not be the best medium for the message. Belittling Al Gore's criticisms of W.'s Medicare drug plan, Mr. Cheney said, ''Apparently, the vice president has trouble understanding the concept of options.'' Perhaps it would be best if the king of stock windfalls avoided the ''O'' word. Friday was the debut of Mr. Nielsen's campaign ad that showed pictures of former President George Bush, John McCain and Joe Lieberman, while the announcer intones, ''Today, when America wants leaders of honesty and integrity. . . .'' Little Bush and Big Time were conspicuously missing.
 AT the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia last month, Dean Dennis, an alternate delegate from Colorado, stood on the convention floor shouting his lungs out for George W. Bush. AT the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia last month, Dean Dennis, an alternate delegate from Colorado, stood on the convention floor shouting his lungs out for George W. Bush. Rosa Erives's involvement in the Democratic Party is hardly a secret to her boss at Qwest, a telecommunications company in Denver: She took time off to serve as a delegate for Al Gore at the party's national convention in Los Angeles. But neither Ms. Erives, an operations analyst, nor her co-workers talk politics on the job. ''It's kind of an unwritten rule that we stay apolitical,'' she said; the furthest she goes is reminding colleagues to vote each Election Day. In such a firm, unanimity helps: all the politically active lawyers are Democrats. ''We all sit around and tell George Bush jokes,'' Mr. Stone said. An example is Enron, the Houston energy conglomerate, which even suggests how much employees should give. Kenneth L. Lay, the chairman, recently sent top executives a memo on his stationery asking them to contribute $1,000 each to the Bush campaign, said Steven J. Kean, an executive vice president. This year, Enron and its employees have contributed more than $615,000 to the Bush campaign, he said.
 For much of the week, the Bush and Gore campaigns sparred over where and how -- or even whether -- the presidential debates would occur this year. The bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, which has been running the forums since 1988, had issued invitations to Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore to three debates on college campuses in October. For much of the week, the Bush and Gore campaigns sparred over where and how -- or even whether -- the presidential debates would occur this year. The bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates, which has been running the forums since 1988, had issued invitations to Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore to three debates on college campuses in October. But last Sunday, Mr. Bush issued a debate plan of his own that included only one 90-minute commission debate and added 60-minute showdowns on ''Meet the Press'' and ''Larry King Live.'' On Friday, however, with Democrats accusing Mr. Bush of wanting to duck the wider television audiences commanded by the commission debates -- and Republicans increasingly worried that voters might be seeing it that way, too -- Mr. Bush withdrew his plan. This week, aides to both candidates are to meet in Washington with the commission to negotiate a final deal that guarantees a series of forums. Mr. Bush's $198 billion overhaul of Medicare would encourage the elderly to pick subsidized private insurance plans that had prescription drug coverage. Mr. Gore, who previously unveiled his own $253 billion plan, said Mr. Bush's subsidies were not sufficient for older people. With Mr. Gore still in the throes of a post-convention surge, Mr. Bush's advisers unveiled a retooled strategy and message, focused on a new theme: ''Real plans for real people.'' The idea is to get Mr. Bush mixing more with ''real people'' at town hall meetings and in workplace chats.
 ''THE BEST MAN''  An election-year revival of an election-year (1960) play about an election, it could only be a comic melodrama or risk its credibility. The making of the president, as envisioned by Gore Vidal. A starry cast that includes Charles Durning, Spalding Gray, Chris Noth, Elizabeth Ashley, Christine Ebersole and Michael Learned. Directed by Ethan McSweeny. In previews. Opens next Sunday. Virginia Theater. (Tele-Charge).
 Campaign of Gov George W Bush faces predicament as it heads into most intense eight weeks of advertising; campaign officials conclude they have no choice but to run ads attacking Vice Pres Al Gore, but face choice of whether to go negative without making commercials appear too harsh; situation presents more of challenge for Bush than Gore since Bush pledged to run campaign on positive note (M) Harold Kaplan, a Madison Avenue advertising executive who is an unpaid consultant to Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, said the ideal way to attack Vice President Al Gore popped into his head in late August when he was reading the obituary of the creator of the Lava Lamp. ''I said, 'Lava Lamp. Oh, my God! What a great visual!' '' Mr. Kaplan recalled. ''I thought a Lava Lamp was a very good metaphor for Gore. It can be whatever you want it to be.'' Harold Kaplan, a Madison Avenue advertising executive who is an unpaid consultant to Gov. George W. Bush's campaign, said the ideal way to attack Vice President Al Gore popped into his head in late August when he was reading the obituary of the creator of the Lava Lamp. ''I said, 'Lava Lamp. Oh, my God! What a great visual!' '' Mr. Kaplan recalled. ''I thought a Lava Lamp was a very good metaphor for Gore. It can be whatever you want it to be.'' Mr. Kaplan's script, which is part of the rhetorical ammunition the Bush campaign has stockpiled in Austin, Tex., opens with a bubbling, oozing Lava Lamp, intended to conjure images of debauchery in the 1960's. The announcer says: ''Some politicians are like Lava Lamps, constantly changing. Always saying what you want them to say. Take Al Gore, for example. He says he's now for tax cuts. That's enlightening. Over the last eight years, Al Gore voted to raise our gas taxes. Kept the marriage tax on couples. Even raised Social Security taxes.'' This 30-second commercial was one of a series of suggested scripts obtained by The New York Times from people not involved in the campaign. The scripts were proposed by Madison Avenue advertising executives who are advising Mr. Bush's media team. They are nicknamed the ''Park Avenue Posse.'' Mark McKinnon, Mr. Bush's top media adviser in Austin, was unapologetically dismissive of the commercial, saying: ''That's not nearly under consideration. I looked at it for about five seconds before I realized it wasn't worthy of consideration.'' But the discussions about the advertisement -- no matter how fleeting -- underscore a fundamental predicament facing the Bush organization as it heads into the most intense eight weeks of advertising of the campaign. Campaign officials have concluded that they have no choice but to run advertisements attacking Mr. Gore -- and they have already started. Now they are facing the hard part: how to go negative without making the commercials appear too harsh. It is more of a challenge for Mr. Bush than for Mr. Gore because the Texas governor had vowed to run a campaign on a positive note. Ms. Hall questioned the effectiveness of the Lava Lamp commercial, saying, ''To do a negative commercial saying he keeps changing is like fighting the last war. Gore has repackaged himself and seems to have sold himself as his own man.'' Besides, she added, ''I'm not sure people are even going to know what a Lava Lamp is. Isn't that the 60's or 70's?'' Bush officials and consultants, and officials at the Republican National Committee, are wrestling with a variety of options, from a commercial that shows Mr. Gore turning into a chameleon to one questioning the validity of his budget plan. The campaign has convened endless meetings and focus groups to settle on how best to take on Mr. Gore. But the reality, according to several people involved in the process, is that there is no definitive strategy. ''We're not sure what we're going to run next,'' conceded one Bush official in Austin. ''We have various things we're considering.'' Mr. Kaplan, a creative director at Young & Rubicam who met Mr. Bush during the 1988 presidential campaign, spoke more bluntly about the problem facing the campaign: ''The struggle is that a negative ad can backfire on you. There's this harsh, mean tone that's wrong and you just don't want to do that. The governor has set a very positive tone.'' Many Republican officials have criticized as too sarcastic a Republican Party commercial -- sanctioned by the Bush campaign -- that ridicules Mr. Gore with humor and cites his fund-raising visit to a Buddhist temple. But Mr. McKinnon defended the commercial and said, in fact, that it may have helped Mr. Bush close the gaps in some polls in the last week. It has become something of a tradition for campaigns to look to Madison Avenue for creative input. In May, the Bush campaign formed the Park Avenue Posse, a group of advertising executives that has volunteered to advise Mr. McKinnon and his colleague in Austin, Stuart Stevens. The group is led by and was named for Jim Ferguson, the president of Young & Rubicam, who lives on Park Avenue. Then an image of Mr. Gore, frozen, appears. The announcer says, ''This is a politician, which does the same thing.'' Then, footage of Mr. Gore recalling his days farming tobacco. ''I've shucked it, hucked it, sold it, smoked it,'' he says. Then the vice president says, ''I will never support the tobacco industry.'' Then back to Mr. Gore, who says, ''I helped invent the Internet.'' Mr. McKinnon had little patience for suggested commercials that tethered Mr. Gore to the Clinton administration's doomed health care plan. ''Remember the health care crisis in '93?'' the announcer says in one proposed ad. ''Clinton and Gore promised a plan that would put a national health care card in every wallet. Still waiting for yours?'' Someone on the screen is shaking a wallet with no card in it.
 THE RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, by Catherine Bush. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) A novel with the nerve to use war as a metaphor for the travails of love; its protagonist, a graduate in war studies, has fled Canada after two men fought a duel over her. THE RULES OF ENGAGEMENT, by Catherine Bush. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) A novel with the nerve to use war as a metaphor for the travails of love; its protagonist, a graduate in war studies, has fled Canada after two men fought a duel over her.
 At New York Theater Workshop the piece I really want to see the most is ''Resident Alien,'' about Quentin Crisp, performed by Bette Bourne. Mike Bradwell directed from the Bush Theater in London, where it has been a great success.
 Editorial on the troubles Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign has run into since Democratic National Convention; says Bush is being forced to deal with issues for the first time and Vice Pres Al Gore appears to be gaining on or pulling ahead of him in states that once looked safe for Bush (M) It is too soon to tell whether Gov. George W. Bush's campaign has simply hit a rough patch or is heading into a steep dive. He was smart to listen to alarmed Republican elders and open talks with the presidential debate commission about meeting Vice President Al Gore. He also promised to be more spontaneous and hold town meetings. But the larger problems faced by Mr. Bush's campaign may be harder to solve, since they have to do with substantive issues and electoral geography. The presidential campaign has reached the stage when state-by-state tallies are more meaningful than the numbers nationwide. While the national polls have the candidates about even, only a handful of big states are in play. These states may also be among the least receptive to Mr. Bush's agenda of tax cuts and restricted government. It is too soon to tell whether Gov. George W. Bush's campaign has simply hit a rough patch or is heading into a steep dive. He was smart to listen to alarmed Republican elders and open talks with the presidential debate commission about meeting Vice President Al Gore. He also promised to be more spontaneous and hold town meetings. But the larger problems faced by Mr. Bush's campaign may be harder to solve, since they have to do with substantive issues and electoral geography. The presidential campaign has reached the stage when state-by-state tallies are more meaningful than the numbers nationwide. While the national polls have the candidates about even, only a handful of big states are in play. These states may also be among the least receptive to Mr. Bush's agenda of tax cuts and restricted government. State polls show Mr. Gore ahead or suddenly competitive in two places, Louisiana and Florida, that once looked safe for Mr. Bush. With the three biggest states hardly in doubt -- Texas is solid for Mr. Bush, and California and New York seem safe for Mr. Gore -- the emerging battleground is turning out to be the industrial heartland of Ohio, Michigan, Missouri, Pennsylvania and Illinois. Since the era of Ronald Reagan, working-class Democrats in these states could be tempted into voting Republican. In recent years, they have gone for Republican governors like Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and John Engler of Michigan, who favor a strong government role in health and education. But it is also true that swing voters in these states have often voted Democratic and may be ready to do so again this year. The polls suggest that the anti-government conservatism so popular in Mr. Bush's Sun Belt base may not play as well among the undecided voters in the hottest combat zone of 2000. An irony is that at the outset of his campaign, Mr. Bush promised to be a ''compassionate conservative'' along the lines of Mr. Ridge and Mr. Engler. But in recent weeks Mr. Bush has gotten off that message, sidetracked by the squabble over debates and distracted by his own indecision over how hard to hit the vice president in attack ads. Meanwhile, partly because of adroit moves by Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush has been pulled onto issues terrain. He is being asked to define proposals, rather than depict them with broad strokes. One result last week was that Mr. Bush wound up sounding more conservative than compassionate, as when he unveiled his bifurcated Medicare drug program. Social issues like gun control, the environment and abortion rights are also strong for Democrats in the critical Midwest. It was significant that Mr. Bush's campaign on general themes of personality and leadership was struggling just as Republicans in Congress gave ground on specific issues in order to avoid a budget confrontation with President Clinton. The House speaker, Dennis Hastert, has signaled a willingness to accept a minimum wage bill and is said to be looking for a compromise on the patient's bill of rights. Republicans are even said to be willing to accept more spending on school construction, foreign aid and other Democratic initiatives. Picking a fight with the Democrats, the Congressional Republicans are saying, can only play into the enemy's hands. That underscores the reasons that Mr. Bush has had a rough time since the Democratic convention. Mr. Gore has succeeded for the time being in making this a campaign season that is turning on specifics rather than generalizations about values and governmental philosophy. And the concentration on issues by his campaign seems especially important in the cluster of contestable states expected to decide the election.
 Lyn Nofziger Op-Ed article says Gov George W Bush must start attacking Vice Pres Al Gore if he wants to be elected president The time has come for that old baseball man, George W. Bush, to recall the words of another old baseball man, Leo Durocher: ''Nice guys finish last.'' They don't win presidential elections, either. Mr. Bush's seeming unawareness of this adage has been fostering a growing sense of unease among his core supporters. When he killed a commercial prepared by the Republican National Committee last month because it was not fully accurate, he may have hoped that his high-road strategy would start to work again. The time has come for that old baseball man, George W. Bush, to recall the words of another old baseball man, Leo Durocher: ''Nice guys finish last.'' They don't win presidential elections, either. Mr. Bush's seeming unawareness of this adage has been fostering a growing sense of unease among his core supporters. When he killed a commercial prepared by the Republican National Committee last month because it was not fully accurate, he may have hoped that his high-road strategy would start to work again. It didn't. Today, Mr. Bush may be showing he is finally aware of the problem; the R.N.C. is airing a new spot that hammers the vice president for his fund-raising activities. Undoubtedly, Mr. Bush will be criticized for allowing the R.N.C. to run these ads and for breaking his pledge to run ''an optimistic, positive campaign in the Reagan tradition,'' as he promised to Nancy Reagan last spring. Mr. Bush needs to take the same approach. He can treat Mr. Gore in good humor, with a smile or with a tone of regret. That's what Mr. Reagan did with Mr. Carter in their 1980 debate, when he said, ''There you go again.'' In fact, he was calling Mr. Carter a liar, but with a needle, not a bludgeon. While not a Ronald Reagan, Mr. Bush exudes warmth and friendliness. Therefore he can attack without raising his voice, without calling names, without snarling or sneering. But he is going to have to remind voters about  Mr. Gore, the political fund-raiser, the extreme environmentalist, the man who is not always truthful. After all, Mr. Gore has already attacked Mr. Bush on his record as Texas governor and on his ties to big oil. If Mr. Bush does not reciprocate, he is likely to find out that the best fate has to offer him is two more years as governor.
 Shooting ''Pi'' was a 28-day guerrilla-film affair, ''running down the middle of Canal Street at midday with the camera,'' as Mr. Libatique recalls it. Mr. Aronofsky's mother provided the food for the crew; the main set was part of a lighting factory in Bushwick.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column criticizes complexity of Vice Pres Al Gore's tax proposals and his eagerness to cut taxes in the first place (M) The bad news about the detailed economic plan the Gore-Lieberman campaign released last week is that it does contain some smoke and mirrors. The good news is that the smoke and mirrors are there not to conceal the true cost of extravagant promises, but to make a modest, not particularly exciting plan sound like something more. The bad news about the detailed economic plan the Gore-Lieberman campaign released last week is that it does contain some smoke and mirrors. The good news is that the smoke and mirrors are there not to conceal the true cost of extravagant promises, but to make a modest, not particularly exciting plan sound like something more. The extension of Medicare coverage is actually a conservative measure, in the fundamental sense of the word. America decided 35 years ago to guarantee health care to older citizens, and while some politicians may dream of turning back the clock, they won't say so in public. But pharmacology has come to play an ever more important role in modern medicine; health insurance that does not pay for prescription drugs looks less and less like the universal coverage most people support. So there's nothing radical about trying to plug that gap. Indeed, at this point George W. Bush has grudgingly accepted the principle that Medicare should provide drug coverage; he's just haggling over the price, and trying to keep the insurance companies in the game. If you want something to complain about in Mr. Gore's program, it's those tax cuts. For one thing, each cut gets touted twice -- once as a tax break, then again as part of a program to promote truth, justice and the American way. And it is an understatement to say that the tax breaks are complicated. As best I can figure, they are targeted on a middle-income widow with many children, all about to enter college, who does not receive health insurance from her employer, is enrolled in a training program, drives a fuel-efficient car and is about to inherit a farm. But I'm not sure I got it right. Actually, I find Republican claims that Mr. Gore has understated the cost of his plan bizarre; it's far more likely that his plan won't actually cost as much as he says because many people who are entitled to claim tax credits will never figure it out. One answer involves political philosophy. Although you would never know it from the other side's rhetoric, New Democrats like Mr. Gore have clearly renounced the party's old big-government, big-spending tendencies. But they apparently retain a lingering taste for penny-ante activism, handing out a few baby carrots here and there to people who do the right thing. The more important explanation of Mr. Gore's intricate tax plan, however, is that this is what happens when you try to play mine-is-bigger-than-yours with a shameless rival. Mr. Bush is proposing huge, budget-busting tax cuts, mainly benefiting the top 3 or 4 percent of taxpayers; Mr. Gore wanted to counter with a smaller, far more prudent tax cut that nonetheless showed bigger numbers for middle-income families. The trouble is that because the income tax is mainly paid by high-income families, it's hard to cut it without mainly helping those families (although Mr. Bush made a gratuitous further tilt toward the rich by slashing marginal rates mainly at the top, while leaving the marginal rate on most middle-income taxpayers unchanged). Mr. Gore's economists have tried to pull it off, but the strain shows. But why is Mr. Gore in such a hurry to cut taxes anyway? After decades of deficits, the federal government has now run an ''on-budget'' surplus for precisely one year. Can't we wait a couple of years to see if it lasts? So I'm not happy about Mr. Gore's tax proposals: instead of clearly distancing himself from Mr. Bush's truly bad idea, Mr. Gore has tried to meet it partway. Still, Mr. Bush's tax plan is grossly irresponsible, while Mr. Gore's is merely uninspiring. And this is a case where less than half a loaf is better than one.
 Pres Clinton says he will seek more than double federal spending on wildfire programs in year ahead, calling current fire season one of worst in memory; asks Congress for nearly $1.6 billion more to aid affected communities and to try to prevent future blazes; initiative is part of attempt to bounce back politically after weeks in which Clinton and Vice Pres Al Gore have come under sharp criticism from Republicans, including Gov George W Bush, for pro-environment bias that has allegedly increased fire risk (M) The announcement was in part an attempt to bounce back politically after weeks in which Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore have come under sharp criticism from Republicans, including Gov. George W. Bush, for what their critics say is a pro-environment bias that has increased the fire risk. The announcement was in part an attempt to bounce back politically after weeks in which Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore have come under sharp criticism from Republicans, including Gov. George W. Bush, for what their critics say is a pro-environment bias that has increased the fire risk. Even as cooler weather and rain have begun to dampen this year's flames, concern about fires and their aftermath remains intense across the West, in a season that has already scorched more than six million acres. Mr. Clinton's call for more spending may have been aimed in particular at voters in California, Washington and Oregon, which are seen as important to Mr. Gore's presidential campaign. In recent weeks, Governor Bush has been among those saying that the Clinton administration's policies were at least in part to blame for the severity of this year's fires. Mr. Bush has vowed ''to put our national forests back to work.''
 In the presidential campaign, the politics of fashion have gotten ugly. First, Vice President Al Gore's critics accused him of getting a fashion makeover. The vice president had a problem. It looked as if Gov. George W. Bush would easily outdress him. Even Mr. Bush's clothes have presidential lineage: not only does W. look great in custom-made suits, he uses the same tailor who dressed Lyndon B. Johnson. Meanwhile, if Mr. Gore slipped up and wore a single earth tone, commentators would say he wasn't his own man, which is a shame because earth tones are some of the vice president's best colors. But at the Democratic convention, the fashion crisis was averted. In the opening-night video, world leaders kept extolling President Clinton, while President Clinton kept wearing a tuxedo, radiating elegance and national prosperity. Then Vice President Gore showed up, dressed in red, white and blue. Dressing like a flag has always been a key to winning national elections. And saying you're your own man while wrapped in the colors of the flag -- it doesn't get much better than that.
 OLIVIER MESSIAEN FESTIVAL  Messiaen we seem always to have with us these days, but a concentrated dose is still welcome. Here are three substantial programs: two song cycles, ''Poemes Pour Mi'' and ''Chants de Terre et de Ciel,'' performed by Elizabeth Farnum and Philip Bush; ''Vingt Regards sur l'Enfant Jesus,'' played by Hakon Austbo, a Norwegian pianist; and ''Visions de l'Amen,'' by Mr. Bush and Marilyn Nonken. Dec. 14. Great Hall, Cooper Union, Third Avenue at Seventh Street (353-4196).
 WHEN Vice President Al Gore outlined his economic vision for America in a speech in Cleveland last week, he did not even mention health policy. That was quite a change from 1992, when controlling health costs and providing health insurance for all Americans was one of the driving forces of the Clinton-Gore campaign. WHEN Vice President Al Gore outlined his economic vision for America in a speech in Cleveland last week, he did not even mention health policy. That was quite a change from 1992, when controlling health costs and providing health insurance for all Americans was one of the driving forces of the Clinton-Gore campaign. Mr. Gore is obviously gun-shy from that defeat. The book-length manifesto he put out with his policy speech in Cleveland last week addresses his health proposals in passing on Page 118 -- including an ambitious and expensive promise to guarantee all children health insurance by 2005. But this was not one of the vice president's top 10 goals -- like encouraging home-ownership or expanding access to college. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas would just as soon skip the issue of health care and avoid further scrutiny of the record in Texas. Thirty-seven percent of low-income children there are uninsured (only Arizona does worse), and a federal judge ruled last month that the state had failed to abide by a 1996 court order to provide appropriate health care for more than 1.5 million children eligible for Medicaid. The one health issue that has been joined in the campaign, prescription drug coverage for the elderly, was hardly discussed eight years ago. Since then, however, drug prices have risen by as much as 15 percent a year. Last week, Mr. Bush laid out his plan for subsidies that he said would allow the elderly to buy private insurance to cover drugs. Mr. Gore would give the elderly drug coverage under Medicare.
 Adam Clymer article on being called a 'major league �expletive�' by Gov George W Bush in an aside to his running mate, Dick Chaney, picked up by a microphone at a campaign stop; cartoon (M) On Monday, Gov. George W. Bush spotted me at a rally in Naperville, Ill. Not realizing the microphones were working, he told his running mate, Dick Cheney, that I was a ''major-league [expletive].'' But those attacks all came from the ideological fringes, and nobody took them seriously. Maybe Mr. Bush is entitled to more credence. After all, I sometimes vote for his party's candidates, as I sometimes vote for Democrats. He cares about education and wants his party to attract African-Americans and Hispanics. Sure, he is not as centrist as he tries to portray himself, but then what politician is? (The pre-nomination Joseph I. Lieberman, maybe.) In any case, Mr. Bush is no right-wing nut, so shrugging his remark off as the sound of an extremist was hardly the proper response. Initially, there was only a moment to think of a response when a pack of reporters descended. One smart-aleck answer occurred to me. Since we were not too far from Wrigley Field, I thought of saying something like, ''At least I didn't trade Sammy Sosa,'' a riposte that would have dealt with Mr. Bush's own major-league experience as boss of the Texas Rangers. But I rejected that and said simply, ''I was disappointed with the governor's language.'' I had plenty of time to listen to the messages because Mr. Cheney, anxious to avoid the storm Mr. Bush had stirred up, did not want to talk on the record to the reporters traveling with him. So I could not ask the question I had traveled to ask, about why he gave only 1 percent of his income to charity. The next day I went back out with Mr. Cheney, and he discussed and defended his contributions. On a flight to Allentown, Pa., he said he should be given credit not just for direct donations but also for corporate matching grants and speaking without charge to nonprofit groups. Television viewers might have expected glares, and at least some reference to the events they were being shown over and over, which included his loyal agreement with Mr. Bush. Instead I asked questions, some of which he seemed to dislike, and he answered them as he chose. Not buddy-buddy, but strictly professional. The Cheney entourage caught up with Mr. Bush, so his vice-presidential candidate could introduce him in Allentown, Bethlehem and Scranton. Every time we stopped near a television set, some cable channel was showing the clip of Mr. Bush muttering about me to Mr. Cheney and then pondering its impact on his campaign and the future of Western civilization. I was back in the office, and colleagues asked if Mr. Bush had apologized to me. I had not heard from him, or from his aides, who were busy telling reporters I had been mean to him when I reported in April that ''Texas has had one of the nation's worst public health records for decades,'' and that Mr. Bush had not made much of an effort to fix things. I was actually proud of that article -- which got immensely renewed readership last week as people tried to figure out what exactly was bugging the governor. But if Mr. Bush did not like it, hey, it's a free country. After all, if newspaper reporters wanted to be loved by their customers, we could drive Good Humor trucks. Newspaper reporters aren't immune from talking into an open mike either. About 18 months ago, I was editing an article describing how hard Mr. Bush was working to study national issues. With feeble gallows humor, I suggested that perhaps he needed the tutorials more than others. But while my comparable slurs of President Clinton, to cite one prominent example, stayed private, a spectacular typesetting blunder got my wisecrack printed. Through an Editors' Note, The Times apologized, sort of. Now maybe Vice President Al Gore, whose aides seem delighted by this business, could do me a favor and make some comparable stumble. Then I could get back to covering the campaign instead of being part of it.
 Working families and hard-working middle-class families, frequently mentioned in campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore, feel they are unable to make ends meet ends meet, despite booming economy; three quarters of 72 million families that earn between $30,000 and $75,000 per year, range of middle class incomes in most of America, are able to pay for basics--such as food, mortgage, automobile, modest vacation--but are stressed by other outlays of middle-class life; graph; photos (L) When Vice President Al Gore incorporated ''working families'' into his rhetoric last month and ''hard-working middle-class families'' this month as pivotal campaign phrases, he pointed a finger -- unintentionally perhaps -- at a central fact of American life: most of the nation's 72 million families feel they cannot make ends meet. When Vice President Al Gore incorporated ''working families'' into his rhetoric last month and ''hard-working middle-class families'' this month as pivotal campaign phrases, he pointed a finger -- unintentionally perhaps -- at a central fact of American life: most of the nation's 72 million families feel they cannot make ends meet. Mr. Gore says his tax breaks and spending proposals would enrich this broad swath of middle-income families whose incomes had languished for more than 20 years, through Democratic and Republican administrations. Gov. George W. Bush's camp increasingly insists that his tax proposals include significant cuts for this group, too. Whatever the merits of their various arguments, the emphasis has clearly shifted. Until Mr. Gore first made a point of helping ''working families'' and then the relabeled ''hard-working middle class,'' the Clinton administration had pushed a different emphasis. The president spoke repeatedly of the ''unprecedented prosperity'' that Americans enjoyed from the economic expansion that gathered steam in the late 1990's. Ms. Ford says that Mr. Bush might do more than Mr. Gore to lower her taxes and to resolve the Social Security problem, but she is voting for Mr. Gore. ''He is from my home state,'' she said. The voting preferences of the Wrights, the Stogdills and the Joneses seem similarly disconnected from their experiences as middle-income families. The Wrights, union members, normally vote Democratic, and are leaning that way now. The Stogdills, conservatives, are voting Republican. And the Joneses, who like some of the middle-income relief Mr. Gore proposes, make abortion their priority issue. They are against it, and therefore for Mr. Bush.
 Many Democrats today, mindful of the lessons of Kennedy's 1964 victory, say they believe that the single most important factor in determining Mrs. Clinton's success in her race against Representative Rick A. Lazio will be how well Al Gore fares against George W. Bush in New York. While leaders in both major parties say it is highly likely that Mr. Gore will defeat Mr. Bush in the state, it seems improbable that he will come close to matching Johnson's 2.5 million-vote cushion of 1964. Even at that, it is doubtful that Mr. Gore can do for Mrs. Clinton what Johnson did for Kennedy. Voters these days are more independent, and a vote for Mr. Gore may not necessarily guarantee a vote for Mrs. Clinton.
 Vice Pres Al Gore prepares to embark on swing through Illinois and Ohio, campaigning during the day and raising money at night (S) By day, Al Gore will be talking about education. By night, he will be raising money. By day, Al Gore will be talking about education. By night, he will be raising money. Mr. Gore will appear on two television talk shows -- Oprah Winfrey on Monday in Chicago and David Letterman on Thursday in New York. He also has fund-raisers in Philadelphia on Tuesday, Boston on Wednesday and New York on Thursday that should raise at least $6 million. The fund-raising comes as Democrats lag in the money chase. Gov. George W. Bush has raised nearly $100 million, and the Bush campaign has spent twice as much each week on television commercials. A Republican official said that the party planned to step up its anti-Gore commercials next week, a barrage that Mr. Gore told his supporters they needed to counter. ''You know, the other side has pulled out all the stops and has gone just way beyond what anybody ever thought would happen in the post-Watergate reform era in not staying within the guidelines and so forth,'' Mr. Gore said at a reception in Atlanta on Friday, where 250 people paid  $1,000 each. ''So if you could help us just remain in the same ball park, just close, then that's what we need.'' According to the Center for Public Integrity, from January 1999 through May 31, 2000, Mr. Gore raised $47.7 million, spent $39 million and had  $8.2 million in cash. Mr. Bush raised $87.5 million, spent $79.5 million and had $7.1 million on hand.
 Let's ask Al Gore and George W. Bush.
 Little wonder. This week alone, Vice President Al Gore campaigned in Philadelphia on Sunday, Pittsburgh on Monday and the Scranton area on Thursday. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was in Allentown and Scranton on Tuesday, Scranton on Wednesday and Pittsburgh on Friday. Lest anyone's attention wander, Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate, hit the Philadelphia suburbs. By early this week, the Democrats and the Republicans had each spent more than $5 million in Pennsylvania, in soft money and hard, on television advertising. By late this week, Mr. Bush had been to the state 14 times and Mr. Gore had made no fewer than 17 campaign visits. On the most recent one he pleased local chauvinists by commenting, ''I believe that this state is literally 'the Keystone state,' and I'm going to continue to spend an enormous amount of time here.'' Hyperbole aside, Pennsylvania is one of the handful of states -- 6, 8, maybe 10, depending on who's counting -- where the presidential race of 2000 will be decided. Even after decades of population decline, it still casts 23 electoral votes, more than any other closely contested state. So when public and private polls suggested the start of a slide toward Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush stormed in to try to halt the slide, and the vice president arrived to try to keep the momentum going. ''No question about it,'' Gov. Tom Ridge, a Bush confidant, said in an interview. ''Gore got a huge bump out of his party's convention. It was very surprising, an enigma to me. But I'll tell you, we're not in such bad shape. Even or a few points behind, running against the vice president when times are good, a strong economy and no war -- sign me up, I'll take a shot.'' Mr. Ridge said he thought Mr. Bush needed to ''maximize voters' chances to see him personally, because he's the more likable of the two candidates, close up.'' Mr. Bush seems to be moving in that direction, with his staff's promises on Thursday to hold town meetings like the ones he held in the primaries. What Mr. Ridge did not say, but virtually every other politician in the state has been saying for weeks, is that Mr. Bush has been handicapped by his vice-presidential choice. Had he chosen Mr. Ridge, the pros here say, he would have won the state with ease and gained in other states that are witnessing hand-to-hand political combat this fall, like Michigan. Under pressure for weeks to state a detailed position on prescription drugs, Mr. Bush did so on his visits to Allentown and Scranton, proposing a plan that would rely much more heavily than Mr. Gore's on the states and on the big health care providers. Mr. Ridge had been among those pressing him in private conversations, and he enthusiastically supported the new Bush plan. Pennsylvania already has the largest state prescription drug program, paid for by state lottery money; it will cost $290 million this year. Mindful of the need to attract uncommitted voters, who here as elsewhere tend to be turned off by excessive partisanship, Mr. Bush repeatedly promised a bipartisan approach to the health care problem and mentioned Democratic senators with whom he said he could work well, like John B. Breaux of Louisiana. ''We are in a very critical week,'' said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School of Communication at the University of Pennsylvania, which studies news coverage. ''The question is, will Bush get the traction he needs on this issue? The proposals are complicated, but what emerges from the media is pretty simple: Both have plans now; Gore would spend more money.'' Mr. Bush did something else here that could have a considerable impact among the large numbers of Roman Catholic voters in Scranton and Wilkes-Barre, most of whom strongly oppose abortion, as does Mr. Bush. There are no abortion clinics in Lackawanna County (Scranton) or Luzerne County (Wilkes-Barre). Although he said nothing publicly about abortion, Mr. Bush paid a well-publicized 40-minute call on Bishop James C. Timlin of Scranton. The bishop, an outspoken opponent of abortion, said afterward that the visit had nothing to do with politics. But it certainly sent a message, especially since he had forbidden a planned appearance this year by Mr. Gore, an abortion rights supporter, at the Catholic Mercy Hospital here. ''This means the church has given its tacit approval to Bush,'' said Steve Corbett, a columnist for The News-Leader in Wilkes-Barre. ''That's how people will interpret it. You're in the heart of anti-abortion country.'' This area is not nearly as populous, of course, as Philadelphia or Pittsburgh. But it is closely balanced in partisan terms. Representative Donald L. Sherwood, whose district is centered on Scranton, won by only 515 votes in 1996, defeating Patrick Casey, a son of former Gov. Robert Casey and a brother of the state auditor, Robert Casey Jr. Mr. Casey, a Democrat, is running again, which should guarantee a big turnout and a close presidential contest in a district that President Clinton won in 1996 but lost to President George Bush in 1992. ''This election is about two things,'' said Prof. G. Terry Madonna of Millersville University. ''Can Gore hold onto the socially conservative working-class Catholics in the hard-coal country in the northeast and the soft-coal country in the southwest, the ones you call Reagan Democrats and we call Casey Democrats? And can Bush hold onto the weakly leaning Republicans, fiscally conservative but not antigovernment, in the suburban counties around Philadelphia, especially the well-educated women?'' A poll taken for KDKA-TV in Pittsburgh on Sept. 5 and 6 and released on Thursday put Mr. Gore at 53 percent and Mr. Bush at 42 percent, with 4 percent opting for other candidates and 1 percent undecided. The survey questioned 800 likely voters, pushing them to state a preference even if they were unsure; the margin of sampling error was plus or minus 3.5 percentage points. Professor Madonna, a pollster himself, said he thought Mr. Gore's lead was more like four to six percentage points. He said that because he did not believe the race had settled yet, he had delayed a new poll until later this month. All the polls show big gender gaps. A poll taken for another western Pennsylvania television station, WPXI, indicates that Mr. Gore's entire margin comes from women. And they all show Mr. Bush fading in the pivotal suburban counties that surround Philadelphia -- Bucks, Montgomery, Delaware and Chester. Neil Oxman, a Democratic campaign consultant in Philadelphia, said the Republican National Convention, held there, was the catalyst. Polls Mr. Oxman has taken for local and regional candidates, he said, show that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have consolidated 92 to 93 percent of their bases, which yields Mr. Gore a significant advantage, given the big Democratic registration edge. Mr. Bush was doing nicely, he said, ''and then bam! this yawning gender gap opens up, and you suddenly have Gore running strongly in the Main Line, especially among the moderate and upscale women there.'' With that constituency, abortion is hurting Mr. Bush, Ms. Jamieson of the Annenberg School said. Although he mentioned the subject only briefly in his acceptance speech, she said, his position, the platform position and that of Mr. Cheney were all discussed at length in the local news media during the convention. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS  Correction:  September 12, 2000, Tuesday  An article on Sunday about the importance of Pennsylvania in the presidential race misstated the name of the Wilkes-Barre newspaper in which a columnist, Steve Corbett, wrote about a meeting between George W. Bush and Bishop James C. Timlin of Scranton. It is The Times Leader, not The News-Leader. An article on Sunday about the importance of Pennsylvania in the presidential race misstated the name of the Wilkes-Barre newspaper in which a columnist, Steve Corbett, wrote about a meeting between George W. Bush and Bishop James C. Timlin of Scranton. It is The Times Leader, not The News-Leader.
 In Brooklyn, Msgr. John J. Powis finds the change painful. ''There's even a feeling they're just waiting for us to go,'' said Monsignor Powis, whose life in the church has included community organizing for many improvements, including subsidized housing and street lights in Brownsville and Bushwick, Brooklyn.
 William Safire On Language column on Vice Pres Al Gore's use of phrase 'old guard' and his and Republican leadership's use of phrase 'class warfare' (M) 'Let others argue the case for the old guard,'' Al Gore said in his Los Angeles acceptance speech. ''We're the new guard.'' 'Let others argue the case for the old guard,'' Al Gore said in his Los Angeles acceptance speech. ''We're the new guard.'' That is the current sense. Aware of this, a conservative Republican group in the 1970's, the Young Americans for Freedom, named its publication The New Guard. But in political terminology, anything can be freely swiped. In this case, that is what the creative Gore word-slingers seeking to keep the Democrats in office have done in their coordinated effort to derogate the freshness of the Bush challenge. ''Al Gore launched out talking about populism,'' charged Karl Rove, Governor Bush's chief campaign strategist, ''about class warfare.'' The next day, on the stump, the G.O.P. standard-bearer himself denounced his opponent as ''a candidate who wants to wage class warfare to get ahead.'' Unfortunately, much of the sting in the charge was lost because Bush was seen and heard on television pronouncing the phrase as ''class war fore,'' inviting derision. Willkie Lives  After Al Gore denounced the old guard and other powerful interests, the relatively moderate Joe Lieberman was asked if the Democratic proposals would cause him to take a populist line. ''Political rallies tend not to be places for extremely thoughtful argument,'' he told The Wall Street Journal. Rather, he said that the Gore policy proposals were ''quite moderate'' and added, ''You have some rhetorical flourishes.''
