 Nation's senior military commanders tell Congress that armed services need significant increase in spending in years ahead, suggesting amounts that would exceed what has been proposed by either major presidential candidate and consume large parts of projected budget surplus; chiefs set stage for what will be contentious fight over nation's spending priorities no matter whether Vice Pres Al Gore or Gov Geroge Bush is elected; photo (M) Instead, the chiefs outlined what amounted to their argument over how to use much of the budget surplus, setting the stage for what will certainly be a contentious fight over the nation's spending priorities no matter whether Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George Bush is elected. In their campaigns, both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have proposed more modest increases than those the chiefs outlined. Mr. Bush has called for spending $4.5 billion more a year, while Mr. Gore has called for about $8 billion more a year.
 Gov George W Bush concludes three days of education events with visit to parochial school in Los Angeles's heavily Hispanic South-Central section, talking about reading, character education and discipline; Bush does not mention school vouchers, although voucherlike proposal is integral part of his plan to push public schools to be more accountable for student achievement; Bush declines to use word voucher, suggesting he considers word loaded with bad connotations; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush concluded three days of education events today with a visit to a parochial school in this city's heavily Hispanic South-Central section, talking about reading, character education and discipline. But there was one issue Mr. Bush did not so much as mention: school vouchers. That Mr. Bush, the Republican candidate for president, would avoid discussing at a Catholic school a policy that many Catholic parents staunchly support -- and that he has endorsed -- spoke volumes about the way he has been campaigning on the education issue this week. Gov. George W. Bush concluded three days of education events today with a visit to a parochial school in this city's heavily Hispanic South-Central section, talking about reading, character education and discipline. But there was one issue Mr. Bush did not so much as mention: school vouchers. That Mr. Bush, the Republican candidate for president, would avoid discussing at a Catholic school a policy that many Catholic parents staunchly support -- and that he has endorsed -- spoke volumes about the way he has been campaigning on the education issue this week. On Monday, Mr. Bush's aides distributed a 16-page pamphlet on his education agenda that does not use the words school vouchers. On Tuesday afternoon, when asked if he supported vouchers, Mr. Bush sidestepped the issue by saying the decision should be left to state and local officials. And on Tuesday evening, when Larry King asked him on his CNN program whether he thought vouchers worked, Mr. Bush replied, ''I'm not positive.'' From his extraordinarily careful handling of the issue, one might conclude that Mr. Bush harbored deep reservations about vouchers. But in fact, a voucherlike proposal is an integral part of his plan to push public schools to be more accountable for student achievement. That is the widely accepted definition of a voucher, yet Mr. Bush declines to use the word, suggesting that he considers it loaded with bad connotations. Instead, he and his running mate, Dick Cheney, emphasize the concept of choice. Their plan, they say, would provide poor children trapped in bad schools a range of options normally available only to the more affluent, such as hiring tutors, transferring to other public schools or attending private schools. ''A voucher connotes that you want everybody to take the money and flee into the private world,'' said B. Alexander Kress, an education adviser to Mr. Bush. ''I think the governor is of the notion that the problems will be fixed by the public schools. But if they aren't, then there are these other options.'' But aides to Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, contend that Mr. Bush is running away from a contentious policy that they say is widely opposed by the moderate swing voters, particularly women, he is assiduously  courting. Mr. Bush ''realizes most Americans don't agree with vouchers,'' asserted Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign. ''That's why they don't use the word vouchers for what is a voucher plan.'' Mr. Gore strongly opposes taxpayer-financed vouchers, arguing that they drain public aid away from the schools that need it most. That is also the position of the powerful teachers unions that are expected to provide important support in getting out the Democratic vote in November. Viewed more broadly, Mr. Bush's approach to vouchers is similar to his handling of a number of contentious conservative policies. Mr. Bush has won support from groups like the National Rifle Association and the National Right to Life Committee by opposing most forms of gun control and by vowing to sign legislation outlawing the procedure known by opponents as partial-birth abortion. Yet he rarely discusses those views on the stump. During a week in which Mr. Bush focused on education, hammering at Mr. Gore's policies and warning of an ''education recession,'' his avoidance of the word, or even the concept, of vouchers was often striking. The pamphlet his campaign issued on Monday, titled ''Ending the Education Recession,'' says that Mr. Bush of Texas would give parents ''real options -- like tutoring or the ability to transfer to another school,'' avoiding any mention that the money could be used for private or parochial schools. At a public high school in Redwood City, Calif., on Tuesday, a student asked Mr. Bush how he felt about vouchers. Mr. Bush never acknowledged that he supported the concept. Later on Tuesday, during his interview on ''Larry King Live,'' Mr. Bush said, ''I'm not positive vouchers work.'' But, he continued, ''I think we ought to try them.''
 Some campaign finance experts and aides to Gov George W Bush say recent Gore-Lieberman campaign solicitation is misleading and possibly runs afoul of federal election law; at issue is letter suggesting that donation to obscure fund that is supposed to pay only for legal and accounting costs will help Gore-Lieberman campaign attack Republicans; spokesman for Gore campaign says solicitations are not deceptive (M) The Gore-Lieberman campaign is raising millions of dollars for an obscure fund that is supposed to pay only for legal and accounting costs and not television advertisements or other political costs. But recent solicitation letters for the fund suggest that a donation to it will help the Gore-Lieberman campaign attack the Republicans, leading some campaign finance experts and Bush aides to say the messages are misleading and run afoul of federal election law. The Gore-Lieberman campaign is raising millions of dollars for an obscure fund that is supposed to pay only for legal and accounting costs and not television advertisements or other political costs. But recent solicitation letters for the fund suggest that a donation to it will help the Gore-Lieberman campaign attack the Republicans, leading some campaign finance experts and Bush aides to say the messages are misleading and run afoul of federal election law. In a pair of letters sent to supporters, including one sent this week, Mr. Gore says that contributions of $1,000 or less to the fund will be used to ''expose the Bush-Cheney voting record.'' ''The Republicans are working hard to cloud their record and their real views,'' Mr. Gore writes in one message. ''The campaign urgently needs your support to expose their real agenda.'' Aides to Gov. George W. Bush accused the vice president's campaign today of using the fund-raising solicitation messages to ''mislead contributors'' about how the money would be spent and ''attempting to skirt federal campaign spending limits.'' ''The vice president, after his protestations that he would be the messenger for campaign finance reform, has found a shady way to circumvent federal election spending limits, an apparent violation of F.E.C. regulations,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''These are deceptive fund-raising solicitations.'' Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said the solicitations were not deceptive and were entirely legal. He stressed that a computerized link in the messages, which were sent by e-mail, leads the reader directly to another computerized page that allows the use of a credit-card to make a donation of up to $1,000. On that page, a disclaimer required by the F.E.C. appears, stating the contributions to the General Election Legal and Accounting Compliance Fund, also known as Gelac (pronounced GEE-lak), will be used to pay the Gore-Lieberman campaign's lawyers and accountants. But some experts on federal election law were troubled that the message strongly implies that the money will help the Gore-Lieberman ticket pay for issue advertisements. Mr. Gore's presidential exploratory committee began raising money for the Gelac in January 1999. The committee has already taken in more than $7 million and spent $547,700 on fund-raising consultants and direct-mail costs, F.E.C. records show. Mr. Fabiani said all of that money was spent on Gelac solicitations, which federal election guidelines permit. For his Gelac, Mr. Bush has raised $4.3 million and spent $68,193 on fund-raising costs. Last month and earlier this month, the Gore-Lieberman campaign sent, by e-mail, at least four letters seeking donations to the committee. A spokesman for the Bush-Cheney campaign said the campaign was considering whether to file a complaint with the F.E.C. Ian Striton, an F.E.C. spokesman, declined to say if the agency was examining the Gore-Lieberman Gelac solicitations. ''The campaigns are audited after the election to check out what has occurred within the fund,'' Mr. Striton said. When the Bush and Gore campaigns in August accepted $67.5 million federal taxpayer dollars to pay for the general election campaigns, the candidates vowed not to raise any more ''hard money,'' the $1,000 checks from individuals. But the Gelac committees can continue to raise donations of $1,000 from individuals to pay for legal and accounting costs, even from contributors who have already given the legal limit of $1,000 to the candidates' primary campaigns. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: FUND-RAISING  Correction:  September 29, 2000, Friday  An article yesterday about accusations by the Bush campaign that the Gore campaign sent out misleading solicitation letters for a fund for legal and accounting expenses misspelled the surname of a spokesman for the Federal Election Commission, who declined to say whether the agency was examining the solicitations. He is Ian Stirton, not Striton. An article yesterday about accusations by the Bush campaign that the Gore campaign sent out misleading solicitation letters for a fund for legal and accounting expenses misspelled the surname of a spokesman for the Federal Election Commission, who declined to say whether the agency was examining the solicitations. He is Ian Stirton, not Striton.
 But if Mr. Matheson is elected and  follows through on his campaign promises, House Democrats should not necessarily count on blind loyalty from him. For example, he says he does not support the registration and licensing of guns, a proposal Vice President Al Gore favors and most Republicans oppose, and he contends that Mr. Gore's plan to include prescription medicine as a Medicare benefit may be too expensive. For Mr. Matheson, the accent on policy, not politics, is vital to win support from the fast-growing number of suburban voters in a district that President George Bush and Bob Dole carried in the last two presidential elections and Gov. George. W. Bush of Texas is expected to win this year.
 Soft-Money Spending Outstrips Campaigns' Own  Republican and Democratic Party organizations are far outspending both special interest groups and the Bush and Gore campaigns on television in the presidential election. Political analysts say the trend is transforming the parties and their soft-money donors this year from supporting players into full partners in the advertising efforts. The Gore campaign is raising millions for an obscure fund limited to paying for legal and accounting costs. But recent solicitation letters for the fund suggest a donation will help the campaign attack Republicans, causing some campaign finance experts and Bush aides to say the messages are misleading and run afoul of federal election law. Vice President Al Gore challenged Gov. George W. Bush to agree to ban the use of unregulated party money on television and radio advertising for the rest of the presidential campaign. The night before, Mr. Bush told Larry King in a CNN interview that he was unlikely to agree to such a pact because he did not trust the Democrats to abide by it. Soft-Money Spending Outstrips Campaigns' Own  Republican and Democratic Party organizations are far outspending both special interest groups and the Bush and Gore campaigns on television in the presidential election. Political analysts say the trend is transforming the parties and their soft-money donors this year from supporting players into full partners in the advertising efforts. The Gore campaign is raising millions for an obscure fund limited to paying for legal and accounting costs. But recent solicitation letters for the fund suggest a donation will help the campaign attack Republicans, causing some campaign finance experts and Bush aides to say the messages are misleading and run afoul of federal election law. Vice President Al Gore challenged Gov. George W. Bush to agree to ban the use of unregulated party money on television and radio advertising for the rest of the presidential campaign. The night before, Mr. Bush told Larry King in a CNN interview that he was unlikely to agree to such a pact because he did not trust the Democrats to abide by it.
 Pre-conventions, George W. Bush led by 17 points; post-conventions, Al Gore took the lead. Last week most major polls had Gore breezing to victory; this week, it's Bush edging him out. Pre-conventions, George W. Bush led by 17 points; post-conventions, Al Gore took the lead. Last week most major polls had Gore breezing to victory; this week, it's Bush edging him out. Is the American majority really switching every few days? Did Gore's Kiss change tens of millions of minds? This week The Washington Times headlined ''Bush Surges Ahead of Gore After Chats With Oprah and Regis.'' Was a 13-point lead in the previous, wacky, Newsweek poll really all but erased by a Bush counter smooch on Oprah's cheek? So I called John Zogby and laid on him my irate view of the abuse of  polling. He in turn gave me this insight: ''Since 1998, we have evidence that voters are more likely to reject the views of all pundits.'' Why do I need to know that? ''If you want to help Bush -- attack him.''
 Government Still Has Economic Role  George W. Bush has made government a campaign issue, arguing that as president he would continue to tame Washington. But the oversimplified fear of big government has been damaging. The next president should realize that both business and government have vital roles. Jeff Madrick: Economic Scene. [C2.]
 GENTLE RIBBING BY GORE -- Like many politicians, Vice President Al Gore has a long memory. On a trip to Iowa yesterday, it stretched back to last winter when Mr. Gore was campaigning against former Senator Bill Bradley. Iowa's Democratic governor, Tom Vilsack, remained studiously neutral, while his wife, Christie, enthusiastically backed Mr. Gore. During a speech at a community center in Altoona yesterday, Mr. Gore acknowledged the presence of Mr. Vilsack, who now travels regularly with the vice president on his visits to the state. ''I'm looking forward to seeing Christie a little bit later,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Now, I'm glad to see you, Governor. But I've never let him forget that Christie had just a little bit better political judgment.'' During Mr. Gore's discussion on Medicare, 79-year-old Winifred Skinner, a retiree from Des Moines, rose to tell Mr. Gore that she collects aluminum cans several hours a day because her Social Security and pension benefits will not pay for both her living expenses and her prescription costs of $230 a month. ''How much do you earn a week?'' Mr. Gore asked. ''You're not going to tell the government, are you?'' Ms. Skinner answered, sending both Mr. Gore and the audience into convulsions of laughter. BIG MONEY NIGHT -- With Election Day now less than six weeks off, fund-raising is more frenetic than ever. Just last night, Vice President Al Gore raised more than $3.5 million for the Democratic National Committee, bringing his total take for the party in the last 16 days to nearly $25 million and his total take since January to more than $65 million. Mr. Gore attended two events, starting with a reception at a downtown Washington hotel for the Women's Leadership Forum. More than 800 people, paying $125 each, contributed about $500,000. He then took his motorcade to a dinner at the Washington home of Senator John D. Rockefeller IV, the West Virginia Democrat, where about 300 people, paying a minimum of $5,000 each, contributed more than $3 million. THE TRAVEL LOG  Al Gore continued his swing through the Midwest, talking health care in Iowa and questioning George W. Bush's commitment to improving the system. Mr. Bush, meanwhile, continued to work the West Coast, talking education in Los Angeles and questioning Mr. Gore's commitment to improvement. At the end of the day, both headed for home, Mr. Bush back to Austin and Mr. Gore back to Washington. Length of the Official Day: Gore, 14 hours; Bush, 12 1/2 hours  States Visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 2  Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 3; Bush, 2  Events: Gore, 3; Bush, 4  Press Conferences/Interviews: Gore, 13; Bush, 6  Debate preparation: Gore, 0 hours; Bush, 2 1/2 hours  Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush, 0  Main message: Gore, strengthening Medicare; Bush, strengthening schools.
 Overwhelmed by the competing proposals in a tight presidential race, Michael Horst grabbed a sheet of paper during the evening news the other night and drew a line down the middle. He wrote ''Gore'' on the left, ''Bush'' on the right, and then rated the candidates' positions, drawing a plus sign in the Bush column next to capital punishment and a minus sign next to the Texas governor's education record. Overwhelmed by the competing proposals in a tight presidential race, Michael Horst grabbed a sheet of paper during the evening news the other night and drew a line down the middle. He wrote ''Gore'' on the left, ''Bush'' on the right, and then rated the candidates' positions, drawing a plus sign in the Bush column next to capital punishment and a minus sign next to the Texas governor's education record. Having voted for George Bush in 1988 and Bill Clinton in 1992 and 1996,  Mr. Obsniuk said he was undecided between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. But he said that his assessment of the economy, and of which candidate presented the best chance for continued prosperity, would drive his thinking. Mr. Beahon, a likely Bush voter who has barred his two younger children from watching adult-oriented cartoons like ''The Simpsons'' and ''South Park,'' said he had gotten pretty good at navigating the music Web site Napster. When someone left a note on the front door for his 13-year-old son, Stephen, imploring him to ''Get Your Roll On,'' Mr. Beahon was puzzled. Stephen told his dad that his friend was using the title of a song by a rap act called Big Tymers to urge him to get going to a party. In a community where many residents work in the skilled trades or middle management at auto plants in surrounding communities, few of those interviewed said they recognized the name of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, Mr. Gore's running mate. Another parent, Tracy Hart, 34, whose presidential vote see-sawed from Michael S. Dukakis, a Democrat, in 1988, to George Bush in 1992 and then to President Clinton in 1996, was one of the few people interviewed here who lamented that the issue of sex and violence in Hollywood was ''not one of the major issues on the forefront, in terms of the campaign.''
 Republican and Democratic Party organizations, using soft money, are outspending special interest groups and Bush and Gore campaigns on television in presidential elections, according to researchers monitoring paid political advertising; in previous campaigns, candidates' campaign organizations paid for majority of their commercials and spent far more money than parties; use of soft money--unregulated party donations by corporations and wealthy individuals--has become issue, and Vice Pres Al Gore has challenged Gov George W Bush to accept ban on soft money in campaign advertising; Bush says he does not favor soft money restrictions because he does not trust Democrats to abide by them; study on television spending by Brennan Center for Justice at NYU Law School shows that from June 1 to Sept 20, two parties spent more than $52 million on commercials, while Bush and Gore campaigns spent $21 million (M) Both the Republican and Democratic Party organizations, using soft money, are outspending special interest groups and the Bush and Gore campaigns on television in the presidential elections, say researchers monitoring paid political advertising. Both the Republican and Democratic Party organizations, using soft money, are outspending special interest groups and the Bush and Gore campaigns on television in the presidential elections, say researchers monitoring paid political advertising. The use of soft money has become an issue in many of the highest profile political campaigns, including the New York Senate race, where Hillary Rodham Clinton and Representative Rick A. Lazio have tentatively agreed to a ban on soft money in campaign advertising. Yesterday, Vice President Al Gore, in response to a call by two senators for similar limits in the presidential race, challenged Gov. George W. Bush to accept such a ban. [Page A23.] Mr. Bush has said he does not favor soft money restrictions because he does not trust the Democrats to abide by them. The latest indication that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are using the national parties as their major advertisers for this year came in a study on television spending yesterday by the Brennan Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law. The report showed that from June 1 to Sept. 20, the two parties had spent more than $52 million on commercials, while the Bush and Gore campaigns had spent less than half that, about $21 million. This year, however, the parties have shown no sign of letting up. Brennan Center researchers found that in the seven days that ended Sept. 20, the two parties were still the biggest spenders: The Republican Party spent nearly $2.3 million on television that week, or $300,000 more than the Bush campaign. The Democratic Party, meanwhile, spent $1.8 million, or about $700,000 more than the Gore campaign. Special interest groups spent a total of about $1.1 million on the two candidates across the country. Although officials on both sides maintain that the parties and campaigns operate independently, others acknowledge privately that the issue of which entity is spending the money has become meaningless. Last month for example, the Republican National Committee withdrew a commercial questioning Mr. Gore's veracity after Mr. Bush objected to it, even though some of his advisers had wanted it to run. Neither party disputed the Brennan Center's findings, but some officials cautioned that the portrait of spending could change as Election Day draws nearer, and the campaigns more aggressively spend the remainder of the $67 million in federal money, or hard money, each has been allocated for the fall campaign. The Brennan Center study noted that the Bush campaign has spent $13 million on television since June 1, and the Gore campaign $8 million.
 GEORGE W. BUSH has finally made government the issue of the presidential campaign. After wasting months focusing on Al Gore's character, he returned to what was always the Republicans' meat and potatoes. As president, Vice President Gore would give you big government, Governor Bush now emphasizes. But if voters elect him instead, Mr. Bush says, he would continue to tame Washington. Mr. Bush is picking up, of course, from the legacy of Ronald Reagan, who was determined to bench government as long as he could. President Reagan helped make entrepreneurialism and profits respectable again, which was no small achievement. And some deflation of government was no doubt deserved. In the 1960's and 1970's, advocates of progressive actions underestimated how difficult such tasks as reducing poverty and revitalizing the inner cities really were, and did not take sufficient care to develop new policies that would be effective. Americans also overestimated the nation's potential affluence. Remember guns and butter? GEORGE W. BUSH has finally made government the issue of the presidential campaign. After wasting months focusing on Al Gore's character, he returned to what was always the Republicans' meat and potatoes. As president, Vice President Gore would give you big government, Governor Bush now emphasizes. But if voters elect him instead, Mr. Bush says, he would continue to tame Washington. Mr. Bush is picking up, of course, from the legacy of Ronald Reagan, who was determined to bench government as long as he could. President Reagan helped make entrepreneurialism and profits respectable again, which was no small achievement. And some deflation of government was no doubt deserved. In the 1960's and 1970's, advocates of progressive actions underestimated how difficult such tasks as reducing poverty and revitalizing the inner cities really were, and did not take sufficient care to develop new policies that would be effective. Americans also overestimated the nation's potential affluence. Remember guns and butter?
 Public Lives column; former NYC Mayor Ed Koch discusses his contribtions to campaign of Hillary Rodham Clinton for Senate and Vice Pres Al Gore for President; list of those named living landmarks by Landmarks Conservancy; Jaid Barrymore, mother of actress Drew Barrymore, pleads guilty to weapons possession charges (M) As for why he decided to send money to the Gore-Lieberman campaign, he said: ''On the issues, the Democrats are going to cream the Republicans, and I believe there will be an across-the-board victory, both houses, Gore, Lieberman and Hillary. But it can't come true unless they get their message out. I don't want Gore to have to go to any more Buddhist temples to raise money. I want him to spend mine.''
 Enrique Miravala is killed in street in Bushwick section of Brooklyn after being struck by stray bullet (M) Enrique Miravala, known to all as Flaco, was a fixture at the corner of Wilson Avenue and Palmetto Street in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. A gentle, sometimes homeless alcoholic, 54 years old, he repaired cars expertly, swept storefronts and ran errands, earning beer money and the affection of his neighbors. Enrique Miravala, known to all as Flaco, was a fixture at the corner of Wilson Avenue and Palmetto Street in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. A gentle, sometimes homeless alcoholic, 54 years old, he repaired cars expertly, swept storefronts and ran errands, earning beer money and the affection of his neighbors. Mr. Martinez, of Stanhope Street in Bushwick, was charged with second-degree murder, reckless endangerment and weapons possession, said Jerry Varson, a police spokesman.
 Janet Maslin reviews Gore Vidal novel The Golden Age; photo (M) THE GOLDEN AGE  By Gore Vidal  467 pages. Doubleday. $27.5O. Thirty-three years after he began his series of interlocking historical novels with ''Washington, D.C.,'' Gore Vidal has done something curious: revisited the characters and events of that first installment with a perspective now altered by age and time. THE GOLDEN AGE  By Gore Vidal  467 pages. Doubleday. $27.5O. Thirty-three years after he began his series of interlocking historical novels with ''Washington, D.C.,'' Gore Vidal has done something curious: revisited the characters and events of that first installment with a perspective now altered by age and time. It should surprise no one that the tangential figure who is most memorably summoned here is Mr. Vidal himself, in the midst of enjoying a golden age of his own. The book postulates that the years between 1945 and 1950 were a hurricane's eye of promise and peacetime between World War II and the cold war. They were also the years in which the author made his auspicious arrival on the literary scene with ''Williwaw'' (1946) and especially ''The City and the Pillar'' (1948), and he glides into the proceedings with winking assurance. ''My mother insists that Gore writes just like Shakespeare,'' says one character at a party. And with this, ''Vidal shook his head sadly. 'I could never manage those rhyming couplets at the end of scenes.' ''
 A new Web feature lets you compare TV commercials and pick a candidate: Ike or Adlai. The Living Room Candidate, an online version of a 1992 exhibition at the American Museum of the Moving Image (ammi.org), has compiled television campaign ads for presidential elections from 1952 to the present. The highlights include campy cartoons from the 1952 Eisenhower-Stevenson race and infamous attack ads from the campaigns of Lyndon B. Johnson (the ad that showed a little girl picking the petals of a daisy -- until a nuclear bomb exploded) and George Bush (the Willie Horton ad). The Desktop Candidate area links to sites with TV ads from the 2000 race and archives with the 1996 campaigns' online efforts. Carl Goodman, the museum's curator of digital media, said visitors could examine ''parallels between how politicians started to use the then-new medium of television and the kind of baby steps that are being taken now on the Internet.'' A new Web feature lets you compare TV commercials and pick a candidate: Ike or Adlai. The Living Room Candidate, an online version of a 1992 exhibition at the American Museum of the Moving Image (ammi.org), has compiled television campaign ads for presidential elections from 1952 to the present. The highlights include campy cartoons from the 1952 Eisenhower-Stevenson race and infamous attack ads from the campaigns of Lyndon B. Johnson (the ad that showed a little girl picking the petals of a daisy -- until a nuclear bomb exploded) and George Bush (the Willie Horton ad). The Desktop Candidate area links to sites with TV ads from the 2000 race and archives with the 1996 campaigns' online efforts. Carl Goodman, the museum's curator of digital media, said visitors could examine ''parallels between how politicians started to use the then-new medium of television and the kind of baby steps that are being taken now on the Internet.''
 We're entering the cold season. Tapping America's oil reserves might have been inadvisable some months ago, as Vice President Al Gore said then, but now is the right time. A frozen populace is not in America's security interest, and the release includes a replenishment provision.
 Appraisal of new commercial being broadcast by Gore-Lieberman campaign; photo (M) The Gore-Lieberman campaign began broadcasting a new commercial, titled ''Veteran,'' this week that highlights stands on several issues, including tax cuts, welfare, child support and Internet pornography, that are the kinds Republicans have used in the past against Democrats. It is being broadcast in 17 swing states, although the Gore campaign would not identify them. ON THE SCREEN -- The 30-second commercial begins with a black and white picture of a young Al Gore in Vietnam and then switches to color footage of Mr. Gore with his family and with his wife, Tipper, and campaigning. It then moves to color footage of workers and families. THE SCRIPT -- ''Vietnam veteran. Father of four. Married 30 years. Al Gore will fight for families. Tax cuts for middle-class families including a $10,000-a-year tax deduction for college tuition. Continue welfare reform with time limits, work requirements. Force deadbeat parents to take responsibility for their children. A crime victims' bill of rights to protect victims, not just criminals. Fight violence and pornography on the Internet, helping parents block out what children shouldn't see. Al Gore. He'll put his values to work for us.'' ACCURACY -- Mr. Gore does have proposals in the areas he mentions, and President Clinton did sign an overhaul of the welfare system into law in 1996, establishing time limits. Republicans argue that in several cases their proposals are tougher or more rigorous than Mr. Gore's. What Mr. Gore does not say is that his $500 billion tax relief plan would not help all middle-class families. It is intended to give tax relief for certain social goals; to benefit, a family must meet certain criteria, like having a parent in long-term care or a child in college or a child in day care. SCORE CARD -- Although this Gore advertisement is ostensibly about individual issues, its real purpose is signaled in its tag line, ''He'll put his values to work for us.'' Republicans are traditionally viewed as more mainstream on cultural and social values than Democrats, and that perception was only strengthened by the president's affair with a White House intern. Without ever mentioning Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore distances himself from him somewhat in this commercial. He mentions his service in Vietnam. (Neither Mr. Clinton nor Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, served in Vietnam.) And by boasting of his 30-year marriage, Mr. Gore emphasizes that he is a family man. The issues the advertisement covers -- tax cutting, welfare, child support, crime and fighting pornography -- are ones the Republicans had been capitalizing on for years until Mr. Clinton began to move his party to the center and stole some of their thunder. This shows Mr. Gore also setting down markers to fight off accusations that he is a big spender or that he is soft on crime or welfare. The Gore-Lieberman campaign began broadcasting a new commercial, titled ''Veteran,'' this week that highlights stands on several issues, including tax cuts, welfare, child support and Internet pornography, that are the kinds Republicans have used in the past against Democrats. It is being broadcast in 17 swing states, although the Gore campaign would not identify them. ON THE SCREEN -- The 30-second commercial begins with a black and white picture of a young Al Gore in Vietnam and then switches to color footage of Mr. Gore with his family and with his wife, Tipper, and campaigning. It then moves to color footage of workers and families. THE SCRIPT -- ''Vietnam veteran. Father of four. Married 30 years. Al Gore will fight for families. Tax cuts for middle-class families including a $10,000-a-year tax deduction for college tuition. Continue welfare reform with time limits, work requirements. Force deadbeat parents to take responsibility for their children. A crime victims' bill of rights to protect victims, not just criminals. Fight violence and pornography on the Internet, helping parents block out what children shouldn't see. Al Gore. He'll put his values to work for us.'' ACCURACY -- Mr. Gore does have proposals in the areas he mentions, and President Clinton did sign an overhaul of the welfare system into law in 1996, establishing time limits. Republicans argue that in several cases their proposals are tougher or more rigorous than Mr. Gore's. What Mr. Gore does not say is that his $500 billion tax relief plan would not help all middle-class families. It is intended to give tax relief for certain social goals; to benefit, a family must meet certain criteria, like having a parent in long-term care or a child in college or a child in day care. SCORE CARD -- Although this Gore advertisement is ostensibly about individual issues, its real purpose is signaled in its tag line, ''He'll put his values to work for us.'' Republicans are traditionally viewed as more mainstream on cultural and social values than Democrats, and that perception was only strengthened by the president's affair with a White House intern. Without ever mentioning Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore distances himself from him somewhat in this commercial. He mentions his service in Vietnam. (Neither Mr. Clinton nor Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, served in Vietnam.) And by boasting of his 30-year marriage, Mr. Gore emphasizes that he is a family man. The issues the advertisement covers -- tax cutting, welfare, child support, crime and fighting pornography -- are ones the Republicans had been capitalizing on for years until Mr. Clinton began to move his party to the center and stole some of their thunder. This shows Mr. Gore also setting down markers to fight off accusations that he is a big spender or that he is soft on crime or welfare.
 Three new nationwide polls show Gov George W Bush has regained some of ground he lost to Vice Pres Al Gore in their presidential race; Bush now seems to have edge in at least two of polls, but fact is that no one is ahead; when polls are looked at together, presidential race is so close that it is impossible to give either candidate an edge (M) After watching his opponent's popularity rise in the polls over the last month, Gov. George W. Bush got a dose of good news over the last few days. The momentum is now his, with three new nationwide polls showing that he has regained some of the ground he lost to Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Bush seems to have the edge in at least two of the polls. But is it real? After watching his opponent's popularity rise in the polls over the last month, Gov. George W. Bush got a dose of good news over the last few days. The momentum is now his, with three new nationwide polls showing that he has regained some of the ground he lost to Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Bush seems to have the edge in at least two of the polls. But is it real? Mr. Bush got his most encouraging news from The Los Angeles Times, which reported yesterday that thanks to a 22-point advantage among men, Mr. Bush was now leading Mr. Gore, 48 percent to 42 percent. But since the margin of sampling error is plus or minus four percentage points, the findings have to be considered a statistical tie. Yesterday, the Gallup/CNN/USA Today poll reported a nationwide telephone tracking poll taken Sept. 24-26, with 696 likely voters. Mr. Gore was the choice of 44 percent of the respondents, while Mr. Bush was the choice of 46 percent. Princeton Survey Research Associates took a nationwide telephone poll for Newsweek from Sept. 20 to 22 with 766 likely voters. In that poll Mr. Gore was the choice of 47 percent and Mr. Bush was the choice of 45 percent. Like the Los Angeles Times poll, the two have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. When the polls are averaged, Mr. Gore has 44 percent and Mr. Bush has 46 percent.
 Her plan, similar in general terms to the one proposed by Vice President Al Gore, goes further than Mr. Gore's by setting aside more money for debt reduction and imposing legislative hurdles for making exceptions. According to her campaign staff's estimates, Mrs. Clinton's proposal would devote about $60 billion more over the 10 years for debt reduction than would Mr. Gore's budget-surplus plan. Mr. Gore's plan also does not require a three-fifths vote for breaking the spending and tax cut limit.
 Spokesmen for Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said their respective candidates did not have positions on the pipeline proposals.
 Vice Pres Al Gore challenges Gov George W Bush to agree to ban use of unregulated party money on television and radio advertising for rest of presidential campaign; Gore makes his offer in separate telephone calls to Sen John McCain and Sen Russell D Feingold, authors of legislation that would ban so-called soft money contributions altogether; Bush says during nationally televised interview that he is unlikely to accept such a pact because he does not trust Democrats to abide by it; Gore's offer would seem to bear little political cost, because Democrats have raised far less soft money than Republicans and because Bush all but declined before Gore announced his offer; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore challenged Gov. George W. Bush today to agree to ban the use of unregulated party money on television and radio advertising for the rest of the presidential campaign. Mr. Gore made his offer this morning in separate telephone calls to Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, the authors of legislation that would ban so-called soft money contributions altogether. On Tuesday night, Mr. Bush told CNN's Larry King in a nationally televised interview that he was unlikely to accept such a pact because he did not trust the Democrats to abide by it. Vice President Al Gore challenged Gov. George W. Bush today to agree to ban the use of unregulated party money on television and radio advertising for the rest of the presidential campaign. Mr. Gore made his offer this morning in separate telephone calls to Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, the authors of legislation that would ban so-called soft money contributions altogether. On Tuesday night, Mr. Bush told CNN's Larry King in a nationally televised interview that he was unlikely to accept such a pact because he did not trust the Democrats to abide by it. In a statement tonight, a Bush spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said, ''I just doubt that somebody who has recognized no controlling legal authority over his campaign fund-raising is going to abide by a handshake now.'' Because the Democrats have raised far less soft money than the Republicans and because Mr. Bush had all but declined before Mr. Gore announced his acceptance, the vice president's offer would seem to bear little political cost. But Mr. Feingold, in a telephone interview, said he remained hopeful that a similar agreement between Hillary Rodham Clinton and Representative Rick Lazio, the candidates for United States Senate in New York, would ultimately help press Mr. Bush to accept the deal. Mr. Gore made his offer on a campaign day when both he and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, spent considerable effort rebutting one of the very advertisements that the Democrats would propose to eliminate. After a week when some polls have shown Mr. Bush gaining ground, it was the first public indication that the Republican ads had succeeded in placing the Democrats on the defensive. ''Our message is getting through on Medicare, particularly in paid media,'' a Bush aide said. Mr. Gore's soft-money challenge to Mr. Bush builds on a similar position taken by the vice president in March, when he proposed that both campaigns forgo those contributions and campaign through frequent debates rather than television advertising. While acknowledging at the time that he was an imperfect messenger because of his role in the Clinton administration's fund-raising, Mr. Gore said he would make campaign finance reform a priority of his campaign. The Democratic ticket has been on a fund-raising tear for the last five weeks. Tonight, less than eight hours after issuing his challenge, Mr. Gore attended two fund-raisers in Washington that raised $3.5 million for the Democratic National Committee. On Tuesday, Mr. McCain and Mr. Feingold sent a letter to Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush encouraging them to join Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Lazio in swearing off advertising financed with soft money. After speaking to the two senators this morning, Mr. Gore released a letter to them announcing his acceptance. ''If the Bush-Cheney campaign will take the same action with the Republican National Committee, I will call upon the Democratic National Committee to cease all soft-money radio or television advertising that aims to influence the presidential election,'' he wrote. ''And I will also call on all independent organizations to do so as well.'' When Mr. King asked Mr. Bush whether he would accept such an arrangement, he responded, ''Probably not, but I'd have to see what it says.'' He added, ''I don't trust him, to be frank with you.'' In his appearance in Altoona and a subsequent rally in Des Moines today, Mr. Gore emphasized his prescription drug coverage plan as a means of setting the policy stage for his first debate with Mr. Bush, next Tuesday in Boston. Beginning Saturday, Mr. Gore plans to devote three days to debate preparation in Sarasota, Fla., where Mr. Gore also practiced for his 1996 vice-presidential debate with Jack F. Kemp. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman both raised objections today to the Republican Medicare advertisement, which charges that Mr. Gore's prescription drug proposal would require seniors to join ''a government H.M.O.'' New Republican mailings to elderly voters in key states make a similar charge. ''You know what that refers to?'' Mr. Gore asked today. ''That's the way they describe Medicare. There's no big government H.M.O. That's the way they describe Medicare. Medicare's not an H.M.O. You get to choose your doctor. You get to choose your pharmacy. You have the choice.''
