 In his advertisements and speeches, Mr. Kahn, 54, depicts himself as a conservative businessman considerably to the right of Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, one who supports education reform and gun rights, a touchstone in the district given Mr. Barr's membership on the board of the National Rifle Association. Mr. Kahn says he does not know whether he would have voted to impeach Mr. Clinton, and criticizes Mr. Barr not so much for the content of his crusades but for their quixotism, and the time they take from the district's business. ''If he favors government control of business, then he's clearly not a conservative, so he must be a liberal,'' said Mr. Barr, flashing his trademark dour glare. ''That would be very consistent with his intention of voting for Al Gore and accepting money from abortion groups. Now that I think about it, he's definitely a liberal.''
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column on George W Bush's awkward appearance on television program Live With Regis, illustrating that male candidates desperately seeking undecided female voters will do desperate things; also takes issue with Al Gore's often self-contradictory posturing about Hollywood as 'creepy' preview of what his administration might be like at its pandering worst (M) Not since Richard Nixon tried to prove his 60's hip bona fides by delivering a ''Sock it to me'' gag on ''Laugh-In'' has there been a shotgun marriage of show biz and politics more awkward than George W. Bush's Thursday appearance on ''Live With Regis.'' But male candidates desperately seeking undecided female voters will do desperate things. In this case, Mr. Bush -- whose co-stars on the show were a man who breaks boards over his head and the singer Sarah Brightman -- donned a dark shirt and matching tie from the ''Regis collection'' and suffered gladly the morning's Kathie Lee wannabe, the persistently dim Susan Hawk of ''Survivor.'' He at least knew better than to give her a smooch, as he had Oprah two days before in his continuing if doomed quest to make up the ground he lost after Al's Excellent Kiss. You almost have to feel for Mr. Bush. A man who by his own admission loved ''Cats'' and hasn't been to a movie theater in years, he is not exactly a slick show-biz hand. John Mellencamp and Tom Petty have even forbidden him to play their songs at rallies. But swamped by Al Gore's latest manic chat-show tour (Oprah, Letterman, Leno in 10 days) and Joe Lieberman's (Imus, Conan, Jon Stewart in 24 hours), the poor guy has no choice but to play, even if he doesn't quite get the game. How long will it be before Dick Cheney starts quipping big time with Gilbert Gottfried on ''Hollywood Squares''? Not since Richard Nixon tried to prove his 60's hip bona fides by delivering a ''Sock it to me'' gag on ''Laugh-In'' has there been a shotgun marriage of show biz and politics more awkward than George W. Bush's Thursday appearance on ''Live With Regis.'' But male candidates desperately seeking undecided female voters will do desperate things. In this case, Mr. Bush -- whose co-stars on the show were a man who breaks boards over his head and the singer Sarah Brightman -- donned a dark shirt and matching tie from the ''Regis collection'' and suffered gladly the morning's Kathie Lee wannabe, the persistently dim Susan Hawk of ''Survivor.'' He at least knew better than to give her a smooch, as he had Oprah two days before in his continuing if doomed quest to make up the ground he lost after Al's Excellent Kiss. You almost have to feel for Mr. Bush. A man who by his own admission loved ''Cats'' and hasn't been to a movie theater in years, he is not exactly a slick show-biz hand. John Mellencamp and Tom Petty have even forbidden him to play their songs at rallies. But swamped by Al Gore's latest manic chat-show tour (Oprah, Letterman, Leno in 10 days) and Joe Lieberman's (Imus, Conan, Jon Stewart in 24 hours), the poor guy has no choice but to play, even if he doesn't quite get the game. How long will it be before Dick Cheney starts quipping big time with Gilbert Gottfried on ''Hollywood Squares''? Pity Mr. Bush. He's so out of it that he may be the only politician in America, regardless of party, who has not hypocritically grandstanded about the Federal Trade Commission's ''shocking'' report that entertainment companies market violence and sex to kids. Instead of offering a glib governmental panacea to curb Hollywood excesses, Mr. Bush warned that Washington schemes to govern cultural content, ''no matter how well intended or well funded, are simply no match'' for parental supervision. Such is the fallen estate of the Bush campaign, however, that his rational stance was easily drowned out by his opponents' shameless barrage of TV clowning (take the Manischewitz shtick, please, Mr. Lieberman), moralistic sermonizing and over-the-top Radio City and Beverly Hills fund-raising. Mr. Bush was also sabotaged by his own self-immolating strategists, who sent their personal Dr. Laura stand-in, Lynne Cheney, as the ticket's anti-Hollywood emissary to Congress and political talk shows. With characteristic shrillness and selective indignation, Ms. Cheney condemned Eminem (though, curiously, without any reference to his homophobic lyrics) and a five-year-old Miramax movie seen only in art houses (''Kids'') while scrupulously avoiding mention of more recent violent (''Fight Club'') and lubricious (''There's Something About Mary'') fare marketed to kids by the conservative fat cat Rupert Murdoch. This whole culture war, of course, is for public consumption only until Election Day. As Ernest Hollings, the South Carolina Democrat, observed in last week's Senate Commerce Committee hearing, there have been 20 hearings by the same committee on kids and media -- and what do taxpayers have to show for it? The V-chip! Mr. Gore proudly takes credit for that gizmo, but it's no Internet. Ninety-seven percent of American parents don't use it, according to a study that another Democrat, John Breaux, cited in the hearing. The vice president's new placebo for worried moms -- his ultimatum that Hollywood ''shape up in six months'' or face punitive legislation -- is just as feeble. Such legislation is more likely a full-employment program for First Amendment lawyers than an impediment to any teenager's access to Dr. Dre. Which is not to say that Mr. Gore's frenzied and often self-contradictory posturing about Hollywood has been without meaning. It's a creepy, if G-rated, preview of coming attractions depicting what his administration may be like at its opportunistic and pandering worst. On the matter of culture and children, Mr. Gore is repeating his familiar pattern. It was not until years after his sister died of lung cancer that he stopped taking tobacco money and boasting of his tobacco farming so that he could tardily declare Joe Camel Public Enemy No. 1. According to The Los Angeles Times, the vice president's embrace of the F.T.C. report is just as sudden a conversion: a year ago he was reassuring Hollywood executives that he had nothing to do with President Clinton's post-Columbine decision to commission it in the first place. Mr. Gore pulled a similar stunt in 1987 when he and Tipper Gore, on the eve of his first presidential run, groveled behind closed doors before Hollywood donors to disown as a ''mistake'' Mrs. Gore's 1985 anti-rock-smut crusade, which had led to another high-dudgeon Congressional hearing. Yet even were Mr. Gore consistent on this issue, it would still be a smoke screen to deflect public attention from what's really going on in the fast-consolidating entertainment industry right now -- and its potentially deleterious effect on children and parents alike. The most important matter before the F.T.C. -- and the F.C.C. -- is hardly the report Mr. Gore and Mrs. Cheney are hawking but the approval of pending media mergers like the AOL purchase of Time Warner. These momentous deliberations are happening off-camera and receive far less attention from politicians and press. But even as Mr. Gore proposes government intervention in movie-and-music marketing, he offers nothing but dead silence about AOL Time Warner and other entertainment industry regulatory issues -- all of which will have a far more lasting effect on the child culture he purports to hold so close to his heart as a potential Parent in Chief. The Bush campaign can't call Mr. Gore on this. While the vice president often goes Hollywood -- the Gores even had Disney supply costly ''Beauty and the Beast'' costumes and a makeup artist for their 1995 Halloween party -- Mr. Bush has actually worked for Hollywood. As a board member of Silver Screen, which financed R-rated Disney Touchstone movies, he pocketed $100,000 over a decade. In this regard, the political contributions that are most worth tracking are not those high-profile sums that Mr. Gore collected from movie stars and directors last week. Steven Spielberg, Rob Reiner and Tom Hanks aren't giving so that Mr. Gore will help them let 15-year-olds sneak into ''Saving Private Ryan'' -- they're giving because they support his traditionally liberal stands on social issues. Mr. Bush isn't going to challenge these corporations any more than Mr. Gore or Mr. Lieberman are, but at least he doesn't condescend to us by pretending he will. The ingenious trick of Mr. Gore's strategy is that he exploits the vast reach of the entertainment industry to get out his message of phony threats against the entertainment industry. And he doesn't risk being grilled about this contradiction since he has held no press conference with actual journalists, as opposed to entertainers, since mid-July. Poor Mr. Bush can't even begin to compete in this racket. He is so clueless about show biz that he hoped he might book into Letterman during his New York visit this week, when the show was in reruns. Ricki Lake awaits.
 Retrieved e-mail messages turned over to investigators show that in early 1996, Vice President Al Gore's senior aides routinely characterized White House coffee sessions as fund-raisers, a description seemingly at odds with Mr. Gore's accounts.  Article, Page A9. Retrieved e-mail messages turned over to investigators show that in early 1996, Vice President Al Gore's senior aides routinely characterized White House coffee sessions as fund-raisers, a description seemingly at odds with Mr. Gore's accounts.  Article, Page A9.
 ''Negotiations are going to continue with whoever is elected, Gore or Bush,'' he said. ''Secondly, lame duck presidents have managed in the past to accomplish great things in the Middle East.'' Gershom Gorenberg, an expert on the mount, said the site had predictably ended up as the core of the conflict not only because of its religious importance to both sides but also because of its ''mythic value'' in their historical narratives. There has been what Mr. Gorenberg -- whose book, ''The End of Days: Fundamentalism and the Struggle for the Temple Mount,'' will be published by The Free Press in December -- calls ''a de facto division of holy space'' that has prevented a holy war. ''If an agreement is reached, then in religious and national terms, the two sides will have agreed to the idea of more than one truth existing in Jerusalem -- that there's more than one way up God's mountain,'' Mr. Gorenberg said. ''But that's a big if.''
 The center found that 146 of the guests had made political contributions in this election cycle, giving a total of $5.5 million, 98 percent of it to Democratic committees and candidates. The Democratic National Committee was the single largest recipient, with $2.5 million. Vice President Al Gore's campaign got $142,750, the center found. The list of overnight guests also contains several of Mr. Gore's top fund-raisers, as well as a number of the Democratic Party's most generous sponsors in recent years. Among those are Terry McAuliffe of Washington, Alan Patricof of New York, Norman Pattiz of Los Angeles, Haim Saban of Beverly Hills, Calif., Howard J. Kessler of Boston, Chris Korge of Miami, William Brandt of Chicago and Smith and Elizabeth Bagley of Washington.
 Clinton Agrees to Put Oil Reserves on Market  President Clinton ordered 30 million barrels of oil released from the nation's emergency reserve in the next month, a day after Vice President Al Gore injected the issue into the presidential campaign. Crude oil prices dropped and analysts said the move could help check the rise in fuel prices. Mr. Gore held his first news conference in 67 days, defending his call for the oil release and vowing to ''confront friend and foe alike'' over the marketing of violent entertainment to children, despite the big donations he receives from Hollywood. Gov. George W. Bush criticized the oil decision and told elderly voters that he would promote medical advances ''with new resources and new resolve'' by increasing financing for the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute. Gore aides distributed news accounts from last year that they said showed Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, then heading an energy-services company, praising OPEC for driving up oil prices. E-Mail Reveals Fund-Raisers  Reconstructed e-mail messages given to federal and Congressional investigators show that Mr. Gore's senior aides routinely characterized White House coffee sessions as fund-raising events in early 1996. Attorney General Janet Reno said there was no basis for investigating Mr. Gore's relationship to donations from trial lawyers interested in a presidential veto.
 As the Republicans renewed their attacks on Vice President Al Gore over his plan to tap the nation's oil reserves, Mr. Gore's aides fought petroleum with petroleum today. They released news accounts from last year that they said showed Dick Cheney, who was then the chief executive of an energy-services company, praising the global oil cartel for driving up worldwide oil prices. The Gore campaign, stung by Republican accusations that Mr. Gore's plan is unwise and politically motivated, released accounts of an energy conference in 1999 attended by Mr. Cheney, then the chief executive of the Halliburton Company. In the accounts, Mr. Cheney appears to praise the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries for agreeing to take more than two million barrels of oil off the market to drive up prices, which had been kept low by a worldwide glut. As the Republicans renewed their attacks on Vice President Al Gore over his plan to tap the nation's oil reserves, Mr. Gore's aides fought petroleum with petroleum today. They released news accounts from last year that they said showed Dick Cheney, who was then the chief executive of an energy-services company, praising the global oil cartel for driving up worldwide oil prices. The Gore campaign, stung by Republican accusations that Mr. Gore's plan is unwise and politically motivated, released accounts of an energy conference in 1999 attended by Mr. Cheney, then the chief executive of the Halliburton Company. In the accounts, Mr. Cheney appears to praise the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries for agreeing to take more than two million barrels of oil off the market to drive up prices, which had been kept low by a worldwide glut. The punches and counterpunches came after a week in which Mr. Cheney stepped up his criticisms of Mr. Gore, and underscored the degree to which the Gore campaign hoped to turn public anxiety over rising oil prices against Mr. Cheney and his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush, who both have ties to the industry. Mr. Gore's campaign also attacked a central component of the Bush campaign's proposal to bring oil prices down: their call to increase domestic production by allowing drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska, a move that Mr. Gore and many environmentalists oppose. Mr. Gore's aides noted that Mr. Cheney's old company, Halliburton, had pushed plans to open the refuge to oil drilling in the past. Juleanna Glover Weiss, a spokeswoman for Mr. Cheney, said, ''Unlike Al Gore, Secretary Cheney has always made his decisions based on what's in the national interest and is good for the country, rather than for any personal or political gain.''
 Al Gore and George W. Bush may both be lampooned by the likes of Leno and Letterman, but the satire isn't impartial. And now a political joke can reverberate all the way to the voting booth. A report by Marshall Sella in The Times Magazine.  Plus: Men's Fashions of The Times. Al Gore and George W. Bush may both be lampooned by the likes of Leno and Letterman, but the satire isn't impartial. And now a political joke can reverberate all the way to the voting booth. A report by Marshall Sella in The Times Magazine.  Plus: Men's Fashions of The Times.
 Correction of Sept 21 article about Dr Gail R Wilensky, health care adviser to presidential candidate George W Bush; her financial ties to health care companies explained (S) An article on Thursday about a health care policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush who has financial ties to eight health care companies referred incorrectly to her ownership of 16,000 options on shares in United Health Care, of which she is a director. The adviser, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, sold the shares in May at a profit of $328,144; she does not still hold them. An article on Thursday about a health care policy adviser to Gov. George W. Bush who has financial ties to eight health care companies referred incorrectly to her ownership of 16,000 options on shares in United Health Care, of which she is a director. The adviser, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, sold the shares in May at a profit of $328,144; she does not still hold them.
 Clinton Orders Oil Released From Emergency Reserve  President Clinton ordered the release of 30 million barrels of oil from the nation's emergency reserve over the next month, only a day after Vice President Al Gore injected the issue into the presidential campaign. The move could stall or even reverse the surge in home heating oil and gasoline prices. But analysts said that there were no guarantees that consumers would benefit and that the decision did nothing to address the underlying issue of how to bring energy supply into line with demand over the long run. Administration officials said they acted primarily because inventories of heating oil on the East Coast had fallen to worrisomely low levels, raising the risk of shortages should the winter be particularly cold or long. [Page A1.] Clinton Orders Oil Released From Emergency Reserve  President Clinton ordered the release of 30 million barrels of oil from the nation's emergency reserve over the next month, only a day after Vice President Al Gore injected the issue into the presidential campaign. The move could stall or even reverse the surge in home heating oil and gasoline prices. But analysts said that there were no guarantees that consumers would benefit and that the decision did nothing to address the underlying issue of how to bring energy supply into line with demand over the long run. Administration officials said they acted primarily because inventories of heating oil on the East Coast had fallen to worrisomely low levels, raising the risk of shortages should the winter be particularly cold or long. [Page A1.] In deciding to release oil from the nation's strategic reserves, President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore exploited one of the major perks of incumbency, the power to move oil and markets. News Analysis. [A1.]
 Pres Clinton orders release of 30 million barrels of oil from Strategic Petroleum Reserve over next month; announcement, day after Vice Pres Gore injects issue into his presidential campaign, helps drive down crude oil prices, suggesting action could in short run check or reverse surge in home heating and gasoline prices in weeks before Election Day; analysts see no guarantees that consumers will benefit, and warn decision does not address underlying issue of bringing energy supplies into line with demand; administration points to low inventories on East Coast as winter nears; Clinton made decision after talking with Gore, who suggestedreleasing smaller amount to start; opponent George W Bush says stockpile is for serious supply disruptions, as during war, and recalls that Gore himself opposed using reserve last winter; government is not selling oil outright, but will arrange with refiners to replace oil they are taking at later date; Sec Bill Richardson explains; photo (M) President Clinton ordered the release today of 30 million barrels of oil from the nation's emergency reserve over the next month, only a day after Vice President Al Gore injected the issue into the presidential campaign. President Clinton ordered the release today of 30 million barrels of oil from the nation's emergency reserve over the next month, only a day after Vice President Al Gore injected the issue into the presidential campaign. Mr. Clinton made his decision after a sharp debate within the administration over whether releasing oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve was justified, and after talking by telephone on Tuesday with Mr. Gore, who told the president at that time that he intended to call for use of the reserve to stabilize oil prices. Mr. Gore did that on Thursday but recommended starting with the release of a smaller amount, 5 million barrels, with the possibility of releasing more. Mr. Clinton committed himself today to a substantially larger 30-million-barrel release. The president's decision played neatly into Mr. Gore's campaign strategy of portraying himself as fighting for the people against powerful interests like big oil companies. It also allowed Mr. Gore to dominate the news again on an issue of his choosing, forcing his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, into an argument about who could do more to help consumers. And it was clearly intended by Mr. Gore to minimize the chances that voters could be put in a sour mood before Election Day by high prices for gasoline or heating oil. In a statement, Mr. Bush said the stockpile was created as a backstop for times when the supply of oil has been seriously disrupted, such as a war. And he pointed out that as recently as last winter, Mr. Gore had opposed use of the reserve just to deal with rising prices. ''I believe the vice president has made this decision, with the support of the president, for short-term political gain,'' Mr. Bush said. At a stop in Pennsylvania a few hours before the administration announced its decision, Mr. Gore said it was time to stand up to what he called big oil and its apologists, of whom he implied Mr. Bush was one. ''These prices are skyrocketing,'' Mr. Gore said. ''It's hurting small business. It's hurting those on fixed incomes. It's hurting young families. And the prospect for even higher prices ahead is going to cause even more trouble unless we act now.'' Administration officials said they had been considering the issue for weeks, but came to a consensus on how to proceed only during a late-night conference call among the president's senior advisers on Thursday, a few hours after Mr. Gore gave a speech in which he laid out the case for drawing on the nation's oil reserves. Mr. Clinton then signed off on the strategy today. The price of crude oil for November delivery fell by $1.32 cents a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange today, closing at $32.68. Heating oil for delivery in October fell by 4.41 cents a gallon, to 95.48 cents. On Thursday, after Mr. Gore called for release of the reserves, prices dropped $1.24 a barrel for crude oil. It was first used in 1991, when President George Bush ordered that as much as 30 million barrels be released during the war against Iraq. In the end, only about 17 million barrels were actually sold.
 Al Gore defends his call for releasing oil from federal stockpile, move he resisted few months ago; also tells Pennsylvania audience he would 'confront friend and foe' on marketing of violent entertainment to children, despite millions in donations he receives from Hollywood; says he is neither nervous nor overconfident about debating George W Bush; takes fierce exception to Bush's desire to drill for oil in Alaska National Wildlife Refuge and blames Congressional Republicans for lack of coherent energy policy (M) Vice President Al Gore held his first news conference in 67 days today, defending his call for the release of oil from the government's stockpiles and vowing that he would ''confront friend and foe alike'' over the marketing of violent entertainment to children, despite the millions in donations he receives from Hollywood. In particular, Mr. Gore tried to brush off criticism from Gov. George W. Bush, who pointed out that as recently as February, the vice president had resisted using the oil stockpile to reduce prices. Today, Mr. Bush called Mr. Gore a ''flip-flopper,'' saying his proposal to tap into the reserves was a political ploy. Vice President Al Gore held his first news conference in 67 days today, defending his call for the release of oil from the government's stockpiles and vowing that he would ''confront friend and foe alike'' over the marketing of violent entertainment to children, despite the millions in donations he receives from Hollywood. In particular, Mr. Gore tried to brush off criticism from Gov. George W. Bush, who pointed out that as recently as February, the vice president had resisted using the oil stockpile to reduce prices. Today, Mr. Bush called Mr. Gore a ''flip-flopper,'' saying his proposal to tap into the reserves was a political ploy. But Mr. Gore said: ''The situation is very different today. It's not fair to the middle-class families of this country to stand by and do nothing.'' He added that the oil-producing countries had not kept their promise to lower prices and that inventories were falling. Oil prices dominated the 31-minute news conference here, near Pittsburgh. Mr. Gore spoke to reporters after holding a discussion with two dozen people at a union hall belonging to the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers about their difficulties in paying higher prices for home-heating fuel. On other topics, Mr. Gore said he was not nervous about the coming debates, but he was incredulous when a reporter asked whether he was confident he had the election locked up. ''I don't have an overconfident bone in my body,'' he said. ''This is very much out there to be won or lost, this is a jump ball right now.'' He sought to raise expectations about his opponent's debating skills. Mr. Bush, he said, was ''a very good debater and has won all of the debates he's been in that I know of.'' He mentioned Mr. Bush's debate against Gov. Ann W. Richards of Texas in 1994. ''He was supposed to be slaughtered in that,'' Mr. Gore mused. ''She's certainly a better debater than I am, she's got a very quick wit and silver tongue and is just smart as a whip, and he beat her in that debate, so put that in your formula.'' The vice president took every opportunity to shape the discussion at the news conference and at the event to his populist campaign theme: that he would fight ''for the people'' while Mr. Bush, a former oil executive, is so beholden to big oil that he would do nothing to stem prices. ''This is just a straight difference of opinion here,'' Mr. Gore said. ''We stand in different places, we see this differently, and we fight for different people.'' Mr. Bush has called for renewed oil and gas drilling as well as personal diplomacy with oil-producing nations to lower prices while arguing that the government's stockpile should be tapped only for strategic purposes. Mr. Gore challenged the notion that the reserve was held for strategic purposes. ''I've been a part of the discussions on the strategic reserve since the days when it was first established,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and actually, the purposes that justify release are many and varied and in fact it's not just as narrow as that.'' The vice president took fierce exception to Mr. Bush's desire to drill for oil in the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge. ''I am not in favor of putting fragile parts of our environment at risk in order to get tiny new amounts when the price is going up sky high and the production is being artificially cut back elsewhere,'' Mr. Gore said. ''We do not have to sacrifice our environment and our environmental treasures in order to satisfy the appetite of big oil companies to go into new areas.'' In response to Mr. Bush's charge that oil and gas prices were climbing because the Clinton administration had no coherent energy policy, Mr. Gore said the blame lay with Republicans in Congress. ''They have blocked and stalled and prevented the investments in renewable energy and the development of our own natural resources here that we have advocated year after year,'' he said. ''I want to put this on the front burner in the midst of this campaign, in part to seek a mandate to get the next Congress to act.'' Mr. Gore had not held a news conference since July 17. The 67-day stretch surpassed his previous record earlier this year of 62 days without a news conference. During this period, in which his campaign has tightly controlled his appearances and tried to produce a single message of the day, he has climbed in the polls. But he said today that the lack of news conferences was not a sign that he would not hold regular news conferences as president. Gore associates said he made himself available today to end the increasing number of stories that he was inaccessible. Still, asked if he would hold a news conference once a week, he avoided answering. ''We'll talk about that at the next one,'' he said.
 News analysis on whether Pres Clinton decided to dip into Strategic Petroleum Reserve because he believes it will reverse jump in oil prices that could threaten US economy and voters' pocketbooks, or because he hopes to protect Al Gore's presidential campaign; photo; official argues that decision is not wrong just because it also helps Gore (M) Did President Clinton decide to dip into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve today to protect Vice President Al Gore? Or does he truly believe it will reverse a jump in oil prices that could hurt millions of Americans and threaten the country's remarkable prosperity? Mr. Clinton's aides insisted today, not surprisingly, that the decision was made on policy grounds alone. But none denied that it had the pleasant side effect of casting Mr. Gore into the limelight as the man who tried to save American homeowners from a winter of sky-high heating bills. Did President Clinton decide to dip into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve today to protect Vice President Al Gore? Or does he truly believe it will reverse a jump in oil prices that could hurt millions of Americans and threaten the country's remarkable prosperity? Mr. Clinton's aides insisted today, not surprisingly, that the decision was made on policy grounds alone. But none denied that it had the pleasant side effect of casting Mr. Gore into the limelight as the man who tried to save American homeowners from a winter of sky-high heating bills. And so Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore are exploiting one of the ultimate perks of incumbency -- the power to move both oil and markets -- in hopes of lifting an economic burden on millions of American households while outflanking a Republican ticket that Mr. Gore has already charged with being a tool of big oil. ''Look, no one here is going to argue that we made this decision in a vacuum -- Gore's people were right in the room,'' one senior administration official said today. ''But just because it helps Al doesn't mean it was the wrong policy choice. A week ago we were going the other way. But if you looked at the markets in the past few days, it was clear we couldn't sit and do nothing.'' It was particularly clear to Mr. Gore, who called President Clinton on Tuesday and told him that he was going to give a speech later in the week calling on the president to tap the reserves. In public, Mr. Gore said he was seeking only a small intervention in the oil markets -- starting with five million barrels, roughly a quarter of the amount of oil that the United States consumes in a single day. But he was clearly looking for more. ''He left the president a lot of room to do a little or a lot,'' one of Mr. Gore's aides said today. But the message was clear: He had to do something. The sale might have a modest effect on prices, Mr. Summers argued, but it would not last long. The markets would quickly conclude that the United States did not dare pull the same trick twice -- because it would not want to exhaust its emergency reserves or give Mr. Gore's Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, the chance to make a credible argument that the administration was endangering America's energy security in an effort to get Mr. Gore elected. But that is exactly what Mr. Bush charged on Thursday, after Mr. Gore's announcement calling for the release of the reserves. He repeated the charge today, saying, ''The Strategic Petroleum Reserve needs to be used in the case of war, in case of major disruption of supply. This is an administration that has had no energy plan.'' But Mr. Bush may have a hard time arguing that a plan that keeps 95 percent of the stocks in the ground, unused, poses a major threat. And today, the White House was trotting out members of its national security team to assure reporters that they had reviewed the plans and thought it posed no problem. That is what Mr. Summers and other economic officials around the world were betting this morning when they intervened in the international currency markets to support the lagging Euro, the European currency, and it is what Mr. Gore is betting with his oil initiative. No doubt Mr. Gore will be on the stump suggesting that he can do plenty more if he needs to. ''I reject the agenda of those who say, 'Don't even offer a plan, do nothing about it,' '' Mr. Gore said today in Pennsylvania. ''We are not helpless. We can act. We have tools at our disposal.''
 One reason international financial officials had considered active American support for the euro unlikely is that the Clinton administration has generally avoided taking actions that might prove detrimental to Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, which depends in part on the continued robustness of the American economy.
 Vice President Al Gore stopped by the Pittsburgh Steelers' practice, where he threw a couple of passes and tried to sneak a peek at the team's playbook as they prepared to play Mr. Gore's home team, the Tennessee Titans. (He also attended his son's football game in the evening.) Meanwhile, Gov. George W. Bush rounded out his weeklong swing through nine battleground states in Florida. The stats: Length of the Official Day: Gore, 10 hours; Bush, 13 1/2 hours States Visited: Gore 2, Bush 1 Towns and Cities Visited: Gore 2, Bush 4 Press Conferences/Interviews: Gore 3, Bush 6 Events: Gore 3, Bush 5 Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore 1 (Steelers practice), Bush 0 Passes completed: Gore, 2 for 3; Bush, 0 for 0 Main message: Gore, helping families deal with high home heating costs and oil prices; Bush, new policy initiatives on health, including proposed increases for health research.
 Retrieved White House e-mail messages turned over to federal and Congressional investigators show that Vice Pres Gore's aides in early 1996 routinely described White House coffee sessions as fund-raisers, contrary to Gore's recollections this year; Republicans seize on messages as evidence that Gore and White House were not truthful about gatherings at White House and event at Buddhist Temple in California; photo (M) Retrieved White House e-mail messages turned over today to federal and Congressional investigators show that Vice President Al Gore's senior aides routinely characterized White House coffee sessions as fund-raising events in early 1996. While none of the e-mail messages indicate that the vice president himself was involved in any of the electronic conversations, the aides' descriptions of the coffees seem to be at odds with Mr. Gore's comments in an April 18 interview this year with federal investigators. The vice president said the 103 coffee gatherings with campaign donors held at the White House before the 1996 election had not been ''fund-raising tools.'' Retrieved White House e-mail messages turned over today to federal and Congressional investigators show that Vice President Al Gore's senior aides routinely characterized White House coffee sessions as fund-raising events in early 1996. While none of the e-mail messages indicate that the vice president himself was involved in any of the electronic conversations, the aides' descriptions of the coffees seem to be at odds with Mr. Gore's comments in an April 18 interview this year with federal investigators. The vice president said the 103 coffee gatherings with campaign donors held at the White House before the 1996 election had not been ''fund-raising tools.'' Mr. Gore's remarks in the four-hour interview led a senior Justice Department prosecutor, Robert J. Conrad Jr., to recommend that Attorney General Janet Reno appoint a special counsel to investigate the truthfulness of Mr. Gore's remarks. Last month, Ms. Reno declined to appoint a special counsel. The Gore campaign countered that the e-mail messages were consistent with earlier explanations of the nature of the coffees and contained nothing new. Karen Skelton, Mr. Gore's political director, asked an aide to the vice president in an e-mail note dated April 23, 1996: ''These are F.R. coffees, right?'' Asked tonight whether the abbreviation stood for fund-raising, a White House aide said it could also mean ''finance-related,'' a phrase the vice president himself once used to describe his appearance at a luncheon at a Buddhist temple in Los Angeles in April 1996. On May 8, 1996, Ms. Skelton described in an e-mail message the expectations that the White House had for people invited to coffees with President Clinton and Mr. Gore. Jim Kennedy, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said tonight that the e-mail messages contain information that had already been provided three years earlier to several Congressional investigative committees, including the House panel led by Representative Burton. ''There is nothing significant here in response to Dan Burton's 25 subpoenas,'' Mr. Kennedy said. Karen P. Hughes, the communications director for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, said the e-mail notes are ''another piece of evidence that calls into question the vice president's credibility when he says he did not know that a fund-raising event was a fund-raising event.'' For his part, Mr. Burton tonight vowed to make the newly released e-mail messages an issue at a hearing scheduled for Tuesday. When Ms. Reno decided not to seek the appointment of a special counsel to investigate Mr. Gore, she said, ''I have concluded that there is no reasonable possibility that further investigation could develop evidence that would support the filing of charges for making a willful false statement.'' Some messages deal with Mr. Gore's attendance of the luncheon at the Hsi Lai Temple. But many of those notes are excerpts of memorandums that had been previously turned over to Congressional investigators and made public. Several e-mail messages again demonstrate that Gore aides may have been confused about two fund-raisers that had been originally scheduled. But the schedule for Mr. Gore prepared nearly three weeks before the temple luncheon did not mention a fund-raising event at a Los Angeles area restaurant. After arriving in Los Angeles at 11 a.m., Mr. Gore was scheduled to proceed to the Hsi Lai Temple event, which was described at the time as a Democratic National Committee ''Asian Pacific American Leadership Council Luncheon.'' Another e-mail note recommended that Mr. Gore bring $20 with him to the temple so he could make a donation of his own. ''The V.P. will need to have some cash on hand,'' a message said, ''to offer as an offering at the Buddhist temple in L.A.''
 Former Pres Bush, giving into temptation to 'get off the reservation' on this year's presidential campaign, defends his son George W, jabs at Al Gore, and makes unmistakable reference to impeachment of Pres Clinton; comments during Florida campaign stop for Republican Repr Bill McCollum, who led in impeachment effort; photo (M) Former President George Bush may have a mannerly reputation, but shortly after the Republican National Convention opened in Philadelphia, he was burning to mix it up with President Clinton for saying not-so-nice things about his eldest son. ''I'm tempted to get off the reservation,'' Mr. Bush told NBC News in late July. If Mr. Clinton is still denouncing his son after a month, he said of the man who vanquished him, ''I'm going to tell the nation what I think about him as a human being and a person.'' Former President George Bush may have a mannerly reputation, but shortly after the Republican National Convention opened in Philadelphia, he was burning to mix it up with President Clinton for saying not-so-nice things about his eldest son. ''I'm tempted to get off the reservation,'' Mr. Bush told NBC News in late July. If Mr. Clinton is still denouncing his son after a month, he said of the man who vanquished him, ''I'm going to tell the nation what I think about him as a human being and a person.'' In the nearly two months after he uttered those words, Mr. Bush had kept a decidedly low profile and seemed to stay, squarely, on the reservation. Until today. Unable to resist the temptation, Mr. Bush seemed to endorse the House vote to impeach Mr. Clinton. At a fund-raising luncheon in Miami for Representative Bill McCollum, a Republican who is running for the Senate in Florida, Mr. Bush made what Mr. McCollum's aides said was an unmistakable reference to the lawmaker's vote to impeach. ''I'm not in the issue business any more,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But I'm in the character business. And I know a man of character when I see one. I saw him take a lot of heat a few months ago in the House, held his head up high, and did what he felt was right. And whether you agree or not -- and I 100 percent agree -- I think people respect'' his decision. During the impeachment proceedings, Mr. Bush studiously avoided any comment on his position. While Mr. Bush did not mention Mr. Clinton or Vice President Al Gore by name today, the former president peppered his speech with references to honor, integrity and credibility. ''I am absolutely convinced that if our son is elected president of the United States,'' Mr. Bush declared, ''we will restore the respect, honor and decency that the White House deserves.'' After his speech, Mr. Bush slipped out of the hotel ballroom, briskly and quietly, determined not to say anything that would thrust himself back in the headlines. People close to the Bush family said the former president has taken pains since the Republican convention to keep a low profile, and do nothing to distract from his son's campaign. They said he seems to regret his comments about Mr. Clinton. (Mr. Clinton, while not shy about castigating his predecessor's administration, has refrained from inflammatory language that could provoke Mr. Bush.) ''He realizes that this race in its last month and a half is about two people, Bush and Gore,'' an associate of Mr. Bush's said. ''He gets the joke. He realizes that the best he can do is help raise money and stay out of the way. Unlike most politicians I know, he's very adult about it. No one had to bribe him to leave Philadelphia.'' Today, for example, Mr. Bush said, ''I'm not here to attack George's opponent at all.'' But with barely a pause, he gleefully recalled how Mr. Gore, at a rally the other day, sang part of a union jingle that he said was from his childhood but that actually had not been written until he was an adult. Yet the Bush campaign might be best advised against making Mr. Clinton's personal lapses a big issue. Polls have shown that slicing into the president's values -- while helpful in rallying partisans -- does not carry weight among swing voters. In other areas as well, some advisers to Governor Bush say he might be prudent if he steers clear of his father's advice. Though the precise extent of his father's role is unclear, campaign advisers say Governor Bush turned to the former president for counsel on two crucial decisions that have drawn decidedly mixed reviews: the selection of Dick Cheney as his running mate and the initial reluctance by the campaign to negotiate with the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. People close to the Bush family said the former president never liked debates and never trusted the commission. In an interview with PBS to be broadcast on Sunday on a documentary about debates, the former president acknowledged his distaste for debates, which he derided as ''show business.'' Explaining why he checked his watch during his last encounter in 1992 with Mr. Clinton and Ross Perot, Mr. Bush said, ''Was I glad when the damn thing was over? Yeah. And maybe that's why I was looking at it.'' Today, Mr. Bush flashed a glimpse of his family's competitive spirit by letting it be known that he relishes the notion of his son toppling politicians who think they have the upper hand. He recalled that in the 1994 campaign, then Gov. Ann Richards of Texas derisively mocked Mr. Bush as ''Shrub.'' Senator Connie Mack, a Florida Republican who is retiring from Congress, scoffed at the idea that the Bushes were motivated, at all, by a desire to get back at the Democrats for ousting President Bush in 1992. ''President Bush is not that kind of man and neither is his son,'' Mr. Mack said. ''That father wouldn't allow that. He's has opportunities for the past eight years to say things about Bill Clinton and Al Gore and he's refrained.'' Asked, then, about the elder Mr. Bush's nearly verging off the reservation at the convention, Mr. Mack replied: ''That was a little different situation. And it was very short lived.''
 George W Bush accuses Al Gore of turning 'political somersaults' on whether to tap federal oil reserves to ease prices; campaigns for second time in two weeks in Florida, state once thought to be safely his because his brother is governor; Bush tells elderly residents in Sun City he would promote medical advances with more funding; photo (M) A day after Vice President Al Gore called for tapping federal oil reserves, Gov. George W. Bush sought to turn the proposal into a test of character. He accused his opponent of turning ''political somersaults'' and proclaimed that voters ''don't want flip-floppers as president of the United States.'' Mr. Bush sharply criticized Mr. Gore today as he campaigned across Florida, a state that Republicans once thought would be safely theirs, in part because Mr. Bush's brother Jeb is governor. It was Mr. Bush's second trip here in two weeks and his sixth since the primaries ended in March. A day after Vice President Al Gore called for tapping federal oil reserves, Gov. George W. Bush sought to turn the proposal into a test of character. He accused his opponent of turning ''political somersaults'' and proclaimed that voters ''don't want flip-floppers as president of the United States.'' Mr. Bush sharply criticized Mr. Gore today as he campaigned across Florida, a state that Republicans once thought would be safely theirs, in part because Mr. Bush's brother Jeb is governor. It was Mr. Bush's second trip here in two weeks and his sixth since the primaries ended in March. From the moment Mr. Bush's campaign plane landed in Sarasota on Florida's west coast, he was on the offensive, trying to stoke perceptions that Mr. Gore is wavering and too political. He pointed to Mr. Gore's call for the administration to release oil from government stockpiles to stabilize prices -- which Mr. Clinton agreed to do later in the day -- was a reversal of Mr. Gore's stand from last winter when prices were significantly lower than they are now. ''It should be interesting to America to hear the facts,'' Mr. Bush shouted at an airport rally in Sarasota. ''Last winter my opponent opposed the plan to use the strategic petroleum reserve. He was right then. But now we're getting close to the time when we find out, who's steady, who's got a vision, who doesn't listen to polls and focus groups, how he has flip-flopped on the issue. ''The reason why Florida is going to vote for this team is because they don't want flip-floppers as the president of the United States,'' Mr. Bush said. At another point, he said, ''Florida wants to turn back from the past of double talking, of changing positions, of just kind of talking one way and doing another.'' This was supposed to be a week in which Mr. Bush put a new focus on the issues in a ''cradle to grave'' tour intended to show that he has proposals that would help middle-class voters at every stage of their lives. And each day he has drawn contrasts between his plan and Mr. Gore's. But his campaign also never  stopped trying to raise questions about Mr. Gore's character and credibility. Pouncing on every possible misstep, Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, told reporters that in one week, the vice president had muted his criticism of Hollywood, run into a controversy over whether he had embellished a story about the amount his mother-in-law pays for prescription drugs, ''remembered a childhood lullaby'' that had not been written until he was older and called for tapping the oil reserves ''after saying eight months ago it was a bad idea.'' And Mr. Bush tried to use the spike in oil prices to bolster a broader theme, his charge that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore ''have not led'' the country. Consumers, he said, wonder ''where the administration has been for the last seven years; where was the plan?'' Polls showed Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore running neck and neck in Florida, which narrowly voted for Mr. Bush's father in 1992, but went for Mr. Clinton in 1996. Both parties have spent millions of dollars in the state. ''It's wistful thinking on behalf of our opponents -- they said they think they can carry Florida,'' Mr. Bush said at the airport. ''They don't know what's about to hit them in Florida.'' Mr. Bush said that to spur medical research and make ''an investment in the health and hope of Americans and people across the world,'' he would spend an additional $67 billion over 10 years to complete the goal of doubling the budget of the National Institutes of Health. Congressional Republicans are already working toward that goal through annual spending bills, and Mr. Gore has also called for doubling the spending on the federal institutes. Mr. Bush compared his goal to John F. Kennedy's challenge to put a man on the moon. ''I will fund and lead a medical moonshot to reach far beyond what seems possible today and discover new cures for age-old afflictions,'' he said. The governor was repeatedly given standing ovations at the Kingspoint Theater in the Sun City Center. When he raised Mr. Gore's proposal that the United States should tap the oil reserve, people started yelling 'no'' in opposition. ''That's my position,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He did political somersaults.'' When Mr. Bush made his signature pledge to restore ''honor and integrity'' to the White House, he won whoops, applause and a standing ovation. His first questioner appeared to catch the crowd's mood when she asked, ''Are you going to be able to have a big enough shovel to clean up Washington?''
