 And suddenly, Democrats who not long ago feared he would undermine Vice President Al Gore are increasingly viewing Mr. Nader as a storm whose thunder has passed. ''I think Nader is fading,'' said Amy Isaacs, national director for Americans for Democratic Action, a liberal group that has endorsed Mr. Gore. Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster, said, ''The Nader vote has really collapsed, and that is another indication that Democrats are coming home to Gore.'' Odd as it might sound, Mr. Nader does not mind that Mr. Gore's supporters are feeling so confident. For months, he has battled the perception that a vote for him would essentially be a vote for the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush. So, Mr. Nader now asserts, if the race begins to seem like a runaway, many liberals and independent voters will feel freer to vote for him. And for that reason, Mr. Nader and his supporters have begun telling audiences not to worry, because Mr. Gore is going to win anyway. The filmmaker Michael Moore, who has been touring with Mr. Nader, put it this way: ''This podium I'm leaning on is smarter than George W. Bush,'' he told a crowd at Michigan State University on Thursday. ''You have to trust me on this one. He is not going to win.'' The crowd roared, but not everyone was convinced. ''I really want to vote for him,'' Pat Lee, 53, who teaches at a prison near East Lansing, said of Mr. Nader. ''But I really don't want Bush to be president.'' Ed Garvey, a lawyer in Madison who ran for governor of Wisconsin on the Democratic line in 1998, admires Mr. Nader so much that he appeared with him in Madison this week. But Mr. Garvey said he would vote for Mr. Gore because he believed the race would remain tight to the end. If his recent events are any indication, Mr. Nader has no plans to slink quietly into the night. At every stop, he slashes at Mr. Gore's credibility, using language that might make a Republican blush. In Lansing, the vice president is ''forked-tongued, Pinocchio-nosed Al Gore.'' In Minneapolis, he is ''a certified political coward.'' In Milwaukee, he is an ''identity thief,'' guilty of stealing Mr. Nader's populist oratory. But if Mr. Nader can sound like the Republicans in attacking Mr. Gore's character, his platform is a smorgasbord of liberal ideas. To do that, he plans to focus his energies on states where either Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore holds a commanding lead.
 DON'T you just hate George Bush (pere) for turning ''a kinder, gentler America'' into a political joke? Henry Koster's HARVEY (1950) couldn't be kinder or gentler, even though it's about an alcoholic with mental problems James Stewart plays Elwood P. Dowd, of course, best friend of the title character, an invisible, martini-drinking 6-foot-3 1/2-inch-tall rabbit. (Harvey is seen by audiences only once, with is arm draped around Stewart in an oil portrait over the fireplace.) Josephine Hull won the best supporting actress Oscar for her role as Veta, Elwood's nervous older sister who tries to have him committed. Anyone who can sit through Stewart's alley-behind-the-bar speech and not feel a surge of warmth toward human kind in general is too cynical to live - Wednesday at 10:15 p.m. and Wednesday/Early Thursday at 4:45 a.m. on AMC. DON'T you just hate George Bush (pere) for turning ''a kinder, gentler America'' into a political joke? Henry Koster's HARVEY (1950) couldn't be kinder or gentler, even though it's about an alcoholic with mental problems James Stewart plays Elwood P. Dowd, of course, best friend of the title character, an invisible, martini-drinking 6-foot-3 1/2-inch-tall rabbit. (Harvey is seen by audiences only once, with is arm draped around Stewart in an oil portrait over the fireplace.) Josephine Hull won the best supporting actress Oscar for her role as Veta, Elwood's nervous older sister who tries to have him committed. Anyone who can sit through Stewart's alley-behind-the-bar speech and not feel a surge of warmth toward human kind in general is too cynical to live - Wednesday at 10:15 p.m. and Wednesday/Early Thursday at 4:45 a.m. on AMC.
 Vice President Al Gore, whose campaign has received millions of dollars from the entertainment industry, said that if he were elected he would give the industry six months to clean up its act before considering some sort of government regulation. Last week, however, at a fund-raiser in Beverly Hills, Calif., the vice president took a more conciliatory tone, saying that his administration would never be interested in playing the role of censor.
 Gov George W Bush, campaiging in Florida, steps up his personal criticism of Vice Pres Al Gore, accusing him of 'misleading Americans' through 'pattern of embellishments and sudden reversals'; cites seies of incidents involving Gore campaign that he says provide telling insights into Gore's character (M) At the end of a campaign swing that was intended to focus on issues, Gov. George W. Bush stepped up his personal criticisms of Vice President Al Gore today, accusing him of ''misleading Americans'' through a ''pattern of embellishments and sudden reversals.'' Mr. Bush assailed Mr. Gore in a speech he delivered by satellite to the state committee of the Pennsylvania Republican Party. He cited a series of incidents involving the Gore campaign last week that he said provided telling insights into the vice president's character. At the end of a campaign swing that was intended to focus on issues, Gov. George W. Bush stepped up his personal criticisms of Vice President Al Gore today, accusing him of ''misleading Americans'' through a ''pattern of embellishments and sudden reversals.'' Mr. Bush assailed Mr. Gore in a speech he delivered by satellite to the state committee of the Pennsylvania Republican Party. He cited a series of incidents involving the Gore campaign last week that he said provided telling insights into the vice president's character. ''My opponent has unfortunately spent the week misleading Americans,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His misrepresentations are serious business -- not the legitimate debate of political disagreements. They are a disturbing pattern of embellishments and sudden reversals.'' Mr. Bush also took aim again at President Clinton's decision to release oil from the nation's emergency reserves, portraying the move as political opportunism. The reserve, Mr. Bush said, ''was created for America's national security, not for the vice president's political security.'' Mr. Gore had called for the reserve to be tapped just a day before Mr. Clinton acted. Mr. Bush seized on Mr. Gore's assertion at a news conference that he had been involved in discussions about the strategic oil reserve in its early stages. ''Just yesterday, there he went again,'' Mr. Bush said, evoking Ronald Reagan's well-known rebuttal of Jimmy Carter in a 1980 campaign debate. ''He claimed he was involved in the very invention of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The problem is the reserve was first established in 1975, two years before Al Gore even went to the United States Congress.'' More broadly, Mr. Bush offered a week's worth of examples to ridicule Mr. Gore. He brought up matters as varied as Mr. Gore's attendance at a Hollywood fund-raiser, at which the vice president muted his previous criticism of the entertainment industry, and his quip to a union group that ''Look for the Union Label'' had been one of his childhood lullabies. (The song was not written until years after Mr. Gore's childhood.) Mr. Bush made a similar mistake earlier this year when he named as one of his favorite childhood books one that had not been written until he was a student at Yale. And Mr. Bush pointed to Mr. Gore's assertion that an arthritis drug used by his mother-in-law cost more than the one given to his dog. The vice president's aides later acknowledged that the figures were taken from a study of drug prices by House Democrats, not actual medical bills. Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore had used ''numbers he later had to admit weren't even true, and we still don't even know the real story.'' Mr. Gore responded to Mr. Bush in remarks to an electrical workers' union meeting in Cleveland. ''The other side said they wanted to talk about the issues, but that didn't seem to last very long,'' Mr. Gore said.  ''With our whole future at stake this is no time for personal attacks, which is why I'll never make any.'' But one of Mr. Gore's aides, Douglas Hattaway, pointed to the ties that Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, have had to the oil industry. ''The Texas oil ticket is on the defensive because they've been making excuses for the oil industry while Al Gore is fighting to cut oil prices,'' Mr. Hattaway said. He stood by Mr. Gore's assertion that he had been involved in discussions about the oil reserve since its inception. He said while it was authorized by law in 1975, the reserve was in its early stages in 1977, when Mr. Gore was serving on a House subcommittee on energy. Mr. Bush, who has called for more domestic oil exploration, sought today to turn the focus to the country's increased dependence on foreign oil. ''Americans are understandably worried about the high and rising prices of gas and home heating oil, and I sure am as well,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The vice president blames big oil. I'll tell you what I'm worried about. I'm worried about big foreign oil. I'm worried that under the vice president's policies America is more dependent on foreign oil, and domestic production is at its lowest level in almost 50 years -- since 1954.''
 Her father, Harry F. Clark of North East, Pa., is the world cultures teacher at North East High School. Her mother, Diane K. Clark of Fredonia, N.Y., who is retired, taught the third grade at the Bush Elementary School in Jamestown, N.Y.
 Health Insurance Association of America Pres Charles N Kahn III letter responds to Sept 18 article; notes that Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush support 'patients rights' legislation that would raise health insurance costs
 Vice Pres Al Gore hopes to ride public's trepidation about big oil, big drug companies, big health insurers and big polluters all the way to White House; it has been decades since politician denounced such broad array of corporate targets with such pointed language; for Gore, it is part of broader positioning of his campaign as ' for the people,' while portraying Gov George W Bush and Republicans as 'for the powerful'; Gore's tactic is not without risk of being branded hypocrite (M) They are Vice President Al Gore's bogeymen -- big oil, big drug companies, big health insurers, big polluters. For good measure, Mr. Gore still throws in big tobacco from time to time. They are out there, threatening America's prosperity. And like politicians before him, Mr. Gore hopes to ride the public's trepidation about them all the way to the White House. They are Vice President Al Gore's bogeymen -- big oil, big drug companies, big health insurers, big polluters. For good measure, Mr. Gore still throws in big tobacco from time to time. They are out there, threatening America's prosperity. And like politicians before him, Mr. Gore hopes to ride the public's trepidation about them all the way to the White House. But it has been decades since a politician denounced such a broad array of corporate targets with such pointed language. For Mr. Gore, it is all part of the broader positioning of his campaign as ''for the people,'' and the other side -- Gov. George W. Bush and the Republicans -- as ''for the powerful.'' ''I have never hesitated,'' Mr. Gore said on Friday, ''to take on big oil or the big pharmaceutical companies or the H.M.O.'s or whoever was operating in a way that was not in the best interest of the middle-class families of this country.'' Like most campaign messages these days, Mr. Gore's assault is rooted in extensive polling and focus-group surveys that suggest deep public frustration with rising prices and, in the case of health maintenance organizations, confounding red tape. Populism has proven most effective, historians say, in times of economic inequality, and Mr. Gore's target audience includes those who feel they have not shared in the good times. But Mr. Gore's tactic is not without risk. Another important component of his message is the taking of credit for the country's economic health, including the 22 million jobs created in the Clinton years. By setting his sights on central industries, Mr. Gore may create the perception that he is fighting the very businesses that have generated those jobs. Then there is the risk of being branded a hypocrite. One major industry that Mr. Gore does not group with his litany of corporate offenders is big entertainment, which he condemns separately in speeches for marketing violence to children even as he solicits its executives for hefty campaign contributions. Because it has been so long since any prominent politician tried Mr. Gore's approach, it is hard to predict how it will be received, said Alan Brinkley, a presidential historian at Columbia University. ''Gore is using it very carefully, making attacks against specific targets and not more broadly against concentrated economic power,'' Mr. Brinkley said. ''I don't see how he could be perceived as antibusiness given the very centrist economic policy he's promoting and has been identified with over time.'' But Jerry J. Jasinowski, the president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said Mr. Gore had convinced the business sector, particularly leaders of small companies, that he is against private enterprise. Clearly, Mr. Gore long ago discarded any instinct to soft-pedal his message. In speeches about oil pricing on Thursday and Friday, he pledged to ''work toward the day when we are free forever of the dominance of big oil and foreign oil.'' Because Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, both served as executives in the oil business, Mr. Gore said the Republican ticket was ''of big oil, for big oil and by big oil.'' When Mr. Gore turns his sights on  managed care, he laments that doctors' decisions are being ''overruled by some bean counter'' who ''doesn't have a right to play God.'' When the target is the prescription drug manufacturers, he describes them as having ''so much power and so much wealth -- by all odds the most profitable industry in America.'' Oil industry officials and analysts said this week that they were distressed by Mr. Gore's offensive because, they maintain, domestic petroleum pricing is primarily a product of foreign supply. Profits are up this year, but the industry was battered last year by plummeting prices. Oil profit rates for the first half of this year were 6.8 percent, according to Business Week, compared with 7 percent for all United States industries. ''Mr. Gore is either extremely badly informed or he's being extremely disingenuous,'' said J. Robinson West, the chairman of Petroleum Finance Company, which provides strategic advice to oil companies. Karl Rove, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign, said the primary effect of Mr. Gore's ''screechy left-wing populism'' was to stem the flow of liberal support to Ralph Nader and the Green Party. And he pointed out that Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, had received heavy campaign contributions from the insurance and pharmaceutical industries, and that Mr. Gore's family had profited from Occidental Petroleum mineral leases. But Mark D. Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign director, said the vice president had credibility because he fought against price-fixing in the oil and natural-gas industry in Congress and was an early supporter of generic drugs.
 William Safire On Language column on Al Gore's modified use of phrase 'put up or shut up' and Dick Cheney's use of word squandered; corrects error in stating that first name of Sen Joe Lieberman's wife, Hadassah, is Hebrew equivalent of Esther (M) 'The time for generalities without specifics,'' said candidate Al Gore, ''I think is just about over. . . . It's kind of put up or shut up time.'' His opponent promptly complained about the ''tone'' of this remark. Amid the general fear of being counterpunched with a charge of negativity, politicians shy from any locution that can be construed as harsh. Evidently Gore was concerned about his use of the directly challenging put up or shut up, because he preceded it with the ameliorating kind of and followed it with time. 'The time for generalities without specifics,'' said candidate Al Gore, ''I think is just about over. . . . It's kind of put up or shut up time.'' His opponent promptly complained about the ''tone'' of this remark. Amid the general fear of being counterpunched with a charge of negativity, politicians shy from any locution that can be construed as harsh. Evidently Gore was concerned about his use of the directly challenging put up or shut up, because he preceded it with the ameliorating kind of and followed it with time. Did dealer Gore obliquely demand that the ante-man put up or quietly fold? Or did he make a veiled dialect reference to the stance of a pugilist? It's a down-and-dirty dialectical mystery that leads us to an etymological mystery: ''When I look at the administration now in Washington,'' Dick Cheney told the G.O.P. convention, ''I am dismayed by opportunities squandered.'' Next night, George W. Bush added, ''The current administration hasn't seized the moment -- they [sic] 've squandered the moment.'' Democrat Joe Lieberman came right back with ''the same people who let this nation drift are trying to convince us that the past eight years have been squandered.'' To Republican Jennifer Dunn's charge that ''Al Gore has squandered opportunities to improve America's future,'' Hillary Clinton showed the popular verb could be used by Democrats too: ''Let's not squander our children's future.''
 Dana K Long letter holds that women overwhelmingly back Vice Pres Al Gore because he supports reproductive rights and choices for women In struggling to explain why single women overwhelmingly support Al Gore (news article, Sept. 20), a pollster suggests that they are more vulnerable to changes in the national economy, and therefore more reliant on government services. But there is a much more plausible cause: Mr. Gore supports reproductive rights and choices for women, and George W. Bush does not. In struggling to explain why single women overwhelmingly support Al Gore (news article, Sept. 20), a pollster suggests that they are more vulnerable to changes in the national economy, and therefore more reliant on government services. But there is a much more plausible cause: Mr. Gore supports reproductive rights and choices for women, and George W. Bush does not. Mr. Gore has promised to protect their rights. Mr. Bush has promised to appoint more Scalias and Thomases. There isn't much wooing room for Mr. Bush in this arena.
 With televised presidential debates once again big political news, the program's timing is ideal. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, tried for several weeks to circumvent the bipartisan commission that has run the debates for a dozen years, hoping to effect radical changes in the dates, the number and the format of the series. He failed, largely because he looked as if he was trying to insulate himself from Vice President Al Gore's debating skills. The American voter doesn't much like chickens, and such was the picture of himself Mr. Bush was projecting. It was a major league blunder. So he reconsidered, backed off and accepted the commission's terms. The first of three debates will be Oct. 3 in Boston. It turns out that Governor Bush's seeming aversion to debates reflects, like so much else in his campaign, the views of his father, the former president George Bush, a man who has never been possessed of noteworthy fluency. When Mr. Lehrer asks the elder Mr. Bush whether debates should be ''a required part of the process,'' he replies: ''Nope. I think you ought to do what's best to get you elected. And if that's best that you have no debates, too bad for all you debate-lovers. If there was a guy that couldn't, say, couldn't finish a sentence and yet is a brilliant contribution as a public servant or an academic or whatever, why should that one thing be mandatory? Why should a person be burdened with that decision to have to debate?'' ''I was glad when the damn thing was over,'' Mr. Bush says of the town meeting debate, during which he twice looked at his watch. Mr. Bush complains that he had been set up, telling Mr. Lehrer: ''Beforehand they had rehearsed and identified some of the questioners, and there was some guy that was, you know, so clearly was going to be antagonistic to me. And the way the questions were asked, and I was told later, that how about you back there in the fourth row, and they singled him out to be the contentious questioner of George Bush.'' Several erstwhile debaters compare the experience to a sporting event. Mr. Bush says it was ''like a ball game,'' in a way; the former president Jimmy Carter says he went in ''as though it was an athletic competition,'' and the former president Gerald R. Ford, harking back explicitly to his gridiron days at the University of Michigan, says, ''I was anxious to get into the ball game.''
 First Al Gore planted a big one on his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic Convention, and the pollsters said it worked wonders with women. So after Oprah Winfrey jokingly complained that Mr. Gore failed to kiss her in a cheery appearance on her talk show, Mr. Bush delivered a strategic smooch to her cheek last week and declared that his favorite gift to his wife, Laura, was a kiss. First Al Gore planted a big one on his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic Convention, and the pollsters said it worked wonders with women. So after Oprah Winfrey jokingly complained that Mr. Gore failed to kiss her in a cheery appearance on her talk show, Mr. Bush delivered a strategic smooch to her cheek last week and declared that his favorite gift to his wife, Laura, was a kiss. So the attention to this year's crop of kisses has everything to do with last year's loves. However sincere or spontaneous the Gores' embrace (which lasted from four to seven seconds, depending on how much of the hug is counted), it seemed to stand in stark contrast to Mr. Clinton's marital complications. Ditto Mr. Bush's endorsement of spousal smacking.
 Tom Redburn Economic View column on 180-degree turnaround by Democratic and Republican parties over economic policies of John Maynard Keynes and Milton Friedman, which is playing big role in presidential election campaigns of Al Gore and George W Bush; graph (M) Today, this 180-degree reversal of traditional party positions on fiscal policy is firmly enshrined in the presidential election campaigns of Al Gore and George W. Bush. Mr. Gore, in presenting his own budget blueprint, called for paying off more than $3 trillion in federal debt over the next 10 years. By contrast, the centerpiece of Mr. Bush's campaign is a 10-year, $1.3 trillion tax cut that  would reduce debt by a much smaller $1.7 trillion. Yet Lawrence B. Lindsey, Mr. Bush's principal economic adviser, has said he fears that the economy may soon stumble badly, and he argues that an across-the-board tax cut is the best way to ward off a recession. ''You can hear in Larry's argument a kind of anticipatory Keynesianism,'' Mr. Litan said. Still, by trading places on economic policy, Republicans and Democrats have created all kinds of paradoxes. Many Wall Street economists, for example, are more worried about Mr. Bush becoming president than they are about Mr. Gore. A recent report from Goldman, Sachs warned that the Federal Reserve, already fearing that the economy cannot grow any faster without prompting higher inflation, would probably respond to a big package of stimulative tax reductions by pushing up interest rates  sharply. Or consider the views of Robert M. Solow, the liberal economist and Nobel laureate  who long taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. While he favors budget surpluses for now as a tool to help increase investment and productivity, he wrote recently in The New York Review of Books that Mr. Gore was making a mistake by calling for elimination of the federal debt as an end in itself.
 Vice Pres Al Gore has raised $60 million for Democratic National Committee since he locked up party's nomination in March; more than $20 million of that has come in last 12 days, as Gore surged in polls; Gore and his running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, expect to pull additional $7 million in next week; it is not clear how much Gov George W Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, have raised for Republican National Committee, because Republicans keep such numbers and events under wraps; photo (M) By the end of next week, Vice President Al Gore will have raised that much for the Democratic National Committee since he locked up the party's nomination in March. By the end of next week, Vice President Al Gore will have raised that much for the Democratic National Committee since he locked up the party's nomination in March. More than $20 million of that has come in the last 12 days, as Mr. Gore has surged in the polls, catching Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, expect to pull in an additional $7 million in the next week, including $1.5 million here tonight and $1.5 million at a dinner in Miami on Monday night. It is not clear how much Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, have raised for the Republican National Committee in this period because the Republicans keep those numbers and events under wraps. Featured here tonight were Mayor Richard M. Daley of Chicago, Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and former senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Mr. Gore's unsuccessful primary opponent, who introduced him. Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, William M. Daley, brother of the mayor, was on hand but not onstage. The candidates received $67 million in federal money for the fall campaign. In exchange, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush cannot raise more for themselves. But they can raise cash for their parties, which will spend the money on their candidacies. In August, according to federal figures, Mr. Bush spent $21 million of his $67 million, while Mr. Gore spent about $11 million, leaving Mr. Gore with $10 million more than Mr. Bush in his federal coffer. The money race now is between the parties. The Republicans are pouring more into Mr. Bush's coffers. But Mr. Gore has been turning up the heat under his party's donors, especially since he moved ahead in the polls. Mr. Gore held large fund-raisers on Sept. 12 in Philadelphia, Sept. 13 in Boston and Sept. 14 in New York City, with a total take of nearly $10 million.
 I agree with Andrew Sullivan (Counter Culture, Sept. 3). It is unfortunate that our choice for president this year is between two candidates who come from political families. But to me, this is a coincidence and nothing especially portentous. In my lifetime, there have been 11 presidents: Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan, Bush and Clinton. Only Roosevelt, Kennedy and Bush came from political families. The others were all self-made men; indeed, most came from humble origins -- most notably, Bill Clinton. I agree with Andrew Sullivan (Counter Culture, Sept. 3). It is unfortunate that our choice for president this year is between two candidates who come from political families. But to me, this is a coincidence and nothing especially portentous. In my lifetime, there have been 11 presidents: Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan, Bush and Clinton. Only Roosevelt, Kennedy and Bush came from political families. The others were all self-made men; indeed, most came from humble origins -- most notably, Bill Clinton.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column disputes Gov George W Bush's contention that he would use only one-quarter of projected budget surplus for tax cuts; holds that his tax-cut plan would use over third of surplus; supports Vice Pres Al Gore's contention that drug companies engage in price discrimination, charging what traffic will bear (M) George W. Bush is still using the four-dollar routine in his public appearances -- the one where he pulls out four dollar bills to represent the projected budget surplus, then says that he plans to use only one of those bills, one-quarter of the surplus, for tax cuts. Anyone who has looked at his campaign's own numbers (or who read this column a week and a half ago) knows that this isn't right -- that the tax cut would actually use up more than a third of the surplus. But most commentators seem to think that this is a minor detail -- a quarter, a third, what's the difference? (About $450 billion, but who's counting?) Meanwhile, Al Gore got a pummeling from some commentators -- and, of course, Mr. Bush's campaign -- over the dog story, in which he told an anecdote about an expensive human drug that costs only one-third as much if prescribed by a vet. It turns out that he was looking at wholesale prices; when you look at retail prices the number is more than one-third, though less than one-half. My God! Does this man have the integrity to be president? George W. Bush is still using the four-dollar routine in his public appearances -- the one where he pulls out four dollar bills to represent the projected budget surplus, then says that he plans to use only one of those bills, one-quarter of the surplus, for tax cuts. Anyone who has looked at his campaign's own numbers (or who read this column a week and a half ago) knows that this isn't right -- that the tax cut would actually use up more than a third of the surplus. But most commentators seem to think that this is a minor detail -- a quarter, a third, what's the difference? (About $450 billion, but who's counting?) Meanwhile, Al Gore got a pummeling from some commentators -- and, of course, Mr. Bush's campaign -- over the dog story, in which he told an anecdote about an expensive human drug that costs only one-third as much if prescribed by a vet. It turns out that he was looking at wholesale prices; when you look at retail prices the number is more than one-third, though less than one-half. My God! Does this man have the integrity to be president? Although both cases involve misstated fractions, they are very different in other ways. Mr. Gore's numbers were off, but the thrust of  his story -- that drug companies engage in price discrimination, charging what the traffic will bear -- is true. On the other hand, the intended moral of Mr. Bush's story -- that the budget will easily accommodate his tax cut, that it leaves plenty of money with which to secure the future of retirees, rebuild the military, and all that -- isn't at all true. Just to revisit the arithmetic one more time: Let one dollar bill represent $100 billion of projected surplus. If we put Social Security and Medicare in ''lock boxes,'' the remaining surplus amounts to $18 -- of which $16 will be used up by Mr. Bush's tax cut. And Mr. Bush has promised new spending that is more than twice, though less than three times -- hey, I don't want to be inaccurate! -- as much as the money he actually has left. So Mr. Gore got the details wrong but represented the basic situation correctly; Mr. Bush also got the details wrong but fundamentally misrepresented the situation. And that's not the only difference. Mr. Gore told his story once, and didn't repeat it after the details were questioned. Mr. Bush continues to tell his story even though it is demonstrably inconsistent with the numbers his own campaign has put out. It's true that Mr. Gore has an occasional habit -- odd in someone who is so obsessed with detail -- of making the story he is telling a bit better than it deserves to be. And public figures are, and should be, held to a higher standard on such matters than ordinary raconteurs. But Mr. Gore's occasional overstatements, while embarrassing, don't come close to those of many other politicians. Remember Ronald Reagan's tale of the welfare queen driving her welfare Cadillac -- a fantasy that was not only untrue but mean-spirited too. So why did Mr. Bush's campaign believe that the dog story offered an opportunity to challenge Mr. Gore's integrity -- and that Mr. Bush's own problems with fractions would not raise questions about his own truthfulness? The answer, I suspect, is that political strategists believe that voters don't pay attention to big numbers, numbers that are outside their ordinary experience. And maybe they're right. If a candidate were to declare that gasoline costs $1 a gallon when everyone knows that it costs at least $1.60, he would be shouted off the stage. But when Mr. Bush declares (as he often does on the stump) that his tax cut will cost $1 trillion, when his own budget numbers indicate that the right number is roughly $1.6 trillion, everyone shrugs.
 America has been offered a fine model of a grown-up for the last two months, and we'll be seeing quite a bit more of him. Dick Cheney, all the politerati tell us, is a quintessential grown-up, by which they mean he looks like he could be his own father. The man stands next to George W. Bush, and the idea that the two of them are but five years apart in chronological age seems as absurd as the idea of Dick Cheney's playing the sax on ''The Arsenio Hall Show.'' In fact, you look at Dick Cheney long enough, and the whole concept of ''The Arsenio Hall Show'' seems absurd. America has been offered a fine model of a grown-up for the last two months, and we'll be seeing quite a bit more of him. Dick Cheney, all the politerati tell us, is a quintessential grown-up, by which they mean he looks like he could be his own father. The man stands next to George W. Bush, and the idea that the two of them are but five years apart in chronological age seems as absurd as the idea of Dick Cheney's playing the sax on ''The Arsenio Hall Show.'' In fact, you look at Dick Cheney long enough, and the whole concept of ''The Arsenio Hall Show'' seems absurd. I guess that it's the rejectionism of ''growing up'' that rankles me, the rejectionism exemplified by George W. Bush's approach to life: be dangerously dissolute during the first half, and prissily haughty during the second. When I was in college, working on the newspaper, my colleagues would hold regular parties. Every week I'd watch them drunkenly line up in front of the bathroom door at about 11 p.m., waiting to pay heaving homage to the porcelain god. That was all it took to convince me that teenage dissolution wasn't all it was cracked up to be. So, sorry, I have no years to reject. I've even integrated the photos of my shocking hair misjudgments into my current persona.
 Campaign officials for Vice Pres Al Gore say they temporarily removed junior staff aide because he gave incorrect information to ABC News, but that aide, Michael Doyne, had nothing to do with transmission of confidential information from Bush campaign to Gore associates (S) Gore campaign officials said tonight that they had temporarily removed a junior staff aide because he had given incorrect information to ABC News, but they said the aide had nothing to do with the transmission of confidential information from the Bush campaign to Gore associates. Mark Fabiani, deputy campaign manager for Vice President Al Gore, said the campaign had put Michael Doyne, 28, on paid leave until Wednesday. But, Mr. Fabiani said, ''It is our firm belief that he has no knowledge of any information passed to or from the campaign.'' Gore campaign officials said tonight that they had temporarily removed a junior staff aide because he had given incorrect information to ABC News, but they said the aide had nothing to do with the transmission of confidential information from the Bush campaign to Gore associates. Mark Fabiani, deputy campaign manager for Vice President Al Gore, said the campaign had put Michael Doyne, 28, on paid leave until Wednesday. But, Mr. Fabiani said, ''It is our firm belief that he has no knowledge of any information passed to or from the campaign.'' ABC News was investigating the mailing of information about Gov. George W. Bush's debate preparations to a Gore adviser. On Thursday, ABC News told the Gore campaign that it had learned of the possibility of a Gore ''mole'' within the Bush campaign, Gore officials said. In a statement tonight, the Gore campaign said that Mr. Doyne had first said he was ''not aware of any 'mole.' '' But, the statement said, several hours later, Mr. Doyne told ABC News and the campaign that he may have told a friend about a mole but that it was ''not based on any actual facts or any actual knowledge.'' Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman, called the news troubling, adding that it suggested that people in the Gore campaign may have ''more knowledge about the possible transfer of information than was previously thought.''
 Gabrielle Margaret Bushman, the daughter of Georgia Bushman of South Norwalk, Conn., and Gregory T. Bushman of New York, was married yesterday to David Acton Fitzgerald, a son of Dr. Thomas A. Fitzgerald Jr. of Lakewood, Colo., and the late Billie Jean Fitzgerald. The Rev. David M. Clarke performed the ceremony at St. Edmond's Roman Catholic Church in Rehoboth Beach, Del. Gabrielle Margaret Bushman, the daughter of Georgia Bushman of South Norwalk, Conn., and Gregory T. Bushman of New York, was married yesterday to David Acton Fitzgerald, a son of Dr. Thomas A. Fitzgerald Jr. of Lakewood, Colo., and the late Billie Jean Fitzgerald. The Rev. David M. Clarke performed the ceremony at St. Edmond's Roman Catholic Church in Rehoboth Beach, Del.
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 ''The overriding purpose for our action is to increase supply and help consumers make it through the cold winter,'' Mr. Clinton said. He defended as ''plainly a prudent thing to do'' his decision to release crude oil from the reserve, which had been recommended by Vice President Al Gore but was denounced by Gov. George W. Bush as a political ploy.
 A dead heat in Florida has the Bush camp being criticized as having taken winning for granted. A dead heat in Florida has the Bush camp being criticized as having taken winning for granted.
 A Political Career Built at the Ballpark  As an owner of the Texas Rangers, Gov. George W. Bush helped improve the team and build a new ballpark. He also acquired wealth and a resume he would need to succeed in politics. Mr. Bush is now spending an unexpected amount of time and money campaigning in Florida. And Republicans have begun to second-guess the Bush campaign, saying it took the state for granted and failed to see signs of Vice President Al Gore's potential to win.
 Gov George W Bush devotes second day to stumping in Florida, state where he never expected fierce competition; some Republicans say Bush campaign took Florida for granted, failed to explain Bush's position on issues of concern to elderly and, over all, neglected signs of Vice Pres Al Gore's potential to win; Bush advisers said to be unnerved by upended electoral reality in Florida, which has 25 electoral votes; polls show dead heat in state; photo (M) As Gov. George W. Bush today devoted a second day to stumping in a state where he never expected fierce competition, Republicans have begun to second-guess the Bush campaign, saying it took Florida for granted, failed to explain Mr. Bush's position on issues of concern to the many elderly people here and, over all, neglected signs of Vice President Al Gore's potential to win. While Mr. Gore has drawn even or overtaken Mr. Bush in other crucial states, the governor's advisers say they are most unnerved by the upended electoral reality in Florida, which has 25 electoral votes, making it one of the biggest prizes on Election Day. And now with only six weeks remaining, Republicans face polls showing a dead heat in Florida. As Gov. George W. Bush today devoted a second day to stumping in a state where he never expected fierce competition, Republicans have begun to second-guess the Bush campaign, saying it took Florida for granted, failed to explain Mr. Bush's position on issues of concern to the many elderly people here and, over all, neglected signs of Vice President Al Gore's potential to win. While Mr. Gore has drawn even or overtaken Mr. Bush in other crucial states, the governor's advisers say they are most unnerved by the upended electoral reality in Florida, which has 25 electoral votes, making it one of the biggest prizes on Election Day. And now with only six weeks remaining, Republicans face polls showing a dead heat in Florida. It is difficult to construct a strategy for Mr. Bush to capture the White House if he does not win New York, California or Florida, and polls show Mr. Gore is comfortably ahead in the first two states. But instead of moving aggressively over the summer to secure Florida, Republican lawmakers and party officials in and out of the state said in interviews this week, the Bush forces seemed lulled into complacency here. The assumption of many Bush advisers, these Republicans said, was that Mr. Bush would not have to worry about Florida because his brother Jeb is the popular governor, and because Florida historically backs Republicans for president. Besides costing campaign time for Mr. Bush, the miscalculation has forced Republicans to divert millions of dollars here to the fourth largest state -- money that would have been pumped into battleground states in the Midwest, where he also faces a powerful threat from Mr. Gore. A secondary yet significant concern among many Republicans is that the tight race here complicates the party's drive to win the state's open Senate seat, as well as its prospects in two ferociously competitive House races. Even as Republicans assess their own performance, they also credit the changed dynamic to demographic factors and to the Gore campaign's deftness at sensing Mr. Bush's vulnerability. One after another, Republicans said Democrats had more skillfully tailored their issues to Florida voters. Many Republicans said an incalculable benefit for their opponents was Mr. Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate. In picking the first Jewish candidate for a major party presidential ticket, Mr. Gore emboldened Jewish voters, even though most were widely expected to favor Democrats anyway. Perhaps because they were so optimistic, many Republicans now grouse that Mr. Bush and his party did not move early enough to advertise in Florida. They also say the campaign was slow to explain Mr. Bush's stands on issues that are critical to the aging population here, from prescription drugs to protecting Medicare and Social Security. They noted that Jeb Bush warned his brother months ago that Mr. Gore could effectively scare elderly voters -- and that those warnings never seemed to be acted upon. ''We should have been off the block a bit earlier on our senior citizen issues,'' said Tom Slade, a former chairman of the State Republican Party. But many Republicans said Jeb Bush had disappointed them as well because he had not stumped as visibly, and doggedly, for his brother as they had expected. He has been a potent fund-raiser for the party but has been far less active publicly for the ticket than many other Republican governors. Concerns about Jeb Bush's commitment intensified earlier this month when he did not show up at a rally here with his brother, prompting the Texas governor to crack, ''I'm a little disappointed the chairman of my campaign is late.'' Seeking to explain Jeb Bush's low profile, Al Cardenas, the state Republican chairman, said the Florida governor had retreated because he did not like being compared to his brother in the press. ''Another reason is he's got a lot of things to do,'' Mr. Cardenas said. ''But he'll do more.'' At a fund-raising event in Coconut Grove near here on Friday night, it appeared that Jeb Bush got the message. The Florida governor played an important role in organizing what appeared to be a wildly successful event; thousands of partisans mobbed a convention center to hear George W. and Jeb Bush and see their families. ''Florida is Bush country!'' Jeb Bush exulted. His father won the state in 1988 and 1992, but President Clinton carried it four years ago. The close competition has led the nominees to travel here several times since their conventions. Mr. Bush was in Orlando today, on the second day of a two-day swing. His father, former President George Bush, was here on Friday. Mr. Gore arrives on Monday; Mr. Lieberman, was in Florida on Thursday and Friday. Republicans take some solace in the belief that voters of Florida could turn on Mr. Gore just as they have on Mr. Bush. They also said the unanticipated strength of the Democratic ticket might shake Republicans out of their complacency. ''People are reading polls and saying, 'It's over,' '' said Al Austin, a Tampa real estate developer who is the finance chairman of the State Republican Party. ''Well, it's not over. If Gore wants to cause George W. to spend time in Florida and keep him out of the battleground states, I'm sure that's part of their strategy. But at the same time, they've motivated the Republicans.'' Even if Mr. Bush carries Florida, the Gore campaign can claim something of a victory, because the Bush camp and the Republican Party have spent more than $4 million in advertisements here since the Democratic convention. The money could have been spent on Midwest campaigning. ''It's about as bad of a scenario as Democrats having to spend a lot of money in California,'' he said. ''It's something that you don't budget in.''  Mr. Scarborough still expects Mr. Bush to prevail in Florida. If he does not, the congressman said, ''It would have a devastating impact on the Senate race and the two House races in play -- just devastating.'' The time to be worried, Mr. Scarborough said, is next month -- if Mr. Bush is still traveling to Florida. ''He just can't afford to be in Florida in October,'' Mr. Scarborough said. Some Republicans said the Bush organization's excessive confidence and less than enthusiastic operation in Florida reminded them of how Mr. Bush and his top advisers were brimming with certainty about their prospects on the eve of the New Hampshire primary, in which Senator John McCain upset Mr. Bush. ''The idea that Florida was a Republican state was never a correct interpretation,'' said Senator Bob Graham of Florida, a Democrat whose failure to be picked as Mr. Gore's running mate signaled to some Republicans that the Democrats were not serious about winning the state. While officials of the Gore campaign have said for months that they intended to compete in Florida, they conceded that some of their early threats were intended to keep the Republicans off balance. Campaign officials said there was considerable debate over the decision to spend a half-million dollars on television commercials in three markets in the state this summer. Even now, the campaign is grudging in its spending here; it has spent just over $1 million for advertisements since the Democratic convention. Tad Devine, one of Mr. Gore's top strategists, said the campaign decided to step up its advertising when polls after the Democratic convention found that Mr. Gore had pulled even with Mr. Bush in Florida. Mr. Devine said he was stunned that the Republicans did not run commercials in the state earlier to strengthen Mr. Bush's support. Had the governor maintained his lead, Mr. Devine said, the Gore campaign would not have decided to compete strongly in Florida.
 Much has been made in presidential campaign about Vice Pres Al Gore's stint in Army in Vietnam, but one striking fact has gone largely unnoted; Gore, if elected, would be first president in century to have served as enlisted man; photo (M) MUCH has been made in the presidential campaign about Vice President Al Gore's stint with the Army in Vietnam, but one striking fact has gone largely unnoted: If elected, Mr. Gore would be the first president in a century to have served as an enlisted man and one of only four ever. MUCH has been made in the presidential campaign about Vice President Al Gore's stint with the Army in Vietnam, but one striking fact has gone largely unnoted: If elected, Mr. Gore would be the first president in a century to have served as an enlisted man and one of only four ever. There have been 12 generals (Washington, Jackson, Harrison, Taylor, Pierce, Andrew Johnson, Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Arthur, Harrison and Eisenhower), though no admirals. And there has been a colonel (Theodore Roosevelt), a commander (Lyndon B. Johnson) and a lieutenant commander (Ford), a major (Truman), a captain (Reagan) and three lieutenants (Kennedy, Nixon and Bush). As for Mr. Gore, in August 1969, he walked into a draft center in Newark, N.J. and enlisted as a private. And a private he remained through basic training at Fort Dix, a tour at Fort Rucker, and five months as an Army journalist in Vietnam. (He was granted an early discharge to attend divinity school.) Mr. Gore, of course, was no ordinary buck private. His father was a senator, and G.I.'s  like him were on what one Army general and Vietnam veteran called ''a watch list,'' a sort of unwritten order to keep them out of trouble. Mr. Gore's campaign has made the most of his military record, which starkly contrasts to the lack of service by President Clinton, but it remains to be seen how much it will help him on Election Day. His opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, scores higher in the polls on military matters, and in recent years people in uniform, particularly in the officer corps, have tilted increasingly toward the Republican Party. The tradition in which the majority usually considered themselves independent is weakening, a trend that has raised concerns about the increasing politicization of the military. As if to underscore the point, an array of veterans, including senior officers who served under Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, last week endorsed Mr. Bush, who served as a fighter pilot in the Texas National Guard during the Vietnam War and was, for the record, a lieutenant.
 Marshall Sella article on lampooning of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush by late-night television talk show hosts, who are becoming less impartial and more influential with voters; photos (L) Twelve days ago, when controversy arose over an ad for Gov. George W. Bush that allegedly contained subliminal messages (notably, the word RATS flashing over a critique of Al Gore's health care agenda), Boehmler was first exposed to the story through ''Daily Show'' jokes. Keying in on the blunder, Jon Stewart opened the show with the headline ''G.O.P. accused of subliminal advertising: George W. Bush says, 'Why would we advertise underwater?''' The payoff of the segment, of course, was the video of Bush's many repetitions of the word he pronounced as ''subliminable.'' ''That is so funny!'' Boehmler says. ''Criminables! I like that they didn't just say Bush was a moron, but put it in context of his other policies.'' This latest cascade of gaffes -- presented on a comedy program -- powerfully reinforced Boehmler's impression of the Republican nominee. ''He's an ignorant mouthpiece,'' she says. ''You're always waiting for him to slip up. Dan Quayle often had a little-boy look on his face, but Bush looks lost and confused, like he's not quite there.'' This is hardly a unique phenomenon. The CNN anchor Wolf Blitzer, for example, has direct experience with the power of the late-nights. His own college-age daughter is under their sway. ''I asked her who she was voting for,'' Blitzer says, ''and she immediately said, 'I'm gonna vote for Gore.' I asked why. 'Because he was cool on ''The Tonight Show.''' I asked, 'How do your friends feel?' She said, 'The same way.''' The Bush and Gore campaigns monitor the late-nights for something they don't get from pundits: vibe. ''We read the transcripts of those shows and watch them,'' says Chris Lehane, the Gore campaign's press secretary. ''The monologues are evidence of when a certain story really breaks through. If it makes it onto Leno or Letterman, it means something.'' Such claims to comedic neutrality are willfully nave. Interpreting the news, whether you're poised behind a desk or standing on your mark, can't be performed without some degree of distortion. Not that the distortions don't make for great jokes. This season's comedy yield has been prodigious. Consider Jon Stewart's remark that ''Republicans are trying to bring more minorities into the tent -- not the house, of course, just the tent.'' Or Jay Leno's line that Bush ''has fried so many convicts they shouldn't call him governor, they should call him the Colonel.'' Or even the dusty old jape of Letterman's, about how ''Joe Lieberman would be the first Jewish person to serve directly under a president since -- well, since Monica,'' and further, that the recent polls have made Al Gore so confident that ''he has actually started raising cash legally.'' ''The bottom line of a joke, really, is its premise,'' says Chris Matthews, host of ''Hardball'' on MSNBC. That is, jokes start with their point: the ostensibly agreed-on idea that, say, Gore is a robot or Bush is an idiot. Once the setup is delivered, says Matthews, regardless of the punchline, the joke's damage is done. Suddenly an audience ''knows'' Gore is a liar. That has a lot of artillery. Leno's remarks, and his jokes, often have a whiff of the civics class about them. He is not averse to scolding, especially about public ignorance. That's the implicit point of his ''Jay-walks'' -- the segments in which he quizzes ordinary people in the street, and 6 out of 10 of them can't identify Al Gore. The Late-Night Candidate Visit has never been more crucial to politics. A shot on Leno or Letterman is a unique chance for the country to feel closer to the candidate's ''genuine'' persona. There is no more efficient way to convey a potential leader's humor and modesty; it's a terrific way to humanize the Product. Even potential campaign liabilities can be discussed in jovial tones. When the vice president did ''The Late Show'' on Sept. 14, Letterman opened the proceedings by announcing it was ''a special Al Gore fund-raiser,'' adding that Gore would ''be out a little later to get your thousand dollars.'' Relaxed and apparently having fun, Gore then read the Top 10 list, which contained one item that went: ''Remember, America -- I gave you the Internet, and I can take it away. Think about it.'' Some guest shots yield bitter fruit. Take the March ''Late Show'' interview with Bush. (The Bush campaign, it should be noted, declined several requests to be interviewed for this article.) Bracing up for Super Tuesday, Bush insisted on appearing via satellite, which added a split-second delay to the flow of conversation. The unfortunate effect was that Bush seemed to need extra time to comprehend questions and form answers. The flash point of the interview came with the easiest question. ''You often say, 'I'm a uniter, not a divider,''' Letterman said. ''What does that mean?'' Bush smiled fatuously through a few painful moments of satellite drift. Then, skating to the edge of coherence, he replied: ''It means when it comes time to sew up your chest cavity, we use stitches as opposed to opening it up!'' As a tasteless and contorted reference to the host's recent heart surgery, this comment was baffling on many levels. Letterman traded shrugs with one of his producers, Rob Burnett. The audience actually booed. In three minutes, Bush had confirmed his late-night (modern translation: ''popular'') image as a flyweight who gibbers when he is off script. A few days later, an editorial in The Washington Post framed the appearance as evidence of a real dynamic in the presidential race, borrowing a word from Letterman's own lexicon: the Pinhead Factor. In the months since, Letterman has hardly faded from the campaign. He has kept a hand in by pressing for a debate between Gore and Bush on his program. The ''Late Show'' invitation, issued in July, was at first regarded by news outlets as a prank. But the Gore campaign, which prides itself on its attention to pop culture, leapt at the chance. Gore's handlers saw this as a win-win opportunity to make Bush look nervous or, alternately, to make him look very nervous. Within hours, Gore's approval was finalized. ''He didn't even blink,'' recalls Chris Lehane. ''He just said, 'When do we go?''' The Bush campaign's response has been quite the opposite: to stonewall. A few of the ground rules seem to give them pause -- notably, Letterman's insistence on judging the event with the ''Spectacular Seven'' jai alai scoring system, which has played a relatively small role in American presidential politics to date. Night after night, Letterman hammers on Bush for dithering. ''If you turn it down, see, it makes you look like you're scared,'' he has said, ''like you're a little girl. Nobody wants a little girl in the White House.'' This is a well-oiled machine. Each writer has skimmed one of the morning staples: The Times, The Daily News, USA Today and The New York Post, which one guy mutters is ''our paper of record.'' The day's joke-friendly items are called out between bites of bagel and melon. For a good half-hour nothing is catching fire, not even the stunning announcement that Fabio, the musclebound patron saint of non-butter-disbelievers, has endorsed Al Gore. ''The wait is over,'' one writer rasps. Another tries out some equally perfunctory structure: ''As Fabio goes, so goes the nation.'' ''Gore now leads in the polls,'' offers one of the younger staff members. All eyes turn to this morning's Associated Press video feeds. The Texas governor, looking extra surreal on the Bush 2000 plane, is flanked by his burly director of communications, Karen Hughes. ''Of course we're gonna debate,'' Bush is saying, testily. ''I look forward to 'em!'' In a subsequent shot, Bush steps off the plane with a silly little half-wave. Karlin, whose admiration of the governor seems less than total, says, ''Real presidential,'' then gets back to business. ''Here's the plan,'' he grunts, staring at his fruit basket. ''Our headline is Gore's bump in the polls, with cover on the debate negotiations. Gore's people are accepting 40-plus invites to debate, while Bush is negotiating for the bare minimum.'' Without segue, the room turns to the bleary task of searching for a headline slug. Each writer stares either directly up or directly down, languidly calling out his best attempt to capture this story in short, pun form: ''Bumpin' Up. . . . Rise and Shine. . . . Poll Position. . . . '' Running down the show's outline with the supervising producer, Kahane Corn, Karlin mentions that a recent flurry of Bush gaffes might make a fine highlight for the end of the show. Corn agrees that this sequence would be funny, and moreover, ''important just to air,'' seemingly as a public service. She has views. A brief back-and-forth ensues about Bush's flaws. ''It's staggering that the American people could be so duped by this man,'' he says, his face actually reddening. ''It's hard to be funny about it because it's pretty tragic.'' With an air of utter rationality, Karlin then claims that ''The Daily Show'' is geared for comedy, not partisanship. ''We always cut to the funny,'' he says. ''But this is just a clear case of one candidate being inferior to the other. Not that Gore is some dream candidate, but Bush -- he's an ideal puppet, as though there's a hidden ghost-machine running this thing. It's so obvious he's wrong for the job in every way.'' The room replays the video of Bush on the plane. ''Look at that defensive posture,'' Karlin marvels. ''He is, like, so scared!'' All five writers start doing plane-related riffs, with Stewart tossing out muffled jokes through the pizza: ''The captain told the passengers that if they looked to the left, they could see the abyss of Bush's fear.'' A staff member named Adam enters the room with news that the recent Bush-gaffe video has not yet been found -- not at CNBC nor even CNN. Stewart asks how long it'll take to get it. Adam replies, ''Three hours.'' Minutes later, while the room is engrossed in Harry Potter jokes, Stewart is still fixated on Bush and the plane: ''Since he looks so terrified, how about, 'Bush's panic, you know, caused the oxygen masks to drop'?'' Comedy overrides politics, or near enough. On the show itself, the entire attack on Bush's debate strategy appears only in the form of a throwaway: that back on the plane, the ''dreaded topic'' of debates had been broached. A simpler joke, based on the Bush Dunce model, is used. Stewart would introduce the shot of Bush -- in which we hear the governor committing himself to three debates and Cheney to two -- then say that Bush concluded, ''That's a total of eight debates.'' Old-school purists complain that, apart from the long comedic arcs of ''The Daily Show,'' the joke technology applied by the late-nights is pedestrian stuff. You already know the codes. For Gore, read Stiff. Bush, once Fratboy, then Cokehead, is now Fool. Somewhere, on the sleepy outskirts of comedy, Buchanan and Alan Keyes are huddled together beneath an umbrella called Crank. After nine years, the Gore-as-Stiff archetype still flourishes. On one of his HBO shows in July, Dennis Miller showed an A.P. wire photo of Gore high-fiving a boy as Miller read the vice president's ostensible words: ''Hey there, young fella, make contact with my hand above shoulder level with appropriate force to make a short slapping sound.'' ''It's been fascinating to watch the character of Bush develop,'' says Chris Harris, another ''Late Show'' writer. ''Eventually he started making all these gaffes -- and we realized, he's a dumb guy. There's no better cliche than the Dumb Guy. We can plug that into any formula.'' Just as with Dan Quayle, the Dunce label has proven durable. After George W. Bush used an epithet beginning with ''A'' to describe a New York Times reporter a few weeks ago, Jay Leno told me he regretted cutting the previous night's joke about how, in politics, the A-word used to mean adultery. ''That Bush comment is worth a week of jokes, easy!'' he said. ''At least it was a two-syllable word. For Bush, that's a step up.'' Late-nighters deploy what they regard as an airtight defense against allegations of bias: if an audience doesn't agree with the premise, it wouldn't laugh. Assume, for example, that you reversed the current buzz codes. Tag Gore ''dumb'' and Bush ''stiff.'' The audience won't respond. With this built-in safety net -- so the argument goes -- these jokes must surely be a reflection of public sentiment. Mulligan, a man steeped in politics and history, plays down comedy's impact with an uncharacteristically blocky argument. ''I don't think most comics were avid Reagan and Bush supporters,'' he says flatly. ''We certainly didn't have much influence there. They were there for 12 years, you know?'' When Bill Clinton approved the execution of a mentally incompetent Arkansas killer in 1992, no comedian would have touched the story with a barge pole. Unfortunately for George W. Bush, state-sanctioned death is suddenly irresistible: top-notch TV entertainment. In late July, Letterman casually mentioned that Bush and Cheney were getting along so well that their weekend plans were ''to pick up some six-packs and watch an execution.'' A few weeks later, Jay Leno touched an even more sensitive nerve, a twofer: ''They executed a guy with an I.Q. of 63. Can you believe it? Bush turning his back on one of his own!'' ''As for executions,'' he says quietly, ''what's Texas up to -- 150? I feel like updating the old joke and saying Bush should get rid of the electric chair and install electric bleachers. I mean, it's like throwing dice in Vegas. 'Are you sure this one's guilty?''' Letterman's jokes lack Leno's sense of burden. They're by comparison rather merry: how Bush ''is not lazy'' as his critics suggest, because he executed two prisoners today. How, in the wake of Gore's perceived gains from the notorious kiss with Tipper, ''to kind of even things out, George Bush and his wife were seen making out at an execution.'' The emphasis is always pitched away from the execution itself. Distinct from Leno's approach, Letterman's jokes don't seem to conceal any special concern for the moral weight of executions. By ramping up their hyperbole, Letterman seems to defang the whole issue. Not that Bush isn't called to the carpet with each of these jokes. He just isn't called to answer. Then again, the Dunce label, alive and well each night for Letterman's 61 minutes, is enough to keep Bush from getting comfortable. The current campaign's stereotypes are now fixed. until this summer, Al Gore's robotic bearing was treated as an almost Platonic essence. An episode of ''The Simpsons'' a few years back (relevant because every comedy writer in the nation can quote chapter and verse from that series) included a ''talking Al Gore doll.'' One pull of a string and Gore flatly intoned, ''You . . . are hearing . . . my voice.'' In the latest crop of Clutch Cargos, Gore and Bush (both given voice by the veteran writer Robert Smigel) have achieved a fullness unparalleled anywhere else in late-night comedy. Not long ago, Bush had been seen as a coke fiend, at one point snorting Senator John McCain's entire head. ''The drug thing wore thin,'' says the head writer, Jonathan Groff, who at 38 is a kind of Stanley Kubrick among comedy figures. ''But then we started working in some of Bush's arrogance and lack of intellectual firepower.'' A recent Clutch, for instance, showed Bush complaining that he had been asked to ''name all 50 continents -- not so easy!'' As he then fumbled into Middle East issues, he expressed his conviction that ''the Arabs get Arabia, so the Jews should get Jewsalem.'' The bit ended with Bush's endorsement of his running mate: ''I was always around when Dick Cheney and my dad worked together. I'd hear 'em working in the front room when I'd stumble in all high.'' Despite O'Brien's sworn preference for cartoons over ideology, the skit was typically rich. In the space of a few lines, it nailed not only Bush's putative lack of smarts, but his WASP-ish exclusivity (with a hint of prejudice), his inexperience and reliance on old-guard pols -- all topped off with a kicky drug reference for the lowbrows. Al Gore, once depicted as a face with a staticky modem noise issuing from its mouth, has now transformed into a man who is not so much stiff as creepy. (Not ''arrogant,'' though: that's a word Groff, whose wife worked in the Clinton administration, reserves for Bush.) At one rehearsal I watched last month, Smigel had all but perfected his parody of Gore's voice, with its occasional sibilance and faint echo of a schoolmaster's modulations. With Smigel perched offstage, holding his face motionless so his lips would stay within the Gore-head graphic, O'Brien did the read-through from his desk, strumming an acoustic guitar when there was nothing else to do. Groff (then in his final weeks on staff) lazed on the guest couch, making subtle alterations to the script. The concept for the sketch was that Gore was revving up for his convention speech in Los Angeles. ''Eleven months ago,'' the Clutch Gore intoned, ''I turned my struggling campaign around by talking louder and louder and acting weirder and weirder. Tomorrow night is an opportunity to be louder and stiffer and weirder than ever. Conan, I aim to be truuuly diss-turbing!'' The fake Gore then lauded Clinton as ''most fan-horrible-tastic truly wonder-bad-legacy goodful!'' which was as close as any comic got to capturing the dicey acrobatics of Gore's position at the time. When ''Gore'' then tried to sell the notion that Joe Lieberman brought excitement to the campaign under the bizarre theory that ''Jewish people are festive,'' Conan objected that ''Gore'' was stretching. ''That is so funny, it makes me laugh spontaneously!'' Clutch Gore slowly replied, trying his best to emit human laughter. ''Ha, hah, ha.'' Ultimately, it's not the politics of the people writing the jokes that matters. Some caricatures are just more damaging than others. Being called Dumb is more devastating than being called Stiff -- that's comedy math, pure and simple. The elemental dynamics of humor have made late-night jokes more punishing on Governor Bush. And that helps Al Gore. True, George W. Bush can protest the labels that hang around his neck all he likes, but he can never overcome them. What mainstream comedy will never admit to is the sheer inequity of the attributes assigned to the two candidates. Because the natural analog of stupidity is not stiffness. Late-night comedy's rap on Al Gore might be summed up this way: he is more in his element with policy than with ceremony. He's a nerdy technocrat without flash. In the main, he's accused of being untelegenic, of lacking the charisma of Bill Clinton. He is ''accused'' of being smart. On the structural level (leaving aside the question of Bush's intelligence), a charge of stupidity strikes far deeper. Foolishness is an irreducible attribute and judges the man's political worth unambiguously. There is no way to interpret it charitably. Stiffness, on the other hand, is an accident of outward behavior. It may be a metaphor for discomfort before a crowd -- or it may be the mark of someone who is extremely calculating. Al Gore has hardly been a stranger to such accusations: that he is a gifted panderer and adapts his behavior with amoral dexterity to any situation in which he finds himself. His previous convention speeches (if you believe his critics) clearly demonstrate his willingness to trot out personal calamity to further political goals. Never mind the campaign-finance thicket. Gore's critics insist that, in 1996, Gore exploited the lung-cancer death of his own sister even though he had a long history of accepting contributions from Big Tobacco; later, the near death of his only son was offered up in sentimental speeches that were designed to imbue the politician-father with an air of humanity. And last spring, at the height of his bloody war on Bill Bradley, Gore resorted to embarrassing Gospel-meeting inflections to address an African-American church. The next day he selected a rabbinical monotone while speaking in a synagogue. If you accept all these tenets, Gore is not stiff. He's a chameleon. He is a fraud. And if the Dunce archetype is a mother lode of comedy, isn't the Fraud label just as fecund for the late-night boys? Historically, haven't the archetypes of the Liar, of the Tartuffe, provided soil as rich as that which nourishes the Dunce? And considering that ''stiff'' is arguably the outward shell of ''fake,'' why is Gore given the gentler caricature? A knee-jerk conservative response might be to cry conspiracy and accuse lefty writers of working to boost their man. Bush himself might rightly sense something subliminable at work. Eddie Feldmann of ''Dennis Miller Live'' points out that the Fraud model would never work -- that a mass audience would need to be too well versed to accept this line of comedy. ''They'd have to listen to what Gore says, not what he's known for,'' says Feldmann. ''He was pegged early on, and it's hard to break the stereotype once you set it.'' Not that Feldmann hasn't done some reconnaissance in Fraud territory. Last month, Miller nodded at the theme: ''Al Gore couldn't be more phony if he were a professional Al Gore impersonator.'' Still, the late-nighters have limited their experimentation with Gore as Fraud. Like Feldmann, Mulligan says it's simply too late. ''For a brief period, Gore's fraud was in play with that Buddhist temple and all,'' he says distantly, as if recalling trivia from the life of James K. Polk. ''But these things flip-flop. For some reason, and I can't imagine why, we made a lateral move. This logic -- that the pols' fictitious personae are built, then become immutable in the rigid glow of public approval -- doesn't hold up. Bush's persona evolved, and not just on Conan O'Brien's show. Why not Gore's? The coin flip has landed tails for Bush, on each and every late-night program. Earlier this month, Mulligan made one of his occasional appearances on the Letterman show. Dressed in his shlumpy work clothes, he issued an impassioned plea about the November election. ''I sincerely hope you cast your vote for George W. Bush,'' he implored, with just the right note of pathos. ''I'm a 53-year-old comedy writer, and to be honest, I don't feel like working that hard anymore.'' Mulligan went on to speak of his ambition to ''sit around all day, eating Funions and playing computer solitaire. But this beautiful dream is only possible if we have a really dumb guy in the White House.'' Good comedy is never a victimless crime. Though it is conceivable that the late-nights may have stumbled onto the fairest possible stereotypes -- that Gore is stiff but not sufficiently corrupt and, to put it politely, that the following Dennis Miller joke is justified: ''Bush promises to spend an additional $13 billion on education. O.K., George, that covers you. Now what about the rest of the country?'' Of course, at the end of the day, it's all just comedy. No one's on fire. Chances are, the electorate will get a few chances in the next 44 days to take a more serious look at Bush and Gore.
 Editorial holds that it is shameful fact that US is only industrialized power that does not provide some form of universal health coverage for its people; criticizes Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush for not proposing such plan during presidential campaign President Clinton proposed in 1993 to achieve universal coverage with a massive overhaul of the entire health care sector. But after the plan self-destructed, the administration did little to attack the problem. The issue flickered momentarily as Bill Bradley posed a thoughtful solution during his presidential campaign. Vice President Al Gore, after he snuffed out Mr. Bradley's bid in the primaries, also turned away from the issue, and in the general election campaign, he and Gov. George W. Bush have offered piecemeal plans for extending health insurance coverage. But none of their proposals would knock more than a few million off the dreadful 45 million total that includes 10 million children. Governor Bush, by contrast, proposes a tax credit of up to $2,000, costing about $60 billion over 10 years. He would also spend $8 billion to build community health centers. But the tax credit is too skimpy to draw many uninsured families to policies that could cost them thousands of dollars a year more than the Bush credit would cover. Nor does the Bush proposal include requirements that parents buy coverage for children or strong penalties for states that fail to drive down the number of uninsured residents. Mr. Gore's platform calls for spending about $140 billion over 10 years to raise coverage among the uninsured. He proposes a refundable tax credit for individuals equal to 25 percent of the cost of their coverage. For a $2,000 premium, that would amount to a credit of only about $500. Mr. Gore fears that tax credits large enough to attract the uninsured would encourage employers to drop coverage for workers. So he would also make more low-income children eligible for the Children's Health Insurance Program, an existing state-run program, and open that program to the parents of eligible children. The Gore plan would permit children from families that earn too much to qualify for the program to buy coverage at an unsubsidized premium. But state programs have been slow to soak up many uninsured children, so Mr. Gore's proposal, though over all a more effective approach than Mr. Bush's, offers little prospect of making a giant step toward universal coverage.
 Earlier this month, when the F.T.C. reported that the vast majority of adult-rated films, recordings and electronic games were being advertised to appeal to children, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, his running mate, suggested that if the entertainment companies did not voluntarily clean up their act, the commission should move against the industry by using its power to prohibit false and deceptive advertising. William J. Bennett, the education secretary in the Bush administration who offers himself as a guardian of American moral values, believes the strongest weapon politicians have is their ability to inflict public shame. In that context, the Commerce Committee has called executives of the large movie studios to testify on Wednesday and say publicly what, if anything, they intend to do to limit children's exposure to violent entertainment.
 Health care for children has become a major issue in the presidential campaign. Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee, says Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican candidate, has a dismal record of providing health insurance to children in Texas. Mr. Bush rejects the criticism. Texas officials say 100,000 children have enrolled in the new program since they began taking applications in April. Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said Mr. Gore ''should address the problems on his own watch.'' Mr. Bartlett said that the number of uninsured children nationwide had increased since the Clinton administration took office, and Census Bureau reports show  that the 11 million figure is up from 9.6 million in 1993. Justin J. Sayfie, a spokesman for Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, said: ''There was a lag in getting the program up and running. The Florida Legislature didn't meet until March 1998, and Florida started implementing the program in October 1998. We were one year behind the curve.''
 Gloria Stroock letter on Adam Nagourney's September 3 article on revival of Gore Vidal's play Best Man notes that play has been revised four times since 1960 (S) I read with interest Adam Nagourney's article about the coming revival of ''The Best Man'' [''The Bard of American Politics, Still Campaigning,'' Sept. 3], in which he mentions that Gore Vidal had not made any changes in the original play to account for the intervening 40 years. I read with interest Adam Nagourney's article about the coming revival of ''The Best Man'' [''The Bard of American Politics, Still Campaigning,'' Sept. 3], in which he mentions that Gore Vidal had not made any changes in the original play to account for the intervening 40 years. It appears that someone made the play more relevant to today's world. Let's hope it was Gore Vidal!
 Article in series on Republican Presidential nominee George W Bush discusses his record as owner of Texas Rangers baseball team and his role in receiving financing for building of new stadium in 1994; photo (L) For those who mock George W. Bush as a daddy's boy who slouched through life reaping the dividends of his name, the lovely Texas Rangers baseball stadium here is a useful rebuttal. Walking around the Ballpark in Arlington as it was under construction in 1993, Mr. Bush explained proudly to a Texas reporter, ''When all those people in Austin say, 'He ain't never done anything,' well, this is it.'' For those who mock George W. Bush as a daddy's boy who slouched through life reaping the dividends of his name, the lovely Texas Rangers baseball stadium here is a useful rebuttal. Walking around the Ballpark in Arlington as it was under construction in 1993, Mr. Bush explained proudly to a Texas reporter, ''When all those people in Austin say, 'He ain't never done anything,' well, this is it.'' This stadium is the house that Bush built -- and the one that allowed him, in a sense, to become a presidential candidate. As the owner of a baseball team in Arlington, a Dallas suburb, Mr. Bush laid the groundwork for his race for the governor's mansion, and that in turn may prove his steppingstone to the White House. As an owner, Mr. Bush proved himself an outstanding manager, still remembered fondly by the players who pitched and batted for him, by the fans he wooed, even by the executives he fired. Mr. Bush helped turn the Rangers into a greatly improved team, and he presided over the complex arrangements for the new ballpark, one of the finest in major league baseball. Mr. Bush became a multimillionaire in the process, setting himself up financially for his run for the presidency. In one blow, he acquired not only wealth but also the resume he would need to triumph in politics. Yet a close look suggests that Mr. Bush got the opportunity to be a baseball owner mostly because of his connections. Moreover, his investment was immensely profitable in part because he and his co-owners were shrewd bargainers who charmed and bullied the city of Arlington into giving them a great deal, with the local taxpayers paying more than $135 million to help build the Rangers a stadium. ''The largest welfare recipient in the state of Texas is George W. Bush,'' said Mark S. Rosentraub, a sports economist who formerly taught in Arlington and is now at Indiana University. ''The numbers speak for themselves. You cannot accept $135 million from the taxpayers of Arlington and then be against welfare.'' Mr. Bush and his fellow owners even got the local government to seize the property of other landowners and, in effect, hand it over to the Texas Rangers so that they could make a profit on it. All this was shrewd business and a tribute to Mr. Bush's savvy and vision, but critics complain that it is hard to reconcile with his speeches about limited government and private property rights. ''If a conservative is one who believes in limited government, this whole transaction shows how hypocritical it is for Bush to claim to be a conservative,'' said Jim Runzheimer, a lawyer in Arlington who opposed the public subsidy to build the stadium. ''He got the government to pay his expenses, and that flies in the face of capitalism.'' Yet Mr. Bush was simply doing, exceptionally successfully, what sports franchises everywhere have frequently tried: getting taxpayers to swallow some of their business costs. And to the extent that Mr. Bush's job at that time was to make money for the team's owners, he was eminently successful. A longtime friend of Mr. Bush's and a fellow Rangers' owner, Roland W. Betts, noted that the criticisms in effect confirm Mr. Bush's success in doing his job. George W. Bush has frequently claimed to have cobbled together the deal to buy the Rangers in 1989. ''I was like a pit bull on the pant leg of opportunity,'' Mr. Bush said in a long interview about his past. ''And I just grabbed on to it. I was going to put the deal together. And I did.'' But that is a bit like Vice President Al Gore claiming to have taken the initiative in creating the Internet: there is something to it, but it is also an exaggeration. The initiative, Mr. Bush acknowledges, came from Bill DeWitt, a businessman and friend of the family. Mr. DeWitt had heard that the Rangers were on the market and wanted to recruit Mr. Bush as a partner to buy the team. The attractiveness of Mr. Bush as a partner had little to do with his business ability; at that time, his business record was a bleak one involving faltering oil companies. Rather, Mr. Bush was useful because his father was then the president and because he and his parents were longtime friends of the seller, Eddie Chiles. If anybody could get a good deal buying the team from Mr. Chiles, it would be Mr. Bush. Sure enough, Mr. Chiles said he would be delighted to sell the team to Mr. Bush. So Mr. Bush, always a brilliant fund-raiser, persuaded a group of relatives and acquaintances to invest in the team. But most were not from Texas, and the baseball commissioner, Peter Ueberroth, wanted the teams to have local owners. Mr. Bush was flummoxed. At this point, Mr. Ueberroth and other baseball executives persuaded a Texas financier, Richard Rainwater, to help buy the team. By all accounts, the attraction of Mr. Bush in the deal was his name and connections. ''It certainly helped,'' Dr. Robert W. Brown, then the president of the American League, said of Mr. Bush's status as First Son. Dr. Brown, a former Yankee third baseman better known as Bobby, added: ''He came from a very prominent group. I was very friendly with his father. So it wasn't just a strange happenstance.'' Mr. Bush's path to becoming a baseball owner was remarkable because at first he did not put up a cent of his own money. Instead, he borrowed $500,000 from United Bank of Midland, a Texas bank of which he had previously been a director, and used it to buy a stake in the team. Wayne Merritt, who was then the president of the bank (it has since been merged out of existence), said he could not discuss the loan because it was ''Mr. Bush's private business.'' But Robert A. McCleskey, Mr. Bush's longtime accountant, said that as collateral for the loan, Mr. Bush had pledged oil company stock then worth more than $900,000. In any case, a year later Mr. Bush sold the stock and paid off the loan. He also raised his investment in two stages to a total of $606,000, or 1.8 percent of the team. Mr. Bush himself seemed to acknowledge the advantage that came with his name. Throughout his life, baseball has been one of Mr. Bush's truest loves. As a child, he collected baseball cards and was a catcher on the all-star Little League team in Midland, Tex. As governor, he decorated his office with his collection of baseballs autographed by the likes of Ted Williams and Joe DiMaggio. And even these days on the campaign plane, he perks up when baseball teams are mentioned and seems more intimate with the fine print of the sports pages than of the foreign news pages. Mr. Bush's passion for baseball and his deep understanding of it helped him as he settled into his new role as an owner. While he initially grated on some Texans who saw him as a spoiled rich kid playing on his connections, he worked hard and impressed people in the baseball world. Instead of watching games from an enclosed suite, as many owners do, Mr. Bush sat and ate peanuts in Section 109, Row 1, behind the Rangers' dugout. He got to know all the hot dog vendors and ticket-takers by first name, tirelessly introduced himself to fans and aggressively cultivated reporters. Jim Reeves, a sports columnist for The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, recalled that he had initially been skeptical of Mr. Bush, thinking that he had gotten the opportunity to be an owner simply because of his name. But Mr. Bush then wooed him, golfing with him twice and stopping frequently to chat, and Mr. Reeves changed his views. Mr. Bush also worked to charm the players, dropping by the clubhouse and socializing easily with them. He came across as the direct opposite of the stereotype of an imperious, pretentious owner. ''From the get-go, I liked him,'' said Kenny Rogers, who pitched for the Rangers then and rejoined the team this season. In particular, Mr. Bush became friendly with Nolan Ryan, the legendary pitcher who had just agreed to sign with the Rangers when Mr. Bush's group bought the team. The Rangers had ranked sixth in the American League's Western Division the two years before Mr. Bush came on board; they clawed their way up to second place by his last year of full-time involvement. Since then, they have won the division three times, although it's not clear how much credit if any Mr. Bush should get for that. Mr. Bush had a particular knack for getting media attention, beginning when he got his mother, then the first lady, to throw out the first ball in a game. He also managed to get his father photographed wearing a Texas Rangers cap, and he took advantage of his family's prominence by giving speeches throughout the region proclaiming the virtues of baseball and urging people to go to games. All this promotion paid off. The Rangers had never drawn as many as 1.8 million fans in a season in previous years, but attendance exceeded 2 million each year of Mr. Bush's stewardship. It was less obvious to the fans, but Mr. Bush also proved an astute businessman and a first-class manager. In his presidential campaign, he sometimes describes leadership using the model of a chief executive in business, and that is what his colleagues remember him as: a leader who set an agenda, inspired those around him, acted predictably and was comfortable delegating authority. Owners in baseball are notorious for being haughty and difficult, but Mr. Bush cultivated the opposite image. Instead of micromanaging -- suggesting a pitching change during a game, for example -- Mr. Bush proved then (as now) relatively uninterested in details and happy to delegate to those beneath him. It is hard to find anybody who worked in the ballpark who did not like him and did not periodically chat with him. It helped that Mr. Bush came across not as a rich boy but as a notorious cheapskate. He regularly wore shoes with holes in the soles, until a fellow owner, Edward W. Rose III, bought him a $150 pair of fancy Italian shoes at Neiman Marcus. Sometimes Mr. Bush made management mistakes -- the Rangers traded away Sammy Sosa on his watch, although Mr. Bush simply approved a decision that had been made well below him -- but his management style also won him fierce loyalty. Tom Grieve, then the Rangers' general manager, says that owners typically try to tell tales of their old college baseball days to show off, but Mr. Bush won his heart by doing the opposite. ''And then the coach calls in a second baseman even though he'd never thrown a pitch. And Bush says, 'That's when I figured my aspirations of becoming a major league player might not be achieved.' '' Although he charmed people, Mr. Bush was not a patsy. In the end he fired three key people: Mr. Grieve as general manager, Bobby Valentine as manager, and Mike Stone as president. Mr. Stone declined to talk about it, but Mr. Valentine and Mr. Grieve rave about the man who fired them. Mr. Valentine, who has been the manager of the New York Mets since late in the 1996 season, said of Mr. Bush, ''Once the emotion was out, I still really liked him.'' While in baseball, Mr. Bush demonstrated a grasp not just of tactics but also of strategy. His central strategic goal was to get a new stadium for the Rangers without making the owners pay for all of it. The efforts to get public financing have raised eyebrows because they seem to conflict with much of what Mr. Bush has stood for as a politician. While running for office, he has always called for limited government and low taxes, and the 2000 Republican Party platform in Texas (which he does not publicly embrace) explicitly states, ''Public money or public powers should not be used to fund or implement any private projects such as high-speed rail or sports stadiums.'' ''How can you negotiate on behalf of the city when you've got a lawsuit against you from the administration of the father of the guy across the table?'' asked Mr. Runzheimer, the stadium critic. ''Bush had him over a barrel.'' ''The taxpayers took it in the shorts,'' said William M. Eastland, an accountant in Arlington who studied the agreement and came to oppose it. Mr. Eastland, a lifelong Republican, emphasizes that he supports Mr. Bush in the election -- indeed, he was a Bush delegate at the Republican National Convention -- but he still objects to public financing of the stadium. ''It's one thing to say, 'Why are we building this for owners and for right fielders who get $14 million a year?' '' said Jeff Smulyan, who owned the Seattle Mariners when Mr. Bush ran the Rangers. ''But the reality is that if you want a ball team in a place like Arlington, there has to be a public-private partnership.'' Mr. Smulyan describes himself as a lifelong Democrat, but he has nothing but praise for Mr. Bush. And he adds that the kind of stadium arrangement Mr. Bush worked out is almost inevitable. ''Who is the final judge of whether you made money on the backs of the city of Arlington?'' asked Mr. Rose, Mr. Bush's fellow owner. ''Is it some journalist who wants to sell papers, or the people who think or know that they made a good deal?'' ''There's no question that the ballpark made a huge difference for this franchise,'' said J. Thomas Schieffer, who succeeded Mr. Bush as general partner of the Rangers. ''But we think the citizens of Arlington benefited as much as the owners did.'' As Mr. Bush told a local reporter after buying the team, ''The idea of making a land play, absolutely, to plunk the field down in the middle of a big piece of land, that's kind of always been the strategy.'' As a politician, Mr. Bush has repeatedly sided with the property rights movement, which aims to protect property owners from government attempts to take land or limit its use. Often this issue comes up in environmental cases, and the national Republican platform this year -- which Mr. Bush's aides helped mold -- has an entire section titled ''Protecting Property Rights.'' ''In Texas, in my first term, we enacted one of the strongest property rights laws in the nation,'' Mr. Bush declared in a speech on the environment late last year. ''As president, I would follow the same policies.'' But when Mr. Bush was running the Rangers, the team got Arlington to use its power of eminent domain to seize private land for the new stadium complex. At one level, this was simply one more way for Arlington to give the Rangers an incentive to stay. But the practice raised questions about fairness. Judging from the memos, Mr. Bush was not directly involved in the mechanics of the condemnation. But he supervised those who were, and the process reflected his own philosophy of how to make money in baseball: move beyond tickets and hot dogs to seek new sources of revenue. The Mathes family was one of those that tangled with the Rangers when they were under Mr. Bush. The family, the heirs of a television tycoon named Curtis Mathes, owned a piece of land near the stadium, and agreed to sell if the price was fair. After the settlements, the Rangers, tough bargainers to the end, refused to pay, noting that the legal obligation to pay lay with the city of Arlington. It was only last year, after Mr. Bush and his group had sold the Rangers, that the new owners agreed to repay the city for the losses. ''They made a heck of a deal,'' Glenn Sodd, the lawyer who represented the landowners against the Rangers, said of Mr. Bush and his fellow owners. ''If he was the architect of it, it indicates some brains on his part.'' But Mr. Sodd, who said he had voted Republican in every presidential election since 1968, added that he would not vote for Mr. Bush this time around because of what he said was his repugnance for the ''dirty pool'' played by the Rangers owners. One of the skills Mr. Bush demonstrated with the Rangers was an ability to disagree with people without coming across as disagreeable. It was that talent that almost led his career in a different direction, one that would have kept him in baseball and out of politics. There had been a bitter dispute among major league owners about Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner and an old friend of the Bush family. Mr. Bush had been Mr. Vincent's most vocal supporter, but in the end the other owners -- led by Bud Selig, the owner of the Milwaukee Brewers -- forced Mr. Vincent to resign. Even though Mr. Bush was on the losing side, he was widely respected among the owners for his conciliatory style and commitment to baseball, and some suggested that he be appointed to replace Mr. Vincent as a way of healing the rift among the owners. Several friends say that in early 1993 Mr. Bush was very interested in the job. Mr. Selig, who was then acting commissioner and eventually was given the job permanently, has a different memory. He said he recalled no specific discussions with Mr. Bush about him getting the job, adding that in any case a decision on a new commissioner was put off until long after Mr. Bush had decided to run for governor. When he began campaigning for governor, Mr. Bush's full-time involvement in baseball came to an end. But he retained his financial interest until 1998, when he and his fellow owners sold the Rangers -- very shrewdly, at the top of the market -- for $250 million. It was a good deal for all the owners. The limited partners, who had leveraged their capital with loans, made a 450 percent profit on their investment. And Mr. Bush did far better. As general partner of the Rangers, Mr. Bush was paid $200,000 a year. But, more important, he was rewarded with a provision that after the investors got their money back plus 2 percent interest per year, he would get a gift of a 10 percent share of the remaining profits. Governor Bush's Journey This is the 15th article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future installments will look at Al Gore and religion and George Bush's political revival.
 David E Sanger article on Clinton administration's decision to tap Strategic Petroleum Reserve for 30 million barrels of oil; holds that Vice Pres Al Gore, stung by Gov George W Bush's criticism that administration has stumbled along with no energy policy, feels he is facing political crisis; photo (M) WHEN the idea of tapping the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve was floated last winter, in the face of high home heating prices in the Northeast, no one was more skeptical than Vice President Al Gore. Oil-producing nations, he explained to a Massachusetts audience in February, could easily counter the move. ''All they would have to do is cut back a little bit on supply and they'd wipe out any impact from releasing oil from that reserve,'' Mr. Gore said. WHEN the idea of tapping the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve was floated last winter, in the face of high home heating prices in the Northeast, no one was more skeptical than Vice President Al Gore. Oil-producing nations, he explained to a Massachusetts audience in February, could easily counter the move. ''All they would have to do is cut back a little bit on supply and they'd wipe out any impact from releasing oil from that reserve,'' Mr. Gore said. There is no question that Mr. Gore, stung by Gov. George W. Bush's criticism that the administration has stumbled along with no energy policy, feels he is facing a political crisis. Inventories of oil are running low and everyone from truckers to commuters in S.U.V.'s is getting angry. The Energy Department predicted early this month that home heating oil bills would be 30 percent higher than last winter, and today that looks conservative. Inconveniently for Mr. Gore, the people most dependent on oil for heat live in many of the swing states in the Midwest, which are likely to determine the outcome of the election, now only 44 days away. All these realities collided in the Roosevelt Room of the White House the other day with the political demands of two campaigns -- Al Gore's and Hillary Rodham Clinton's. Just as Mr. Gore is worried about the Midwest, Mrs. Clinton is worried about upstate New York. And neither could make a convincing case that the administration was easing anyone's pain. Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers, a veteran of many currency market interventions (some that worked, some that flopped) took the other side. Mr. Richardson's proposal, he said in a memo that was almost instantly leaked in an effort to embarrass Mr. Summers, would ''set a dangerous precedent.'' Echoing Mr. Gore's point last February, he noted that OPEC could easily neutralize the release of the stockpiled oil. He suggested that oil traders, seeing the approach of an election, might dismiss any action as a political ploy rather than a commitment to reverse oil prices. Maybe so, but in Washington losing an election is also considered a major mistake. So on Thursday the vice president stood in front of some oil tanks in southern Maryland and publicly called on his boss to  begin opening the spigots on the reserve. That hardly came as a surprise to Mr. Clinton, who had gotten a call from Mr. Gore two days earlier, informing him of the new campaign initiative. And on Friday, a happy-looking Mr. Richardson announced the release of the 30 million barrels, about 5 percent of the reserve, a far larger amount than Mr. Gore had sought in public. The White House hopes that it is enough to drive down prices without leaving Mr. Gore  vulnerable to Mr. Bush's charge that the release ''threatens national security.'' Mr. Bush may have a hard time arguing that the release leaves America in peril, but he has a point in his criticism of the Clinton-Gore administration's energy policy. When oil was trading at $20 a barrel, as it was a few years ago, few in Washington worried about the oil market. The administration focused on the economic problems in front of it -- keeping the world economy on an even keel -- and didn't spend much time looking at what might happen if demand for oil picked up while inventory and production capacity were still low. But Mr. Bush is almost certainly right when he says the administration is redefining the purpose of the  reserve, which was created to protect against real supply disruptions. ''We think this is a rainy day,'' Mr. Richardson said. ''We think that between now and winter, because of the low stocks of home heating oil, we're in danger of potential disruption.''
