 Doug Hattaway, Vice President Al Gore's spokesman, said Mr. Gore ''would like to look into reopening Pennsylvania Avenue and would look forward to reviewing the proposal.'' Gov. George W. Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said that if elected, Mr. Bush ''would meet with the Secret Service to get their best judgment on the implications of opening up Pennsylvania Avenue. He is keenly aware of the sensitivities in Washington, D.C., to the problems that have been created by the closing.''
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed column criticizes Vice Pres Al Gore for advocating use of nation's strategic oil reserves; says move is politically motivated and will only increase American dependence on OPEC (M) Wait a minute -- that was supposed to be Al Gore, but in the heat of the campaign Mr. Gore has shamelessly offered us instead a fly-by-night plan for putting America out of balance. The new Gore energy theory is to demonize the oil companies, tap into the nation's strategic oil reserve -- which only a few months ago he declared shouldn't be touched to manipulate prices -- and talk about developing new magic energy-saving technologies that will create jobs in the swing states where Mr. Gore needs to get elected and will allow Americans to keep driving gas-guzzling big cars and indulging their same energy-consuming habits without pain. Wait a minute -- that was supposed to be Al Gore, but in the heat of the campaign Mr. Gore has shamelessly offered us instead a fly-by-night plan for putting America out of balance. The new Gore energy theory is to demonize the oil companies, tap into the nation's strategic oil reserve -- which only a few months ago he declared shouldn't be touched to manipulate prices -- and talk about developing new magic energy-saving technologies that will create jobs in the swing states where Mr. Gore needs to get elected and will allow Americans to keep driving gas-guzzling big cars and indulging their same energy-consuming habits without pain. How nice! How easy! And how far from what's really required to free us from the grip of OPEC. Here is how we got into this pickle, which you won't hear from Mr. Gore: Mr. Gore knows this, but instead of laying it on the line he opted for an Olympic-quality, full-body pander -- offering a quick fix to garner votes, and pain-free solutions for the future. Prime the pumps, pump the polls and pay later. Don't get me wrong, tapping the strategic reserve makes some sense to ease the current distribution crisis -- but doing it without also offering a real program for consuming less oil and finding more makes no sense at all. It's also dangerous. Another name for the Gore strategy would be ''The Saddam Hussein Rehabilitation Act of 2000.'' Because tapping into the strategic reserve, without conservation or exploration, only guarantees OPEC's dominance. And when the oil market remains tight, it means that Saddam is in an ideal position to hold America hostage. Any time he threatens to take any of his oil off the market, he can make the price soar. Mr. Gore's oil pander also reminds many Democrats of what it is that bothers them about the vice president. Many Democrats really are not wild about him, yet they know they have to vote for him over Mr. Bush. They would at least like to feel good about that vote. But when you hear Mr. Gore bleating that ''I will work for the day when we are free forever of the dominance of big oil and foreign oil'' -- without leveling with Americans that the only way to do that is by us consuming less and drilling more -- you just want to cover your ears. Surely Mr. Gore is better than that. Surely Gore supporters are entitled to expect more from him. I guess all they can hope for now is that he will show more spine and intellectual honesty as a president than he has as a candidate. You really start to wonder, though.
 Other Democrats who received large finder's fees under Mr. Silvester's auspices are the former state Democratic Party chairman, John F. Droney; Peter G. Kelly, a Hartford lawyer and prominent Democratic fund-raiser who is an architect of vice-president Al Gore's presidential campaign in Connecticut; and George C. Finley, a West Hartford lawyer. All have repeatedly said they did nothing improper.
 The Gore campaign was quick to note that when Mr. Cheney served as Wyoming's lone congressman, he voted several times against financing for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which provides relief to disaster sites like Xenia. The Gore campaign was quick to note that when Mr. Cheney served as Wyoming's lone congressman, he voted several times against financing for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which provides relief to disaster sites like Xenia. FOX TO SKIP DEBATE -- The Fox television network has cast its vote in the presidential election -- in favor of ''Dark Angel.'' When CBS and ABC broadcast the first debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush on Oct. 3, Fox will be screening the two-hour premiere of a science-fiction adventure series. NBC, for its part, said last week it had to stick to baseball. What gives with the subliminal sloganeering? Peter Beinart, the editor, said he ran the hidden headline, which does not refer to an article inside the magazine, as ''a response to the media obsession with subliminal advertising'' -- the brouhaha that erupted after the barely visible word ''rats'' flashed in an advertisement for Gov. George W. Bush intentionally or otherwise. THE TRAVEL LOG -- After a weekend of debating oil prices and whether any ''moles'' were out there trying to pilfer campaign secrets, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore took to the stump again Monday, with Mr. Gore heading south to Florida, a state once considered Bush territory but now a crucial battleground, and Mr. Bush heading northwest for Oregon and Washington, states that once seemed safe Gore territory but, now, maybe not so safe. Length of the Official Day: Gore, 15 1/2 hours; Bush, 12 hours  States Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 2  Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 2 ; Bush, 2  Events: Gore, 3; Bush, 2  News Conferences/Interviews: Gore, 9; Bush 5 (includes editorial board meeting at The Oregonian newspaper)  Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush 0  Main message: Gore, strengthening medicare; Bush improving education, renewing the promise of America's public schools.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in Beaverton, Ore, where he sounds new slogan aimed at raising anxieties about nation's well-being; accuses Clinton administration of helping create an 'education recession' in which minority and low-income students were routinely allowed to fail; says nation faces reading crisis that has created major social problems and caused it to fall behind peers in other industrialized nations; photo (M) Sounding his new slogan intended to raise anxieties about the nation's well-being, Gov. George W. Bush accused the Clinton administration today of helping create an ''education recession'' in which minority and low-income students were routinely allowed to fail. Seeking to draw a clear link between the nation's future economic health and the quality of its schools, Mr. Bush asserted that the nation faced a reading crisis that had contributed to crime and caused American students to fall behind their peers in other industrialized nations. Sounding his new slogan intended to raise anxieties about the nation's well-being, Gov. George W. Bush accused the Clinton administration today of helping create an ''education recession'' in which minority and low-income students were routinely allowed to fail. Seeking to draw a clear link between the nation's future economic health and the quality of its schools, Mr. Bush asserted that the nation faced a reading crisis that had contributed to crime and caused American students to fall behind their peers in other industrialized nations. ''This is a leading indicator of troubles to come,'' Mr. Bush told 500 supporters early today at an elementary school in Beaverton, Ore., 10 miles west of Portland. ''Children who never master reading can never master learning. As uneducated adults, they face a life of struggle on the fringes of our society. Some will turn to crime and end up in prison.'' Mr. Bush, the Republican nominee for president, outlined his proposals to improve grade school reading programs, expand scholarship programs for math and science students and encourage annual testing of students in grades three through eight. He accused his Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, of promising change but instead protecting a failed status quo. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, countered that Mr. Bush would not be able to afford his education proposals because he would need the entire federal surplus to pay for his military programs and tax cuts. Mr. Bush denies that. Mr. Bush's school event kicked off a three-day swing on the West Coast that today took him through Washington and Oregon, states where Democrats have carried recent presidential elections but where polls show Mr. Bush running neck-and-neck with Mr. Gore. In both states, Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, has recently drawn enthusiastic crowds of more than 10,000 people and is considered a threat to draw disaffected Democrats away from Mr. Gore. Later today, Mr. Bush told several hundred supporters at an airport rally here that he would oppose breaching hydroelectric dams on the Snake River, as some environmentalists had proposed, to improve salmon habitats. He also attacked Mr. Gore for having said he wanted to study the issue further. ''He's worried about some kind of group's not liking him,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He wants to study it as way of not taking a position.'' Mr. Bush also plans to spend two days in California, where polls show Mr. Gore holding a comfortable lead. Part of Mr. Bush's goal is to tap into the state's wealth: he plans to raise more than $1.4 million for the state Republican Party at Silicon Valley and Los Angeles fund-raisers. But Mr. Bush's communications director, Karen P. Hughes, asserted that the governor also wanted to show that he planned to contest California until Election Day. Coming about a week before what will probably be among the most important moments of the fall campaign -- a nationally televised debate with Mr. Gore -- today's event in Beaverton also gave Mr. Bush an opportunity to fine-tune his message on a signature issue before a friendly audience. Mr. Bush did not hold a news conference but instead fielded gently worded questions from the largely partisan audience. With each response, Mr. Bush expounded on his plans to cut taxes, increase military spending and improve education. While Mr. Bush has sought to lay blame for the nation's education problems squarely on the administration's doorstep, many educators contend that the federal government plays a relatively minor role in primary and secondary education. The most important decisions -- on curriculum, standards, testing, personnel and construction -- are made by state and local officials. Mr. Bush himself acknowledged the limitations of federal action today, noting that Washington provides only 7 percent of public education spending. The focus of Mr. Bush's education plan is to ensure that all children read proficiently by the fourth grade. He would provide aid to help primary schools expand reading programs and reward schools that administered standardized tests annually to help educators identify learning problems early. For those and other proposals, Mr. Bush has called for increasing federal education spending by $47 billion over 10 years. Mr. Gore has called for increasing federal education spending by $115 billion over 10 years to help districts build new schools, provide preschool for most students, hire more teachers and raise teacher salaries. Like Mr. Bush, he has proposed withholding federal aid from states where test scores do not improve. But unlike his opponent, he would redirect that money to the local schools with the greatest problems, rather than give it to parents. Toward the end of the education event in Beaverton, Mr. Bush was asked what could be done to help students reconnect with politics, and he recommended that candidates not make decisions based on polls or focus groups. But the Bush campaign is not completely averse to such tools; the phrase ''education recession'' was carefully poll-tested before Mr. Bush first deployed it today. While Mr. Bush was pitching his education ideas, his running mate, Dick Cheney, continued his attacks on Mr. Gore, accusing him of having a conflict of interest involving stock and oil prices. Mr. Cheney told reporters in Springfield, Ohio, that Mr. Gore supported extending a moratorium on royalties paid by United States companies drilling for natural gas in the Gulf of Mexico. That position, Mr. Cheney said, would benefit Occidental Petroleum -- a company whose stock is held in a trust belonging to Mr. Gore's mother. ''Gore continues to be the prospective beneficiary of holdings of stock in Occidental Petroleum in the family trust,'' Mr. Cheney said, ''and I think that that does constitute a conflict of interest.'' Ms. Spell, the spokeswoman for Mr. Gore, said that the vice president neither owned nor controlled any stock in Occidental and that there was no way of knowing what stocks would be in the family trust when he inherited them.
 Pressure builds on Sen Joseph I Lieberman to exit Connecticut Senate race and allow another Democrat to seek his seat so party will not lose it if he becomes vice president; he is seeking third term in Senate while campaigning as Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate, which is allowed under state law; minority leader Sen Tom Daschle has reportedly rebuffed appeals from Sens Harry Reid and Byron L Dorgan to intervene; Sen Robert G Torricelli, who heads Democrat's re-election efforts, says stepping asdide would be right decision; many Democrats fear party could regain control of Senate in November elections, but could then lose it if Lieberman is forced to give up seat if he becomes vice president; Lieberman explains decision to seek re-election by arguing that there would not be enough time for primary so voters could choose replacement; victory in Senate campaign and for vice president would force him to give up Senate seat, allowing Republican Gov John G Rowland to appoint successor (M) Even though he is campaigning as Vice President Al Gore's running mate, Mr. Lieberman is also seeking a third term in the United States Senate, which he is entitled to do under state law. Even though he is campaigning as Vice President Al Gore's running mate, Mr. Lieberman is also seeking a third term in the United States Senate, which he is entitled to do under state law. This boost also coincides with the post-convention surge enjoyed by the Gore-Lieberman ticket against their  Republican rivals, Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. Might he change his mind? Didn't he worry about a Republican taking his seat? Was he hedging his bets against a possible loss by Vice President Al Gore?
 Two parts of the crude oil release helped enhance its effect, analysts said. One is that the administration released 30 million barrels of crude oil, instead of the 5 million barrels that Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, had asked for. In addition, the administration said it would review the need for oil in 30 days, which could mean another release just before Election Day on Nov. 7.
 Vice Pres Al Gore campaigns in St Petersburg, Fla, where he promises to strenghten sanctions against health maintenance organizations that pull out of Medicare market and to eliminate copayments and deductibles for variety of preventive tests; says plans advocated by Gov George W Bush would take money out of Medicare for tax cuts for wealthy; photo (M) Campaigning in Florida, where as many as 40 percent of this November's voters may be 60 or older, Vice President Al Gore promised today to strengthen sanctions against health maintenance organizations that pull out of the Medicare market and to eliminate Medicare copayments and deductibles for a variety of preventive tests. Mr. Gore unveiled those proposals in a speech in St. Petersburg that  opened a weeklong discussion of Medicare policy, an issue that is particularly potent in Florida. Before flying here to attend several fund-raisers, Mr. Gore used his speech to convey his stark differences on the issue with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, a comparison that illustrates the broader philosophical differences between the two campaigns. Along those lines, Mr. Gore also drew attention to a five-year-old interview in which Mr. Bush expressed support for the deep Medicare cuts championed by former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. Campaigning in Florida, where as many as 40 percent of this November's voters may be 60 or older, Vice President Al Gore promised today to strengthen sanctions against health maintenance organizations that pull out of the Medicare market and to eliminate Medicare copayments and deductibles for a variety of preventive tests. Mr. Gore unveiled those proposals in a speech in St. Petersburg that  opened a weeklong discussion of Medicare policy, an issue that is particularly potent in Florida. Before flying here to attend several fund-raisers, Mr. Gore used his speech to convey his stark differences on the issue with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, a comparison that illustrates the broader philosophical differences between the two campaigns. Along those lines, Mr. Gore also drew attention to a five-year-old interview in which Mr. Bush expressed support for the deep Medicare cuts championed by former House Speaker Newt Gingrich. Mr. Gore's aides provided reporters with a videotape of the interview on Oct. 19, 1995, by a television station in Austin, Tex., in which Mr. Bush commended that year's House Republican plan to cut $270 billion over seven years from Medicare, the federal health insurance program for the elderly. The proposal died after a prolonged battle with Congressional Democrats and the White House that prompted two government shutdowns. ''Elderly people will not suffer as a result of this plan,'' Mr. Bush said in the interview with KXAN. ''It's going to make the plan solvent. And Republicans will be heralded, not only for saving Medicare, but at the same time for having the political courage to balance the budget.'' Mr. Gore's aides then made him available for an interview with The New York Times, in which he said that Mr. Bush's comments were ''very revealing of his basic attitude toward Medicare'' and belied his assertion that he was a new kind of Republican. ''He doesn't like it,'' Mr. Gore said. ''He disagrees with its basic premise and he is looking for any politically viable opportunity to gut it.'' Mr. Gore then said Mr. Bush would do ''virtually the same thing to Medicare that Gingrich proposed: raising premiums, taking money out of Medicare for a tax cut that goes mainly to the wealthy, forcing seniors into H.M.O.'s, privatizing Medicare.'' Dan Bartlett, a Bush spokesman, said Mr. Bush had made it clear with his own 10-year plan to restructure Medicare, at a cost of $198 billion, that he was committed to the program. Mr. Bush's proposal, issued earlier this month, would allow private insurers to compete with the government to provide a variety of coverage options, some of which could include prescription drug benefits. As for Mr. Bush's comments in 1995, Mr. Bartlett said, ''What is important here is not what Governor Bush said about a plan five years ago that wasn't even his. What's important is what he says about his plan today.'' Today's trip was Mr. Gore's fourth to Florida since the Democratic convention last month, and his ninth since early March. But despite that sign that Mr. Gore is competing aggressively for the state's 25 electoral votes, his campaign admits that it is being badly outspent here on television advertising. Karl Koch, a senior consultant to the campaign in Florida, said that the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee had spent an estimated $2.2 million on advertising from Sept. 11-19, compared with  only $330,000 by the Gore campaign. The Democratic National Committee, which had been advertising in three Florida media markets, is currently off the air but plans to return, Mr. Koch said. A senior campaign official said today that either Mr. Gore or his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, would travel to Florida each week between now and Election Day. The official also said the campaign would increase its advertising and ground troops in the state. The Gore campaign considers Medicare a major issue partly because it plays well in key states like Florida that have large elderly populations. But Mr. Gore's strategists also know that with 39 million beneficiaries nationwide, a number that is projected to more than double by 2035, Medicare is a significant concern for a large cross-section of voters. Indeed, the vice president also used the Medicare issue to batter his opponent in the Democratic primaries, former Senator Bill Bradley. In his speech in St. Petersburg, delivered to a crowd of several thousand people, most of them elderly, Mr. Gore vowed that ''the heart of my agenda is a rock-solid commitment to Medicare.'' Reading from a teleprompter, Mr. Gore explained the key elements of his Medicare proposals: to protect the projected $360 billion, 10-year Medicare surplus by placing it in a secure fund; to add a voluntary prescription drug benefit at a cost of $338 billion; and to invest $40 billion in reimbursement for nursing homes, teaching hospitals, rural hospitals, home health agencies and rehabilitative services. Those were among the proposals that were repackaged in a 74-page booklet on Medicare that was released by Mr. Gore today, three weeks after he issued a 191-page synopsis of his economic plan. But the booklet also outlined Mr. Gore's new proposals for an array of sanctions against H.M.O.'s that pull out of the Medicare market, a growing problem. Mr. Gore would prevent H.M.O.'s that drop coverage of Medicare recipients from returning to that market for four years, double the existing sanction of two years. ''We will no longer just accept the rising wave of H.M.O.'s dropping seniors and denying them coverage, all to enhance their bottom line,'' Mr. Gore said. Another new proposal would eliminate existing Medicare copayments and deductibles for preventive services like hepatitis B vaccinations, colorectal and prostate cancer screenings, mammographies, pelvic exams and bone mass measurements. Gore aides said those changes would cost $8 billion over 10 years. ''No seniors should be priced out of tests that could save their lives,'' Mr. Gore said.
 Gore on Medicare H.M.O.'s  Vice President Al Gore pledged to strengthen sanctions against H.M.O.'s that pull out of the Medicare market and to eliminate Medicare co-payments and deductibles for various preventative tests. Bush's Education Complaints  Gov. George W. Bush said the Clinton administration had helped create an ''education recession'' in which minority and low-income students were routinely allowed to fail.
 Excerpts from comments on education by Gov George W Bush in Beaverton, Ore (S) Texas has ended the education recession. And as president, I intend to end the education recession in every public school in America. The issue of education provides one of the biggest differences, one of clearest choices in this campaign for the presidency. With the reforms in Texas, reading scores have gone up and under this administration, national reading scores have gone down. Texas is closing the achievement gap between rich and poor and Anglo and minority. Under Vice President Gore, the achievement gap in America has grown wider. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN  Correction:  September 27, 2000, Wednesday  The ''His Own Words'' feature yesterday with the campaign coverage, quoting from remarks by George W. Bush at Bethany Elementary School in Beaverton, Ore., misstated the day he spoke. It was Monday, not yesterday. The ''His Own Words'' feature yesterday with the campaign coverage, quoting from remarks by George W. Bush at Bethany Elementary School in Beaverton, Ore., misstated the day he spoke. It was Monday, not yesterday.
 You say ''the approach of a presidential election has a way of altering the way candidates parse the laws of supply and demand,'' in explaining Vice President Al Gore's reluctance to use the Strategic Petroleum Reserve last winter and his proposal to do so last week -- a proposal that President Clinton has acted on. This statement misses two important points. You say ''the approach of a presidential election has a way of altering the way candidates parse the laws of supply and demand,'' in explaining Vice President Al Gore's reluctance to use the Strategic Petroleum Reserve last winter and his proposal to do so last week -- a proposal that President Clinton has acted on. This statement misses two important points.
 Robert G Gottshall Jr letter holds Gov George W Bush is right that America's Strategic Petroleum Reserve should be used only in event of major disruptions in America's oil supply; charges that Clinton-Gore oil policy is 'nothing but groveling at the feet of OPEC' George W. Bush is right that America's Strategic Petroleum Reserve should be used only in the event of major disruptions in America's oil supply (front page, Sept. 23). George W. Bush is right that America's Strategic Petroleum Reserve should be used only in the event of major disruptions in America's oil supply (front page, Sept. 23). The Clinton-Gore oil policy is nothing but groveling at the feet of OPEC.  When the administration's failures finally turn into headlines, it raids the cookie jar and reduces our national security by stealing oil from strategic reserves for political gains. Only Mr. Bush has shown leadership in this crisis by suggesting that the government help low-income elderly people with their heating bills this winter. In the long run, he promises to lead efforts to produce more energy at home and reduce our dependence on foreign oil.
 Excerpts from remarks on Medicare policy by Vice Pres Al Gore in St Petersburg, Fla (S)
 US Senate approves in 85-1 vote $7.8 billion plan by Army Corps of Engineers to restore Everglades and its ecosystem, in project supporters say is most ambitious environmental restoration effort ever; plan would revamp South Florida's water supply by capturing and storing more rainwater, then redirecting flow into Everglades; comes after years of delicate negotiations among Clinton administration, State of Florida, Congress and unlikely coalition of environmental groups, sugar barons, utility companies, home builders and Indian tribes that live on land; is supported, in rare bipartisan twist, by Vice Pres Al Gore, Gov George W Bush and Jeb Bush, Republican governor of Florida; Sen Robert C Smith, chairman of Committee on the Environment and Public Works, hails passage noting 'national treasure' is in danger; project is expected to take 30 to 40 years to complete; photo (M) In a rare bipartisan twist, the project also made allies of Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee; Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his Republican opponent; and Mr. Bush's younger brother Jeb, the Republican governor of Florida. All three men support the plan, in which Mr. Gore took an active interest early on and which Jeb Bush helped complete. Mr. Gore has been criticized in Florida by environmental groups -- traditional allies of his -- for not taking a strong position on the proposed airport. Responding to the criticism, Jim Kennedy, a Gore spokesman, said today that Mr. Gore ''believes any actions taken by federal agencies should not jeopardize the progress we've made in restoring the Everglades.'' ''Some say we did bad politics -- bad politics for the administration to work with a Republican Congress, bad politics for Republicans to work with the administration,'' Mr. Smith said. ''They say that Florida is a swing state -- maybe Gov. George Bush will get too much credit, or Al Gore, who has been closely associated with the Everglades, he's going to get too much credit. You know what? There is enough credit to go around. Who cares?''
 New York Republicans, faced with set of pivotal legislative races in November, are running campaigns that are increasingly at odds with policies of their party's presidential nominee, George W Bush; positions they are staking out make them sound like Democrats who are trying to unseat them; photo (M) New York Republicans, faced with a set of pivotal legislative races in November, are running campaigns that are increasingly at odds with the policies of their party's presidential nominee, George W. Bush. New York Republicans, faced with a set of pivotal legislative races in November, are running campaigns that are increasingly at odds with the policies of their party's presidential nominee, George W. Bush. A senior Republican strategist who works in the State Legislature said the contrast was in the tone of the Bush and the State Senate campaigns. ''When you look at the Republican national platform, it is not really very helpful to us,'' the strategist said. ''It's much more conservative than we want to be. It's not as conservative as it was four years ago, but it's clearly a platform that was not drafted with New York in mind.'' The stakes are high this year. New York Republicans are worried that Mr. Bush's sizable deficit in state polls may be a sign  that their own supporters will not turn out on Election Day, a concern that has deepened with the likelihood of a strong Democratic turnout resulting from the mounting statewide popularity of the Democrats' national ticket. Even Gov. George E. Pataki is not spending his time campaigning in his home state for Mr. Bush. Instead, Mr. Bush tapped Mr. Pataki this week to make a series of appearances in five other states where Mr. Bush is running close. Perhaps state Republicans' biggest break has been with Mr. Bush's $1.3 trillion tax cut plan. Senator Balboni said that in his district, voters attached greater importance to health care and environmental issues than to a tax cut as large as the one Mr. Bush is proposing. He said there was ''dampening enthusiasm'' for a cut as large as Mr. Bush's. He said his plan was not so much to distance himself from Mr. Bush, but rather to avoid relying on anyone else. ''We don't win our seats because of the top of the ticket,'' he said, adding, ''I run my campaign as Guy Velella.'' Tax cuts aimed at segments of voters are major themes of Vice President Al Gore and Mrs. Clinton. So while the Bush campaign took months before it endorsed a plan to provide prescription drug coverage for the elderly, Republicans in the State Senate can boast that their plan was signed into law months ago. While the national Republican platform opposes abortion, many state Republicans are pointing proudly to a new law that protects abortion clinics from obstruction. And while the national Republican Party is a strong ally of the National Rifle Association, the state senators can cite a law enacted this summer that  toughens restrictions on gun owners. ''The leopard doesn't change his spots,'' she said. ''This is still the Republican Party of George W. Bush. Where has the leadership of the Republican Party been for the last 10 years? These bills should have been passed over the last 10 years.'' State Republicans say that they had hoped that even if Mr. Bush could not prevail in New York, his campaign would inspire Republican voters and might help their candidates win. Instead, many Republicans say they now fear being swamped by a huge Democratic turnout for Mr. Gore. The latest New York Times/CBS News poll shows Mr. Gore ahead nearly two to one. In an interview last week on WROW-AM radio in Albany, Joseph L. Bruno, the majority leader in the Senate, acknowledged the potential trouble Mr. Bush's sagging popularity in New York poses for him and his Senate colleagues. In that context, Republican state lawmakers and their strategists say they have been aggressively developing their own campaign advertisements and fliers in recent months instead of featuring Mr. Bush, or even using his campaign pitch of compassionate conservatism, as many had once considered doing. Nicholas A. Spano, a Republican senator from Westchester County who is facing a potentially competitive race this year, made it clear in a recent interview that he would seek to distance himself from Mr. Bush. To that end, he said, he has emphasized his work on behalf of the environment, education and narrowly tailored tax cuts, such as allowing tuition deductions. ''Politics is a funny business,'' he said. ''If George W. Bush suddenly surges, you may see changes in strategy and advertising. But not now.'' Then he added: ''I still think that George Bush is a moderate. But for whatever reason, his message is not catching on at this moment in New York.''
 Until Mr. Lieberman, the Connecticut senator, became the Democratic candidate for vice president, he did not talk much about this brief but intriguing interlude of his youth. But Mr. Lieberman's civil rights history, including his sojourn to Mississippi and his participation in the March on Washington in 1963, captivated the aides to Vice President Al Gore who researched his life as part of the vice-presidential selection process. And it has since been elevated by Mr. Lieberman and others into a significant component of his political biography as the campaign seeks to energize its base of black voters. When Mr. Gore announced his vice-presidential selection in Nashville on Aug. 8, he concluded by reading from a column written by Mr. Lieberman in The Yale Daily News explaining why he went to Mississippi. When Representative John Lewis of Georgia, the civil rights veteran, spoke just before Mr. Lieberman at the Democratic National Convention, he talked of how Mr. Lieberman had ''responded to the greatest moral crisis of our time.'' Since joining Mr. Gore's ticket, Mr. Lieberman has said he now supports affirmative action. He plays down the rather explicit opposition he expressed in 1995, saying it must be viewed through the prism of a Supreme Court decision that prompted a national re-examination of the issue that year.
 John A Walchak letter observes that George W Bush's baseball management career illustrates Republican penchant for preaching hard work for everyone else, while they get ahead through connections (S) Regarding George W. Bush's baseball management career, I realize that I have not given the Republican Party enough credit. Mr. Bush's career represents almost perfectly in microcosm what I'd long suspected about members of the Republican elite: while they preach hard work, savings and sacrifice to everyone else, they get ahead through connections and ownership. The hypocrisy might be bothersome, but I really must salute Republicans on this neglected aesthetic virtue of the Bush campaign.
 In ''Debate This!'' (column, Sept. 19), Thomas L. Friedman discusses several important current foreign affairs issues and then bemoans the likelihood that both George W. Bush and Al Gore ''will get by without discussing any of them'' in the coming debates. Certainly history supports his gloomy prediction. In ''Debate This!'' (column, Sept. 19), Thomas L. Friedman discusses several important current foreign affairs issues and then bemoans the likelihood that both George W. Bush and Al Gore ''will get by without discussing any of them'' in the coming debates. Certainly history supports his gloomy prediction.
 Those of us in the Bush-Gore generation were not raised to put much faith in the defensive side of military technology. As youngsters, we were told that we could ward off a nuclear attack by hiding under our desks with our heads down. We spent the gulf war watching those Patriot missiles on CNN, weapons apparently so precise they could trail an Iraqi Scud down the street and into a saloon, and blast it right off the bar stool. It was only much later that we learned the Patriots may not have ever hit anything, and that the secret to our defense against the Scuds was that the Scuds were lousy weapons. George W. Bush and Al Gore both support an antimissile program, although Mr. Gore's heart doesn't seem to be entirely in it. The vice president is cautious -- what about the downside? If we put up a shield, the Chinese could respond by simply adding more missiles. We could raise the odds of an attack, and then the shield might not work when it happens. (Unless we get lucky and the North Koreans decide to assail us with large balloons.) Mr. Bush, characteristically, goes for something more daring. (When the last interceptor flunked its test due to a computer glitch, Mr. Bush suggested that the problem was a lack of ''the right leadership.'') His shield proposal is frequently referred to as ''robust'' -- the French roast of ballistic missile defense. Further details, such as what it would look like and how much it will cost, will become available after the inauguration. ''He is an excellent decision maker, but you don't have time on the campaign trail, nor really the resources on the campaign trail, to make a decision of this magnitude,'' his foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, told The Washington Post last week. If the recollections of their old friends are right, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore were two early baby boomers who didn't spend their youth practicing what to do if the Soviet Union decided to bomb their classrooms. ''Down here we had tornado drills,'' said John Bizilo, who was principal of Mr. Bush's elementary school in Midland, Tex. No wonder Mr. Bush is a diplomatic risk-taker. He was raised to fear Mother Nature more than Mother Russia.
 Walter Goodman appraises revival of Gore Vidal's play The Best Man in light of contemporary politics; photo of cast members (M) Whatever the deficiencies of the new Broadway production of ''The Best Man,'' Gore Vidal's 1960 take on presidential politics, it draws attention to the rhetorical flatness and general humorlessness of the current political contests. Viewers looking for some semblance of wit or cleverness find a crop of stock phrases and standard gestures. Epigrams are outlawed and the language is as strictly restricted as immigration law lest some intended drollery slip in. Perhaps the candidates have learned from Mr. Vidal's shaky political career that being clever is not a route to electoral popularity. Whatever the deficiencies of the new Broadway production of ''The Best Man,'' Gore Vidal's 1960 take on presidential politics, it draws attention to the rhetorical flatness and general humorlessness of the current political contests. Viewers looking for some semblance of wit or cleverness find a crop of stock phrases and standard gestures. Epigrams are outlawed and the language is as strictly restricted as immigration law lest some intended drollery slip in. Perhaps the candidates have learned from Mr. Vidal's shaky political career that being clever is not a route to electoral popularity. There have been candidates, from Franklin D. Roosevelt to Ronald Reagan, who could deliver a put-down in an engaging way. Roosevelt's throwaway line about the Republican attack on his little dog Fala and Mr. Reagan's assurance in his debate with Walter F. Mondale that he would not take advantage of that youth's inexperience remain small classics. But in recent years the main entertainment offered by candidates comes from their own pratfalls: Dan Quayle trying to spell; Gerald R. Ford trying to walk down a flight of steps without tripping; Michael S. Dukakis wearing an ill-fitting helmet and riding around in a tank. And, of course, there is Al Gore's changeable wardrobe and George W. Bush's pronunciation problems. Funny but not witty. Like environmentalists who have never met a species that did not require protection, political scriptwriters today guard the sensibilities of all races and religions, of all ages, handicaps and sexual preferences lest their candidate be brought up on charges of offensiveness. The wonder is that Mr. Bush's references to Mr. Gore's fund-raising haven't aroused an outcry from the Buddhist antidefamation league. The presidential candidates, too, are careful onstage. Mr. Bush especially has to watch his step because his natural taste in humor is reputedly fraternity high jinks, which is not likely to serve him this time around. Mr. Gore, whose problem has been a seeming stolidity, is straining to be a regular guy on television shows, where he can chat it up with the Letterman-Leno-Winfrey gang. In the contest for the women's vote, Mr. Bush has followed Mr. Gore onto ''Oprah,'' where he confessed to liking peanut butter sandwiches and actually got a laugh.
