 Janet Maslin reviews Natural Blonde: A Memoir by Liz Smith and Four Blondes by Candace Bushnell; photos (M) FOUR BLONDES  By Candace Bushnell  245 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $24. FOUR BLONDES  By Candace Bushnell  245 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $24. All in all Ms. Smith sounds like a good person with whom to share a lifeboat, particularly if you happened to be well known. Candace Bushnell, on the other hand, would toss you overboard without batting an eye. In ''Four Blondes,'' her own more entertainingly reprehensible take on the fair-haired life, Ms. Bushnell writes with the same acerbic ruthlessness that has made ''Sex and the City'' such a touchstone of its times. ''I heard he was pulled over for drunk driving and got caught stuffing a vial of cocaine in his sock,'' one character tsk-tsks from the Hamptons. ''Socks! In the summer!'' Who says these aren't moral tales? In her understandably best-selling collection, Ms. Bushnell has assembled four stories, named them for hair-lightening methods (''Single Process,'' ''Nice N'Easy'') and arranged them in declining order of coherence and success. She begins with the tale of a model named Janey, who may be selfish and ambitious but otherwise has nothing in common with heroines by the Jackies (Susann and Collins) who are Ms. Bushnell's spiritual forebears. Inevitably, since anxiety and vanity are all-important among Ms. Bushnell's wisecracking characters, Janey begins to feel that even her body is out of vogue. ''I could take out the implants,'' she suggests to a friend. ''But,'' he answers, ''can you take out everything else?''
 ''I'm totally against it,'' he said, adding that he supported Gov. George W. Bush for president. ''I think it's terrible and 100 percent political. There's no doubt in my mind. I'm for everything that makes it easier for the poor, and especially the elderly. But they had a chance to do this a year ago and they didn't.'' Like Mr. Greene, many voters here called it pure politics when, so close to Election Day, Vice President Al Gore said last week that oil from the reserve should be used to increase supply and reduce prices, and Mr. Clinton followed through, ordering the release of 30 million barrels of the 570 million barrels of crude oil in the national reserve. The Clinton administration insisted that despite the political windfall that Mr. Gore might receive from the decision, the move was triggered by growing concern about the high prices of crude oil and heating oil and the exceedingly low supplies of heating fuel in the Northeast. She added that, as a Gore supporter, she did not care if Mr. Clinton's decision had been politically motivated. And she did not think it was. George Blushiy of Manchester, N.H., was sweeping in front of a carwash on Daniel Webster Highway in Manchester. A Bush supporter, Mr. Blushiy called the decision to open the reserves an election-year ploy, but seemed to put more faith in the law of supply and demand than in any political tactics.
 Vice Pres Al Gore says he did not have any knowledge of 'mole' providing his campaign with secrets about his opponent's activities and seems to direct suspicion elsewhere; says his campaign will keep turning over to Federal Bureau of Investigation any confidential internal data sent by anyone in Bush campaign; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore said today that he did not have any knowledge of a ''mole'' providing his campaign with secrets about his opponent's activities and instead seemed to direct suspicion elsewhere. ''If somebody in the Bush campaign keeps sending confidential internal data to us,'' Mr. Gore said in response to questions from reporters in a conference call today, ''we'll keep turning it over to the F.B.I.'' Vice President Al Gore said today that he did not have any knowledge of a ''mole'' providing his campaign with secrets about his opponent's activities and instead seemed to direct suspicion elsewhere. ''If somebody in the Bush campaign keeps sending confidential internal data to us,'' Mr. Gore said in response to questions from reporters in a conference call today, ''we'll keep turning it over to the F.B.I.'' The vice president further made reference to news reports this weekend that quoted unnamed law enforcement officials saying they had identified a suspect in the Bush campaign as a possible source of confidential debate preparation materials that were sent nearly two weeks ago to a supporter of Mr. Gore's. But both federal law enforcement officials and aides to Mr. Bush said today that no such suspect had been identified. In addition, Mr. Bush's advisers insisted that the Gore campaign's suspension on Saturday of a junior staff member who had boasted about a mole in the Bush campaign raised serious questions about what officials with the Gore campaign might know about the situation. ''It's becoming increasingly troublesome,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, in his own conference call with reporters. ''It does seem that the more the F.B.I. inquires, the more nervous they're getting in Nashville.'' ''We saw this week that the vice president will say anything to get elected,'' Mr. Fleischer added, referring to several misstatements that the Bush campaign attributed to Mr. Gore. ''There's now a question of whether the vice president's campaign will do anything to get elected.'' The contest of words reflected the degree to which both the Gore and Bush campaigns are struggling to make sure the matter that began with some errant debate preparation materials does not wind up reflecting ill on their candidates. And it spoke to a mystery that yielded several unusual and ambiguous developments last week. The matter began on Sept. 13, when a former Democratic congressman, Thomas Downey, who had been assigned the part of Mr. Bush in the Gore campaign's debate rehearsals, received in the mail a videotape of one of Mr. Bush's debate practice sessions and a stack of related confidential briefing papers. Mr. Bush's aides said that only the campaign's senior officials had authorized access to -- and copies of -- the materials, and that all those legitimate copies were subsequently accounted for. Several Bush advisers said today that many campaign officials believed that the materials were somehow stolen, copied and then replaced by an outsider, and one adviser said that the campaign manager, Joe Allbaugh, had been pressing F.B.I. investigators to pay heed to this possibility. One of these advisers noted that the Austin offices of Mark McKinnon, who is the Bush campaign's chief media adviser and had copies of the material, are not as secure as the campaign headquarters and are adjacent to a film editing business used by both Democrats and Republicans. Bush advisers said that F.B.I. investigators in Austin had visited Mr. McKinnon's offices and had interviewed some of the people who work there as well as many, but not all, of the senior officials in the Bush campaign. They said that the F.B.I.'s inquiry was too incomplete for there to be any suspects, that the agency had not informed the Bush campaign of any such conclusions and that Mr. Allbaugh had placed a call on Saturday to Louis J. Freeh, the director of the F.B.I., to complain about a news account to the contrary. One Bush aide said this afternoon that Mr. Allbaugh heard back from one of Mr. Freeh's deputies but was still hoping to talk directly to Mr. Freeh. Meanwhile, on Saturday, officials with the Gore campaign announced that they had reprimanded Michael Doyne, 28, and put him on paid administrative leave while they investigated his actions and statements over the previous days. Mr. Doyne is the administrative assistant to the field director for the Gore campaign. Late last week, Mr. Doyne initially told ABC News, which had heard that he was boasting about a mole in the Bush camp, that he had not made such statements. He even provided ABC News with an affidavit to that effect. Officials with the Gore campaign said Mr. Doyne's boast was an idle joke and that the campaign, after an internal review, had concluded that it was not receiving or using any confidential information from the Bush campaign.
 In a family room in Jersey City last weekend, Jamie Niskanen-Singer, 12, loaded a Nintendo 64 game called Turok 2: Seeds of Evil, which is rated ''Mature 17+. Animated Blood and Gore. Animated Violence.'' His father, Howard Singer, watched as Jamie used the ''cerebral bore'' gun to rip a character's head open. Jamie said the action helped him relax, ''because I have control of what's going on,'' unlike with television. His father, apparently getting his first taste of Turok, conceded, ''It is a little violent, but we think he can differentiate between a game and real life.''
 So it came as little relief to Mr. Nannarello when President Clinton  ordered the release of 30 million barrels of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve on Friday to help control heating oil prices. Indeed, more than anything, Mr. Nannarello saw it as a temporary measure to win voters for Vice President Al Gore in the November election. So it came as little relief to Mr. Nannarello when President Clinton  ordered the release of 30 million barrels of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve on Friday to help control heating oil prices. Indeed, more than anything, Mr. Nannarello saw it as a temporary measure to win voters for Vice President Al Gore in the November election. Energy experts and government officials, including Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, have warned that the price of  heating oil could reach its highest level in years because of growing demand worldwide in a market of limited supplies. On Thursday, Mr. Gore joined them in calling for the release of oil from the strategic reserve.
 In the interview, Mr. Lazio also sought to put some distance between himself and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, who according to most polls is behind Vice President Al Gore in New York State. Mr. Lazio said he disagreed with Mr. Bush's suggestion that the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska be open to oil drilling as a way to ease an expected increase in home heating oil prices this winter. Mr. Lazio and Mr. Bush have campaigned together only once, at a Conservative Party luncheon on July 14 in Manhattan. Mr. Lazio campaigned upstate when Mr. Bush last visited the state, on Thursday, for a talk show appearance in New York City.
 Others said they were tired of the ribald jokes and the talk show jabs that are finally beginning to subside now that Vice President Al Gore and  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are providing fresh material. ''He survived Monica,'' Mr. Maynard said. ''He survived Whitewater. And now Al is looking pretty good,'' he said, weighing Mr. Gore's chances of winning the presidency.
 An Independent Streak Makes Wisconsin a Tossup  The race between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore in Wisconsin is close. Like several other Great Lakes states, this is one of the year's main presidential battlegrounds, although it has only 11 electoral votes. The two nominees have spent $2.6 million in Green Bay and Milwaukee alone since June 1. Mr. Gore asserted that Mr. Bush's plan for providing prescription drug benefits would force some low-income elderly people to go to welfare offices to qualify. Mr. Bush's aides called that contention ''pure fantasy'' and ''a classic scare tactic.'' Mr. Gore said he did not have any knowledge of a ''mole'' providing his campaign with secrets about his opponent's activities. Mr. Bush's advisers said the Gore campaign's suspension on Saturday of a junior staff member who had boasted about a mole in the Bush campaign raised serious questions about what officials with the Gore campaign might know about the situation.
 Vice Pres Al Gore begins week dedicated to highlighting his differences with Gov George W Bush over Medicare by asserting that Bush's plan for providing prescription drug benefits would force some low-income elderly people to go to welfare offices to qualify; Bush's aides dismiss contention as 'pure fantasy' and 'classic scare tactic' (M) Vice President Al Gore opened a week dedicated to highlighting his differences with Gov. George W. Bush over Medicare by asserting today that Mr. Bush's plan for providing prescription drug benefits would force some low-income elderly people to go to welfare offices to qualify. Mr. Bush's aides called that contention ''pure fantasy'' and ''a classic scare tactic.'' The Bush campaign, meanwhile, vowed to wage a war against America's ''education recession'' in the  week before the 2000 campaign becomes consumed by the long-awaited first debate between the Democratic and Republican presidential contenders. Aides at Mr. Bush's headquarters in Austin, Tex., buoyed by a polling rebound that accompanied the Texas governor's first good week in a month, also disparaged Mr. Gore for what they portrayed as his recent misstatements. Vice President Al Gore opened a week dedicated to highlighting his differences with Gov. George W. Bush over Medicare by asserting today that Mr. Bush's plan for providing prescription drug benefits would force some low-income elderly people to go to welfare offices to qualify. Mr. Bush's aides called that contention ''pure fantasy'' and ''a classic scare tactic.'' The Bush campaign, meanwhile, vowed to wage a war against America's ''education recession'' in the  week before the 2000 campaign becomes consumed by the long-awaited first debate between the Democratic and Republican presidential contenders. Aides at Mr. Bush's headquarters in Austin, Tex., buoyed by a polling rebound that accompanied the Texas governor's first good week in a month, also disparaged Mr. Gore for what they portrayed as his recent misstatements. Mr. Gore's comments came in a 25-minute conference telephone call with reporters this afternoon from his official residence at the Naval Observatory here. The vice president departs on Monday for Florida, where he hopes to solidify his position among the state's pivotal elderly voters by releasing a new booklet containing his proposals for strengthening and expanding Medicare. He also plans to campaign this week in Michigan and Iowa before devoting the weekend to preparing for the first of three scheduled debates with Mr. Bush, on Oct. 3. Mr. Bush, who spent the day in Texas and had no public schedule, embarks on a western swing to Oregon, Washington and California on Monday. By focusing on education, his campaign hopes to win over women, closing the gender gap that favors Mr. Gore. Bush aides also believe that the issue allows them to point to concrete accomplishments and statistics in Texas that demonstrate Mr. Bush's effectiveness in a given area of public policy. A survey by Newsweek magazine gave Mr. Gore a lead of 3 percentage points, a gap within the margin of sampling error. Mr. Gore led by 14 percentage points in a Newsweek poll a week ago. A daily Gallup tracking poll showed Mr. Bush with a lead of 1 percentage point, while a Fox TV poll had the candidates even. The polls were taken during a week in which Mr. Bush seemed to regain his footing after nearly a month on the defensive. He did his best to keep attention focused on a series of Gore campaign missteps, charged Mr. Gore with political opportunism for calling for the release of oil from the country's strategic petroleum reserve, and accused his rival of ''misleading Americans.'' Mr. Gore said today that he would remain focused on the issues, and said he would devote the week to discussing Medicare policy as a way to draw contrasts with Mr. Bush. ''We have some real and very significant differences,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The other side treats the Medicare surplus as a piggy bank they can use for a tax cut that primarily benefits the wealthiest Americans. I'll veto the use of any money from Medicare for anything other than Medicare.'' Mr. Gore has proposed a plan to extend Medicare's solvency by five years, from 2025 to 2030, by placing the anticipated $400 billion, 10-year Medicare surplus in a secure fund that could be used to reduce the federal debt. That, he projects, would save $75 billion in interest payments that would be used, in turn, to shore up Medicare. In addition, Mr. Gore would spend $338 billion over 10 years to provide a universal prescription drug benefit under Medicare. Individuals making about $12,000 or less would have their drugs covered without charge, while those with higher incomes would pay premiums on a sliding scale. The Gore plan also would spend $40 billion to increase funding for nursing homes, teaching hospitals, rural hospitals, home health agencies and rehabilitative services, all areas that suffered deep Medicare cuts under the balanced budget act of 1997. Mr. Bush's Medicare plan, which would cost a total of $198 billion, would create a system where private insurers compete with the government to provide coverage. His market-based approach would essentially provide subsidies to older people who could spend the money on a variety of government-approved plans, some of which would include prescription drug coverage. For those with the lowest incomes, the government would provide drug coverage free. During the four years Mr. Bush estimates it would take to implement his plan, he would spend $48 billion on a temporary series of grants to states to subsidize coverage for the low-income elderly. ''For the first five years, they would force many seniors to go to welfare offices to sign up for state programs,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and middle-class seniors would be left out completely.'' Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said that the welfare office accusation was wrong and that Mr. Bush's plan would expand on an existing program in 23 states where applicants return forms by mail. ''Al Gore spent last week making things up and today he's continued,'' Mr. Fleischer said. Mr. Bush's assertion of an ''education recession,'' a phrase that aides said tested well in internal campaign polling with women and independent voters, will coincide with the release of a Republican National Committee advertisement that makes the same point. The campaign will attempt to back up the charge by discussing declining test scores, safety concerns, and widening achievement gaps between rich and poor. Mr. Fleischer used the phrase several times in a conference call with reporters today, saying the recession had ''been present for the last 10 years,'' a span that dates to President George Bush's administration.
 It's not exactly Labor Day, but close enough. Florida is in play, big time, and George W. Bush and his closest allies, including his brother Jeb, the governor, have been zipping all over the state, trying to head off a potentially catastrophic upset by Al Gore and Joe Lieberman. At the beginning of the campaign, most observers were awarding the big states of California and New York to Mr. Gore, and Texas and Florida to Mr. Bush. But now the polls are showing Florida, with its 25 electoral votes, to be a tossup. It's easier to imagine the Dodgers moving back to Brooklyn than to come up with a scenario in which Mr. Bush wins the presidency without carrying Florida. So on Friday there was Mr. Bush in Sun City, a senior citizens community on Florida's west coast, offering up a $91 billion plan to find cures for diseases. In keeping with his claim that he is a ''different kind of Republican,'' he likened his proposal to John F. Kennedy's promise to land a man on the moon. ''I will fund and lead a medical moonshot to reach far beyond what seems possible today and discover new cures for age-old afflictions,'' said Mr. Bush. That may be. But why is Mr. Bush, at least so far, having such a tough time in a state he was supposed to win easily? ''The base was always there to begin with for the Democrats; it just had to be energized,'' said Susan MacManus, a political science professor and expert on Florida voting patterns at the University of South Florida in Tampa. ''Gore and Lieberman have greatly energized Democrats in Florida because of their constant presence in the state, and because they are talking issues that are extremely important to their base, especially senior citizens.'' By adding Senator Lieberman to the ticket, Mr. Gore not only strengthened his advantage with Jewish voters, particularly in South Florida, he appears also to have gotten a big boost with senior citizens in general. The idea that Governor Bush would win Florida without a fight was never realistic. Democrats actually have a slight edge in voter registration in the state. And while Florida has a Republican governor in Jeb Bush, one of its two U.S. senators is a Democrat, and three of six elected statewide cabinet positions are held by Democrats. In 1992, Bill Clinton and Al Gore invested very little in Florida and came within a hair of carrying the state. Four years ago, they campaigned seriously in Florida and won by a healthy margin. George W. Bush may yet prevail in Florida, but only with an investment of precious time and campaign money that Republicans would much rather see expended elsewhere.
 Yoshi Tsurumi letter on Sept 18 article sees likely ethnic bias and profiling in Wen Ho Lee's case; scores what he sees as more subtle Asian-baiing in Gov George W Bush's ads attacking Vice Pres Al Gore's 1996 fund-raising that show Gore with Buddhist monks Gov. George W. Bush has been resorting to a more subtle form of Asian-baiting in TV commercials to attack Vice President Al Gore. Instead of confronting his opponent head-on with the real issue of questionable fund-raising, of which both Democrats and Republicans have been guilty, Mr. Bush uses ads that emphasize Mr. Gore's 1996 photo opportunity with Buddhist monks. Gov. George W. Bush has been resorting to a more subtle form of Asian-baiting in TV commercials to attack Vice President Al Gore. Instead of confronting his opponent head-on with the real issue of questionable fund-raising, of which both Democrats and Republicans have been guilty, Mr. Bush uses ads that emphasize Mr. Gore's 1996 photo opportunity with Buddhist monks. Would Mr. Bush ever run an ad condemning Mr. Gore for appealing to white male Christians? Asian-Americans should demand that Mr. Bush drop the commercials and instead provide his own plan of campaign finance reform.
 Political pros in both parties say presidential race is breathlessly close in Wisconsin and that state is tossup; like several other Great Lakes states, it is one of year's main presidential battlegrounds although somewhat smaller than most, with only 11 electoral votes; recent private polls show inconclusive edge for Vice Pres Al Gore, while others show race even; politically quirky state is hard to read since it is full of ticket splitters and independents; produced both LaFollettes, great clan of progressive reformers, and Sen Joseph R McCarthy; its senators, Russell D Feingold and Herb Kohl, are both Democrats who take offbeat positions on some issues and work closely with Republicans; Ross Perot pulled 16 percent of Wisconsin vote in 1992; maps; photo (M) But he has never managed to carry his state for his party's presidential nominee. Not for Bob Dole four years ago, and not for George Bush in 1988 or 1992. He tried hard. On Halloween Day, 1992, he whistle-stopped across the state with Mr. Bush, from Mukwonago and Waukesha to Oshkosh and Chippewa Falls, a made-for-the-cameras trip on a train called the Spirit of America. But he has never managed to carry his state for his party's presidential nominee. Not for Bob Dole four years ago, and not for George Bush in 1988 or 1992. He tried hard. On Halloween Day, 1992, he whistle-stopped across the state with Mr. Bush, from Mukwonago and Waukesha to Oshkosh and Chippewa Falls, a made-for-the-cameras trip on a train called the Spirit of America. If not, he is the only politician in Wisconsin who is not. The race between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore is breathlessly close here, in the estimation of political pros in both parties. Like several other Great Lakes states, this is one of the year's main presidential battlegrounds, although it is a bit smaller than most, with only 11 electoral votes. Some recent private polls, like one taken for a big Wisconsin union, show an inconclusive edge for Mr. Gore; others show the race even. Wisconsin is made to order, one might think, for Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, and he campaigned here on Wednesday, pounding away at ''the concentration of power in the hands of a few.'' Mr. Nader sounded a bit like Fighting Bob LaFollette, and he drew sizable crowds -- more than 1,000 at a rally in Milwaukee and about 1,800 in Madison. In a poll taken in June, he had 16 percent of the vote in traditionally liberal Dane County (Madison), and some Gore backers have warned that he could hurt Mr. Gore in that area. The vice president's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff, who campaigned here on Tuesday, and other surrogates argue that a Nader vote is a Bush vote. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have been saturating the state with commercials for months. According to a continuing national study by Kenneth Goldstein, a professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, they have spent $2.6 million in Green Bay and Milwaukee alone since June 1. Those cities are two of the places where Mr. Gore has advertised most intensively; this summer, only Flint, Mich., Scranton, Pa., and Pittsburgh saw more Gore commercials than Green Bay and Milwaukee. This month, Green Bay has seen more Bush commercials than any other city except Scranton. This week, the Republicans were trumpeting the governor's new slogan, ''Real plans for real people,'' and the Democrats were replying with the taunt, ''George Bush's real plans hurt real people.'' Nor have the candidates missed opportunities to campaign here. Mr. Bush spoke to the American Legion national convention in Milwaukee; both nominees spoke to the Veterans of Foreign Wars in August. Mr. Gore's first postconvention event was a riverboat trip down the Mississippi, complete with a Mark Twain impersonator, starting from La Crosse in southwest Wisconsin. Perhaps with an eye on possible defectors to Mr. Nader, Mr. Gore arranged for his erstwhile rival, former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, to issue a belated endorsement here in Green Bay. The union's president, Terry Craney, was one of the few Gore delegates at the 1988 Democratic convention, and his organization has helped to set up the vice president's major Wisconsin appearances in the last eight years. In 1996, it turned out a crowd of 30,000 for a Gore rally, one of the biggest political gatherings in state history. Governor Thompson, who attributed the elder George Bush's 1988 defeat in Wisconsin to ''just mistake after mistake'' by Mr. Bush and his strategists, has helped Governor Bush raise money in the state. Several politicians here said they thought that in the event of a Republican victory in November, Mr. Thompson hoped to be named United States ambassador to Vatican City. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's top national strategist, said in Wisconsin on Thursday that Mr. Bush would return to the state three or four times before Election Day. Mr. Thompson's support, he asserted, will not transfer directly to Mr. Bush but will ensure that those who like the governor and his policies ''give us a better hearing.'' At the moment, Governor Bush is ''a couple points up, a couple points down'' in the state, Mr. Rove said. Darren Schmitz, Mr. Thompson's former press secretary, is running the Bush operation in Wisconsin. He said the organizational foundation laid down over the years by Mr. Thompson would inevitably benefit Mr. Bush. Still, Teresa Vilmain, Mr. Gore's top Wisconsin operative, thinks the vice president can win on education and such other issues as health care, the economy and the environment. In this state, Ms. Vilmain said, ''we're fighting on our turf.'' Even so, she added: ''It's going to be very tight. We only won here by a few points four years ago. It's totally challenging for us, because we are up against a Republican governor who is totally engaged in this fight.'' Milwaukee remains a major manufacturing city, and Wisconsin has a dozen or more smaller cities with sizable employers, like Wausau and Oshkosh. It also has a significant farm population, which supports the state's noted dairy industry. But here as elsewhere, the suburbs seem to hold the political key this year. Not coincidentally, one of the main Bush offices is in Wauwatosa, west of Milwaukee, a town with a goodly number of Reagan Democrats. Ronald Reagan carried Wisconsin twice, people here recall, and Richard M. Nixon carried it three times -- in each case with a lot of help from Democrats. Mr. Gore made a pre-emptive strike this week by calling on President Clinton to release some of the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and Mr. Bush replied at once, accusing him of playing politics with a major element of national security. Another imponderable is the possible crosscurrents that Senator Kohl's re-election race could generate. A popular figure, he is expected to win easily, but he is not much of a team player -- his slogan is ''nobody's senator but yours'' -- and many of Wisconsin's ticket-splitters might find a Bush-Kohl combination attractive. Or so some Gore senior strategists speculate.
 With 87 electoral votes -- 32 percent of the haul a candidate needs to ascend to the Oval Office -- we of the East and the West were once heavily courted by presidential campaigners. And in the early stages of this campaign, it looked as if we might be again: George W. Bush was supposed to appeal to California's Hispanic population, a possible wedge against Al Gore. In New York, the race was supposed to be inextricably linked with the resolution of the Hillary Clinton-Rudolph Giuliani slugfest.
