 Correction of Sept 18 article: Warner Brothers president Alan Horn co-sponsored fund-raiser for Al Gore, but company itself was not sponsor An article on Monday about people in the movie industry who were troubled by politicians' recent criticism of Hollywood misstated the sponsorship of a fund-raiser for Al Gore that day. Although the sponsors included Alan Horn, president and chief operating officer of Warner Brothers, the company itself was not a sponsor. The others were Rob Reiner, the writer and director; Haim Saban, a children's television executive; and Ron Burkle, a supermarket entrepreneur. An article on Monday about people in the movie industry who were troubled by politicians' recent criticism of Hollywood misstated the sponsorship of a fund-raiser for Al Gore that day. Although the sponsors included Alan Horn, president and chief operating officer of Warner Brothers, the company itself was not a sponsor. The others were Rob Reiner, the writer and director; Haim Saban, a children's television executive; and Ron Burkle, a supermarket entrepreneur.
 While administration officials said today that Mr. Klein, 53, could command a top position should Vice President Al Gore become president, Mr. Klein suggested that it was time to leave government, after nearly eight years as an official in the Clinton administration. He had joined the administration in 1993 a few months after Mr. Clinton came to Washington, replacing Vincent W. Foster Jr. as deputy White House counsel after Mr. Foster committed suicide.
 New study finds Gov George W Bush and Republican Party have vigorously stepped up advertising efforts in Florida in recent weeks, outspending Democrats on television there by over $2 million; analysts say large spending reflects close race in state viewed as crucial to Bush and earlier viewed as state Bush was likely to win; study, by Prof Ken Goldstein, finds Republicans have bought advertising time massively in last two weeks in many contested markets (M) Underscoring how crucial and competitive the race for president has become in Florida, Gov. George W. Bush and the Republican Party have vigorously stepped up their advertising efforts in the state in recent weeks and have outspent the Democrats on television there by more than $2 million, a new study shows. The large Republican expenditure is significant, analysts say, because polls indicate that the state, viewed as vital to Mr. Bush's chances of winning the presidency, is now a tossup. And though both parties have been advertising in Florida all summer, it did not figure prominently in the early calculations about those states seriously up for grabs. Underscoring how crucial and competitive the race for president has become in Florida, Gov. George W. Bush and the Republican Party have vigorously stepped up their advertising efforts in the state in recent weeks and have outspent the Democrats on television there by more than $2 million, a new study shows. The large Republican expenditure is significant, analysts say, because polls indicate that the state, viewed as vital to Mr. Bush's chances of winning the presidency, is now a tossup. And though both parties have been advertising in Florida all summer, it did not figure prominently in the early calculations about those states seriously up for grabs. Partly because of Florida's frequent support for Republican presidential candidates and partly because its governor, Jeb Bush, is Mr. Bush's brother, the state was initially thought to be in the Republican column. Mr. Bush also recently ran commercials for about 10 days in North Carolina, Mr. Goldstein and Republicans there say. North Carolina had been viewed as safe for Mr. Bush. ''It's an insurance policy,'' Dan Gurley, political director of the North Carolina Republican Party, said. The advertising buy in Miami, he said, had created a particularly sharp disparity between the Bush and Gore campaigns. The most recent buys have raised the Republicans' expenditures there to $1.8 million since June, while Vice President Al Gore and the Democrats have spent just $125,000 in the period. As of Sept. 14, Mr. Bush and the Republican Party spent about $4.8 million in the state, and Mr. Gore and the Democrats about $2.7 million. Across the nation, Mr. Goldstein said, the increased Republican spending since the conventions has brought the two parties to approximate parity. In other markets, like Philadelphia and Detroit, it was Mr. Gore who was outspending Mr. Bush. Democrats in Florida contend that Republicans were caught off guard by Mr. Gore's strong showing in recent polls, and that moves like his selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate lifted the ticket's fortunes. ''Al Gore owns the momentum now in Florida,'' asserted Tony Welch, a spokesman for the Florida Democratic Party. ''The language of this race has changed. It has gone from 'Maybe it's in play' to 'Definitely, it's a horse race.' '' Republican officials acknowledged that they had increased their focus on Florida. But they maintained that their advertising was a response to unfair efforts by Mr. Gore to alarm Florida voters about Mr. Bush's proposals about health care and Social Security. ''Florida is a swing state, and it's a state in which Al Gore and other Democrats have reverted to their 'Medi-scare' tactics,'' said Clifford D. May, communications director for the Republican National Committee. ''We will use our resources to tell voters the truth.''
 The improved response came in spite of a falloff in responses to the long-form questionnaire. This year, the gap between long-form and  short-form returns was 11 percentage points, double that of 1990. Some politicians, including Gov. George W. Bush, had suggested people might not return the long form because its questions were too intrusive.
 The national race may be decided by a kiss. Al Gore's convention smooch won the hearts of all those female voters who had been playing hard to get. Yesterday W., who was nicknamed ''Lip'' in high school but only for his smart mouth, played hardball on lip lock. Wooing the women's vote on ''Oprah,'' he came out and gave the surprised talk show host a buss on the cheek -- one-upping Al Gore, who merely gave Oprah a half-hug last week, prompting her flirtatious request, ''No kiss?''
 In 1992, when memories of the 1989 Tiananmen massacre were still vivid, Congress made the annual renewal of China's trading rights conditional on a range of changes in Beijing. President Bush vetoed the measure. The Senate fell just short of the two-thirds vote needed to override him -- which would have essentially terminated China's trading privileges with the United States -- by a vote of 60 to 38. Within months, Mr. Clinton was charging Mr. Bush with ''coddling dictators.'' It was not until he arrived in the White House, and spent a year unsuccessfully trying to link trade with China's human rights record, that Mr. Clinton ended a fierce fight within the White House and reversed himself. He became a passionate adherent of Mr. Bush's policy -- and took it several steps further.
 Photo of Gov George W Bush being interviewed on television by Oprah Winfrey
 Gov George W Bush appears on Oprah Winfrey's show and seeks out other television opportunities; is no longer playing it as safe and scripted as he did in spring and into summer as he strives to regain lead in tight race; photo (M) The question came by way of an e-mail message to Oprah, the queen of confessional television, and Gov. George W. Bush took it head on: What is the public's biggest misconception of him? The question came by way of an e-mail message to Oprah, the queen of confessional television, and Gov. George W. Bush took it head on: What is the public's biggest misconception of him? ''You know, if my name was George Jones I'd be a country and western singer,'' said Mr. Bush, the son of a president. ''I've lived with this all my life. Of course, I love my dad a lot. He's a fabulous man and I'm proud to be his son.'' For an hour today, Mr. Bush took his turn in Oprah Winfrey's chair in her Chicago studio, just a week after Al Gore did, trying to woo her 7 million daily viewers, most of them women. He gave her a kiss, which Mr. Gore did not. He resisted some of her efforts to force him into introspection and joked at others. He talked of God and why he stopped drinking. And his eyes welled up as he spoke of his wife and the birth of his twins. ''Right now,'' Mr. Bush deflected, then added: ''When my heart turns dark. When I am jealous. Or when I'm spiteful.'' ''I know you are,'' Mr. Bush retorted. ''But I'm running for president.'' The audience laughed. And Mr. Bush is also seizing television opportunities. He sat for an interview with Paula Zahn of Fox on Monday. Today he sat not just for Ms. Winfrey but also for Diane Sawyer of ''Good Morning America.'' On Thursday he will be on the Regis Philbin show. And the Bush campaign tried to work out an appearance with David Letterman this week, during a brief visit to New York City, but found out that Mr. Letterman was not taping. Still, the Bush campaign seemed to get what it wanted from Ms. Winfrey's show. Aides said they were delighted that he had the chance to speak to voters for an hour, ''unfiltered'' by the news media. Viewers, said Karen P. Hughes, his chief press aide, ''got to see the Governor Bush I know and work with every day.'' The Gore campaign, though, tried its best to keep Mr. Bush off balance. Seizing on Mr. Bush's comment to Ms. Winfrey that ''a leader is someone who is not afraid to take positions,'' it peppered reporters covering Mr. Bush with an instant news release pointing out issues Mr. Bush had not taken clear positions on and attacking his positions on others. She pressed Mr. Bush on his father, asking whether he was running to restore his family's name and legacy. When Mr. Bush said he was not, she wondered whether ''not even in the teeniest, tiniest part'' of himself he was seeking to avenge his father's defeat in 1992. ''Not even in the teeniest, tiniest part,'' Mr. Bush insisted. ''Basically, what you're saying is, 'Are you running to get revenge?' Revenge is such a negative thought. I'm running for positive reasons.'' ''Alcohol was beginning to compete for my affections,'' Mr. Bush said, ''compete for my affections for my wife and my family. It was beginning to crowd out my energy and I decided to quit.'' ''I don't think it was quite that,'' Mr. Bush said, but added, ''she got disappointed some evenings.'' Later, Ms. Winfrey asked Mr. Bush to describe a time when he was overwhelmed with doubt. He recalled going to preparatory school in the East after a childhood in Texas and in the process seemed to respond to critics who question whether he is intellectual enough to be president. ''I remember thinking how brilliant all the other kids were,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Eventually, I realized smarts are not only whether or not you can write well or whether or not you can do calculus, but smarts also is instinct and judgment and competence.'' He said: ''I've got a lot of experience, I'm well educated. But I'm certainly not the kind of person who talks down to people because of my education.'' Ms. Winfrey quizzed Mr. Bush about a long list of his favorite things, just as she had with Mr. Gore. Sandwich? Peanut butter and jelly on white bread. Gift to give? ''Kiss to my wife.'' Fast food? Taco. Thing he cannot live without? Running. (''I'm up to a seven-and-a-half-minute mile three miles a day -- another reason why I should be president.'') Historical figure? Winston Churchill. Prized possession? His Texas ranch. His favorite dream? Mr. Bush looked taken aback, blushed, said nothing and then lifted his hand. Ms. Winfrey clasped it and raised it in the air. Ms. Hughes later said that Mr. Bush's gesture was a reference to being sworn in as president. Tonight, Mr. Bush talked to another set of questioners, at a town-hall meeting here in Lexington. At times, he hit the same kinds of soft notes he had on ''Oprah,'' but at other moments he was more pointed. He accused Mr. Gore of wanting ''nationalized health care.'' He also took on Mr. Gore on tax cuts. ''You've heard the rhetoric we're for the rich and he's for the people,'' he said, paraphrasing Mr. Gore. He said that his opponent had promised middle-class tax relief in 1992 but instead delivered a ''targeted tax increase.'' ''You've had your chance, Mr. Gore,'' he said. ''You have not led, we will.''
 Analysis of Vice Pres Al Gore's shift away from calls for gun control and attacks on National Rifle Association as he courts conservative swing voters; Gore's aides say he focuses on other issues, but has not backed away from gun control agenda (M) Last April, on the first anniversary of the shootings at Columbine High School, Vice President Al Gore castigated Gov. George W. Bush for offering only ''half a solution'' to the problem of gun violence. ''We have to address not just the spiritual dimension of this challenge, but also the physical fact that there are too many guns,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I think one of the lessons of Columbine is that we have to stand up to the N.R.A. and the gun industry.'' Last April, on the first anniversary of the shootings at Columbine High School, Vice President Al Gore castigated Gov. George W. Bush for offering only ''half a solution'' to the problem of gun violence. ''We have to address not just the spiritual dimension of this challenge, but also the physical fact that there are too many guns,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I think one of the lessons of Columbine is that we have to stand up to the N.R.A. and the gun industry.'' But Mr. Gore himself seems to have gone silent on the physical half of that equation. He has chastised the entertainment industry for glamorizing violence and marketing it to children. He has made family values and religious faith centerpieces of his speeches. Yet he has virtually stopped talking about gun control or the National Rifle Association. Many political analysts said they were not surprised by Mr. Gore's effort to steal a bit of his Republican rival's thunder. Among the more conservative swing voters he is trying to court, there is greater political profit in criticizing the people who produce movies than the ones who make, sell and own guns. Mr. Gore's aides said he had not backed away from his gun control agenda, which includes licensing new handgun owners and limiting handgun purchases to one a month. They said he was keeping his focus on education and health care and might return to gun control later, though they offer no promises. ''I don't think there's any ambivalence about the issue,'' said Mark Fabiani, the deputy campaign manager. But privately, Mr. Gore's advisers have long acknowledged that gun control is a potentially double-edged issue. And so they have counseled him to avoid discussing gun control in rural communities and to frame his proposals as crime-fighting or child-safety ideas -- terms more acceptable to gun owners. ''Clinton always viewed the issue as a big plus for him,'' said Kristen Rand, a lawyer with the Violence Policy Center, a nonprofit advocate for gun control. ''With Gore, I think there is a lot of ambivalence.'' The logic of Mr. Gore's strategy becomes clearer with a glance at the electoral map. His race with Mr. Bush is most sharply contested in  Midwestern and Great Lakes states, including Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin and Missouri. Having consolidated his base among more liberal Democrats at last month's Democratic convention, and having checked, at least for the moment, the advances of Ralph Nader of the Green Party on his left, Mr. Gore is now free to court those more conservative voters. Recent surveys of voters in the Midwest suggested that Mr. Gore's tactic is working. Ed Sarpolus, an independent pollster in Lansing, Mich., said polls that he conducted in Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Illinois last week showed Mr. Gore edging up among men, while also receiving significantly stronger support among voters who said family values was the issue they cared about most. Mr. Sarpolus noted that embracing gun control can be an effective way to court women. But he said that Mr. Gore's popularity among women has improved sharply in recent weeks without mentioning the issue. One reason for Mr. Gore not to change his strategy is what many analysts call the hassle factor: the ability of the National Rifle Association to energize small groups to work against their political opponents. Research by Mr. Jelen suggested that gun control opponents are a more unified and active voting bloc than gun control supporters. That means, Mr. Jelen asserted, that Mr. Gore is likely to alienate more voters than he can woo by talking about gun control, particularly in the Midwest. But those advocates said they also understand that the Gore campaign needs to handle the gun control issue carefully. ''It's not that they are not going to talk about gun issues,'' said Joe Sudbay, political director for Handgun Control Inc., a nonprofit advocacy group. ''They are talking about it smartly.'' Mr. Bush faces his own conflicts on the gun issue. Though he wants to win the conservative Democrats who oppose gun control, he is also concerned about alienating women who support it. His response, like Mr. Gore's, has been to avoid the issue whenever possible. So both men have left the job of raising gun issues to their supporters. For Mr. Bush, that has meant the N.R.A., which is promoting him without endorsing him. For Mr. Gore, the task has fallen mainly to Handgun Control, which is running commercials attacking Mr. Bush in several Midwestern cities. The risk in attacking the entertainment industry for Mr. Gore was that he might lose financial support from the executives who have lavished contributions on him and other Democrats in recent years. But on Monday, Mr. Gore raised $4.2 million, much of it from film and music stars, at a Los Angeles fund-raiser where he softened his tone. In his remarks, he mentioned the gun issue only in passing -- even though Hollywood executives have been strong supporters of gun control.
 Given that Mr. Gill is allocated $2.18 for each lunch -- 45 cents per entree, 8 cents per vegetable, 7 cents per bread, 9 cents per fruit and 17 cents for milk, with the rest going for supplies and labor -- there is, he says, very little margin for improvement. ''It's very easy to take a free kick against school lunch,'' Mr. Gill said Monday. ''It's just about the easiest kick you can make. Except maybe George Bush.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph I Lieberman, at Beverly Hills fete at which 300 Southern California moguls give $4.2 million to Democratic National Committee, mute their criticism of entertainment industry; seek to reassure Hollywood that their calls for stricter marketing practices will not lead to censorship; amount raised is record for political fund-raising dinner at private home (M) Face to face with 300 of their most generous contributors, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman muted their criticism of the entertainment industry on Monday night as they sought to reassure Hollywood that their calls for stricter marketing practices were not an effort to squelch creativity. Face to face with 300 of their most generous contributors, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman muted their criticism of the entertainment industry on Monday night as they sought to reassure Hollywood that their calls for stricter marketing practices were not an effort to squelch creativity. He and Mr. Gore spoke from a stage set up under a huge white tent on the fairway-size lawn of Ron Burkle, the supermarket magnate and longtime Democratic contributor. Mr. Gore was a bit more circumspect than Mr. Lieberman in his comments, praising Rob Reiner, the director, for paving the way for their visit and referring obliquely to ''the controversy of the previous week.'' That ''controversy'' was the threat by Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman that, if elected, they would take action against industry executives who did not ''clean up their act'' on marketing violent movies, music and video games to children within six months.  Mr. Gore said then that his administration would seek sanctions through legislation or regulatory action against the industry for deceptive advertising practices. Since Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman began their push just over a week ago, they have been attacked by their Republican opponents as hypocrites for chastising Hollywood by day and taking its money by night. Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential nominee, said that Mr. Gore was raising ''millions of dollars from the same media moguls who are corrupting our children.'' The entertainment industry is the fifth-biggest contributor to Democratic campaigns. In response, the Gore campaign said the point Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman were making was essentially the one they had been making in recent weeks. ''Al Gore and Joe Leiberman will not hesitate to tell their friends and supporters when they're wrong,'' said Mark Fabiani, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. ''This message has been consistently delivered loud and clear. Just because they went to the event doesn't obscure the point.'' In fact, Mr. Lieberman said in his Congressional testimony on Sept. 13 that he and Mr. Gore were talking about voluntary measures first, governmental regulation second and legislation only as a last resort. ''It's true that we feel strongly about the responsibility that the entertainment industries need to take when it comes to marketing inappropriate material to children,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Joe and I believe this very deeply. And if I'm entrusted with the presidency, we're going to fight to change that. And I know a lot of you will be standing with us.'' Mr. Reiner, who has worked assiduously on Mr. Gore's behalf and helped organize the fund-raiser on Monday, delivered a similar message. ''We don't only have our parochial interests at heart,'' Mr. Reiner told the contributors, with Mr. Gore seated nearby. ''We care about the same things that all Americans care about. We care about making sure our children get a good education, we care about making sure that we have health care. We care about a woman's right to choose, about protecting the environment and making sure that we have meaningful gun-control laws.'' He added, ''That's the reason we're supporting Vice President Gore and Senator Lieberman, because they are in sync with us on all of these issues.'' Mr. Gore said: ''I thought, Rob, you put it exactly right in talking about all of the things that we have in common.'' He spoke at length, but mostly about other subjects. He mentioned his support for abortion rights three times and emphasized that the next president could appoint three or four new justices to the Supreme Court. ''Incidentally,'' Mr. Gore said, ''the only thing I would change -- when you two kissed up here? You might want to hold that a little longer.'' Mr. Gore was headed tonight to another fund-raising dinner, this one in Silicon Valley, where he was expected to raise more than $3 million.
 Senate approves bill to end annual Congressional review of China's trade status and grant China permanent normal trade ties, 83-15; strong bipartisan support follows long and tumultuous struggle; Pres Clinton hails vote, which gives him what he views as key foreign policy goals; aide to Gov George W Bush hails vote; Vice Pres Al Gore, who feared losing support of labor unions who opposed bill, voices qualified support; Senate supporters hail deal, which will expand vast overseas market for American goods; photos (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential nominee, has supported the legislation. After the vote, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, Ray Sullivan, said, ''This measure will help open markets to American products and help export American values, especially freedom and entrepreneurship.'' Although Vice President Al Gore feared losing the support of allies in organized labor who opposed the measure as a threat to union jobs, he voiced qualified support for it today. But he stressed that American workers' rights must be protected. ''We must combat unfair trade practices abroad when they harm our working families,'' Mr. Gore said. So supporters adopted a low-key strategy aimed at leaching from Senate consideration all of the volatile politics that enmeshed the House vote. Tactically, that meant having Mr. Clinton -- who eight years ago was on the opposite side, criticizing  President George Bush's policy of engagement with China -- project enough support to show that he still cared deeply about the bill, but not raise the debate temperature high enough to prompt some foes to take the bill hostage to delay it. When Mr. Clinton's original point man on the bill, Commerce Secretary William M. Daley, left the Cabinet in June to head Mr. Gore's presidential election campaign, some supporters worried that momentum was slipping away. In the vote, all but 7 Democrats and 8 Republicans supported the bill.  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut Democrat who is Mr. Gore's running mate, was campaigning in California and Ohio and did not vote. Senator Daniel K. Akaka, Democrat of Hawaii, also did not vote.
 WOODS-Patricia Fay, on September 6, 2000 in San Francisco, CA of cancer after a short illness. She was the beloved mother of Wendy Luers, Ward, Cynthia and Susan Woods, loving grandmother of Kate and Alexandra Woods, Ramsay and Connor Turnbull, Max and Tatia Bauer & great-grandmother to Rowan and India, loved by her sons-in-law William Luers, Myron Sugarman and Johannes Bauer and her daughter-in-law Priscilla Woods. She will be remembered fondly by her caregivers: Rosa Sandoval, Annie Vega, Marcenita Villegas and Rosemary Massey. Patsy, a third generation San Franciscan, was generous and important in the lives of her many nieces and nephews, cousins, and friends of all generations whom she welcomed with ease and style in the many places she made her home. She will be sorely missed by all whose lives she brightened with her happy spirit and contagious optimism and energy. And above all, we will all remember her humor, kindness and wonderful sparkling smile. The family suggests contributions to St. Anthony's Foundation, 121 Golden Gate Avenue, San Francisco, Ca 94102 or Mount St. Joseph-St. Elizabeth, 100 Masonic Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94118. A memorial service will be held on October 20th at 3 PM at St. Dominic's Church, 2390 Bush Street, San Francisco followed by a reception. WOODS-Patricia Fay, on September 6, 2000 in San Francisco, CA of cancer after a short illness. She was the beloved mother of Wendy Luers, Ward, Cynthia and Susan Woods, loving grandmother of Kate and Alexandra Woods, Ramsay and Connor Turnbull, Max and Tatia Bauer & great-grandmother to Rowan and India, loved by her sons-in-law William Luers, Myron Sugarman and Johannes Bauer and her daughter-in-law Priscilla Woods. She will be remembered fondly by her caregivers: Rosa Sandoval, Annie Vega, Marcenita Villegas and Rosemary Massey. Patsy, a third generation San Franciscan, was generous and important in the lives of her many nieces and nephews, cousins, and friends of all generations whom she welcomed with ease and style in the many places she made her home. She will be sorely missed by all whose lives she brightened with her happy spirit and contagious optimism and energy. And above all, we will all remember her humor, kindness and wonderful sparkling smile. The family suggests contributions to St. Anthony's Foundation, 121 Golden Gate Avenue, San Francisco, Ca 94102 or Mount St. Joseph-St. Elizabeth, 100 Masonic Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94118. A memorial service will be held on October 20th at 3 PM at St. Dominic's Church, 2390 Bush Street, San Francisco followed by a reception.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, both making aggressive bids for women's votes, face gap between their appeal to single and married women; Gore leads overall with women voters and with single women, but Bush has backing of more married women, particularly those under 50 with children still at home; latest New York Times/CBS News poll shows married women prefer Bush over Gore, 45 percent to 37 percent, while unmarried women strongly prefer Gore to Bush, 57 percent to 22 percent; table (M) Perhaps David Letterman put it best. After Vice President Al Gore appeared on ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'' last week, talking up his marriage and his family life to millions of female viewers, Mr. Letterman joked: ''Al, you go, girl!'' The wisecrack neatly caught a dynamic of the last few weeks of the presidential campaign as first Mr. Gore and now Gov. George W. Bush have made aggressive efforts to secure the votes of women. Perhaps David Letterman put it best. After Vice President Al Gore appeared on ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'' last week, talking up his marriage and his family life to millions of female viewers, Mr. Letterman joked: ''Al, you go, girl!'' The wisecrack neatly caught a dynamic of the last few weeks of the presidential campaign as first Mr. Gore and now Gov. George W. Bush have made aggressive efforts to secure the votes of women. From Mr. Gore's appeals to ''waitress moms'' to Mr. Bush's hourlong appearance today on Ms. Winfrey's show, women are central to the strategies of each campaign. Over all, Mr. Gore seems to have the edge; he now holds an 11-point lead among them in the latest New York Times/CBS News poll, while Mr. Bush leads among men. But not all women are signing on to the Gore campaign. While most single women support Mr. Gore, most married women, particularly those under 50 with children still at home, support Mr. Bush. Married women prefer Mr. Bush over Mr. Gore, 45 percent to 37 percent, while unmarried women strongly prefer Mr. Gore to Mr. Bush, 57 percent to 22 percent. One difficulty in exploiting the marriage gap is that it is hard for candidates at this stage of a general election to refine their messages narrowly enough to reach one group or the other. And Mr. Gore, for one, wants to reach both. In Las Vegas on Monday he held two events focused on women's health care. ''I'm for tough new patients' rights legislation to make sure women get the best health care, not the cheapest,'' Mr. Gore said. Recognizing the strides that Mr. Gore has made, Mr. Bush has been aggressively trying to win back the support of many women. On Monday he and his wife, Laura, visited a maternity ward in Little Rock, Ark., and today Mr. Bush appeared with Ms. Winfrey before her millions of female viewers. There is no question that unmarried women over 50 form one of Mr. Gore's strongest groups of supporters and that he is struggling to win over married women. Mr. Bush is aiming squarely at the married group too, with his reignited campaign devoted to education. A new survey for the Pew Research Center, conducted Aug. 24 to Sept. 10 with 1,999 registered voters, shows how broad the disparity is. The poll shows that Mr. Bush is ahead among both married mothers and married fathers and among married men who have no children, but that Mr. Gore leads among most other sex-based categories, including unmarried men of all ages, which is a significant gain for him. (The New York Times/CBS News poll, however, has Mr. Bush two percentage points ahead among unmarried men and six points ahead among all men.) Mr. Gore is less interested in them than Mr. Bush is, because they form the natural Republican base -- favoring tax cuts, the death penalty and building up the military, and opposing gun control. If Mr. Bush is to recapture his overall lead, he needs to expand his hold over the married mothers while rebuilding his base among men who are shifting toward Mr. Gore. These are white men who make less than $50,000 a year and have not attended college -- a signal group of social conservatives who have proved to be important swing voters in recent presidential elections. ''A lot of the focus has been to reclaim the family for Democrats and Al Gore,'' Stanley Greenberg, Mr. Gore's pollster, said. Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew poll, found strong differences in the views of married mothers under 50 and those of women under 50, unmarried or married without children. The married mothers said they liked Mr. Bush better and considered him a stronger leader than Mr. Gore. They said Mr. Bush seemed more honest and more likely to get things done. But on all of these issues, unmarried women of all ages think more highly of Mr. Gore than married women do. Mr. Kohut also foresees Mr. Gore benefiting from an underlying sense of anxiety that voters, especially women, have about their personal financial situations. Mr. Bush's emphasis on being a ''compassionate conservative'' and caring about education spoke to married women, Ms. Lake said, while his toughness on the military and on crime -- and the continuing executions of condemned prisoners in Texas -- have helped him keep the support of men. For Mr. Gore, the goal is obvious. ''Younger, blue-collar men are more receptive to his message than college-educated men are,'' Ms. Lake said. Men who are both educated and affluent tend to support Mr. Bush because they like his tax cut proposal, his antigovernment stance and his support for privatizing part of Social Security. With Mr. Clinton's impeachment, the Democrats lost the ground they had gained, Mr. Greenberg said. Several analysts said Mr. Clinton's personal behavior was perhaps one of the strongest factors in inhibiting voters' support for Mr. Gore, particularly among women and even more so among married women with children at home. But analysts have identified a string of recent events that have swung women to Mr. Gore, starting with his selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate on Aug. 7 and including what Mr. Gore called his ''overwhelming surge of emotion'' when he kissed his wife at the convention.
 BRASS FOR BUSH  Gov. George W. Bush, who has sharply criticized the Clinton administration's defense policies, has picked up the endorsement of several retired military leaders, including senior officers who served in influential positions under President Clinton. The list, to be announced today by Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, in Lancaster, Calif., includes Adm. Jay L. Johnson, who stepped down as the Navy's top admiral in July, and Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, the commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf, who also retired this summer. Others include two former commandants of the Marine Corps, Gen. Charles C. Krulak and Gen. Carl Mundy Jr.; and two former chiefs of the Air Force, Gen. Ronald R. Fogelman and Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, all of whom served under President Clinton. The officers are part of a new group called ''Veterans for Bush-Cheney.'' BRASS FOR BUSH  Gov. George W. Bush, who has sharply criticized the Clinton administration's defense policies, has picked up the endorsement of several retired military leaders, including senior officers who served in influential positions under President Clinton. The list, to be announced today by Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, in Lancaster, Calif., includes Adm. Jay L. Johnson, who stepped down as the Navy's top admiral in July, and Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, the commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf, who also retired this summer. Others include two former commandants of the Marine Corps, Gen. Charles C. Krulak and Gen. Carl Mundy Jr.; and two former chiefs of the Air Force, Gen. Ronald R. Fogelman and Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, all of whom served under President Clinton. The officers are part of a new group called ''Veterans for Bush-Cheney.'' RUNNING FOR ECONOMIST  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said yesterday that Gov. George W. Bush showed a flawed understanding of the national economy when he said this week that he would not retreat from a tax cut in the middle of a recession but would cut even more, even at the risk of creating a ''short-term deficit.'' That approach might worsen a recession, Mr. Lieberman said at a campaign stop in Fresno, Calif. ''We can't afford that,'' he declared. ''Deficits lead to higher interest rates, and what does that mean? Higher mortgage payments. Higher car payments. Higher student loan payments.'' He predicted that Mr. Bush's plan for a $1.3 billion tax cuts over the next decade would lead to deficits and noted that even Republican leaders in Congress had not advocated so large a cut. Vice President Al Gore has proposed a $500 million package of tax cuts. TAKE MY MONEY, PLEASE  Sometimes candidates raise more campaign cash than they can use and start giving the excess to candidates who have come up short. So when Representative Peter R. Deutsch, a four-term Democrat from Florida's 20th Congressional District, at the tip end of the state, offered to give some excess cash to the Democratic National Committee to help elect Al Gore, there was no great surprise. He had almost $2.5 million in his kitty and essentially no place to spend it because his only challenger in November is a write-in candidate, Ed Kopanski of Key West. Besides, Mr. Gore is scrambling hard to snatch Florida away from Gov. George W. Bush, whose brother Jeb is the state's governor. Then the check came in, for a whopping $250,000. Democratic fund-raisers say the contribution may be the largest of its kind ever from a member of Congress to a national campaign. Mr. Deutsch, who campaigned for Mr. Gore during the primary season and held a fund-raiser for him in April that pulled in more than $400,000, says he sent in his big check because while the Gore-Lieberman ticket has made good progress in recent weeks, it still lags in fund-raising. THE TRAVEL LOG  With Al Gore starting his day in Los Angeles and ending it in Silicon Valley, he lagged a bit in the frequent-flier sweepstakes with George W. Bush who traveled from Chicago to Lexington, Ky., to Pittsburgh. But today's another day. Here are the stats for Tuesday:  Length of the Official Day: Gore, 12 hours; Bush, 13 hours  States Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 3  Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3  Events: Gore, 2; Bush, 2.  Interviews: Gore, 1; Bush, 3  Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore, 1; Bush, 0  Main message: Gore, working families; Bush, middle class
 Text of Vice Pres Al Gore's remarks at Beverly Hills, Calif, fund-raiser
 With a Hollywood Crowd, Democrats Mute Criticism  Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, appearing at a Beverly Hills fund-raiser Monday night, muted criticism of the entertainment industry as they reassured Hollywood that their calls for stricter marketing practices were not an effort to squelch creativity. Bush on 'Oprah'  Gov. George W. Bush appeared on Oprah Winfrey's program, whose audience is three-fourths women, sitting for an interview that emphasized biography over policy. Polls show that while most single women support Vice President Al Gore, Mr. Bush leads among married women, particularly those under 50 with children still at home. Dick Cheney, citing news reports casting doubt on a cost comparison Mr. Gore had made between human and animal medications, said the vice president ''simply makes some things up out of whole cloth.''
 Dick Cheney steps up Republican assault on Vice Pres Al Gore over Gore's statement that his mother-in-law paid far more for arthritis drug Lodine than he paid for animal version of drug taken by his dog; Gore campaign releases data showing price disparity, but comparison of human and dog dosages reveals little disparity for similar dosages (M) The Republicans continued a sharp assault today on Vice President Al Gore over the veracity of a statement he made last month saying his  mother-in-law paid a much higher price for a prescribed arthritis medication than he had to pay for the same drug when it was prescribed for his dog. In response the Gore campaign released information that on close  examination seems to suggest that there was little disparity in the price for similar dosages of the drugs. Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential nominee, said the questions about Mr. Gore's statements on drug costs was an example of how he ''simply makes some things up out of whole cloth and repeats them over and over and over again until he's called on it.'' The Republicans continued a sharp assault today on Vice President Al Gore over the veracity of a statement he made last month saying his  mother-in-law paid a much higher price for a prescribed arthritis medication than he had to pay for the same drug when it was prescribed for his dog. In response the Gore campaign released information that on close  examination seems to suggest that there was little disparity in the price for similar dosages of the drugs. Dick Cheney, the Republican vice presidential nominee, said the questions about Mr. Gore's statements on drug costs was an example of how he ''simply makes some things up out of whole cloth and repeats them over and over and over again until he's called on it.'' Mr. Cheney was referring to news accounts that cast doubt on an anecdote Mr. Gore used last month when he told a group of elderly people in Florida that the arthritis medicine his mother-in-law took cost three times as much as the animal version of the same medicine taken by his dog, Shiloh. The Boston Globe reported on Monday that Mr. Gore had made the assertion based on figures from a Congressional report, not on his family's actual drug bills. Today, after enduring barbs on the issue from the Bush campaign for a day and a half, the Gore campaign said the report that Mr. Gore had cited put the wholesale price of Lodine, the arthritis drug for humans, at $1.20 per capsule and Etogesic, the one for dogs, at 42 cents. The Lodine for Mr. Gore's mother-in-law, Margaret Ann Aitcheson, cost $2.13 per capsule , while Shiloh's Etogesic cost 92 cents per capsule, the campaign said. Later Mr. Gore talked about the matter and said the issue was not his mother-in-law. But Mr. Cheney, who attacked Mr. Gore on a variety of fronts today, contended that the issue was one of credibility. After the Gore campaign released the updated drug costs, Mr. Cheney told reporters here: ''Clearly Al Gore is going around the country, making up stories about his family, citing costs that may or may not have been paid in order to try to win a political argument. I think the vice president of the United States has an obligation to be as accurate as possible during the course of the debate.''
 Correction of Sept 16 editorial, which erred in saying Gov George W Bush opposes right to sue health maintenance organizations; Bush campaign says he favors patient's right to sue provided claim is first reviewed by independent medical panel An editorial last Saturday erred in saying that Gov. George W. Bush opposes the right to sue health maintenance organizations. The Bush campaign says that its candidate favors a patient's right to sue provided that the claim is first reviewed by an independent medical panel. An editorial last Saturday erred in saying that Gov. George W. Bush opposes the right to sue health maintenance organizations. The Bush campaign says that its candidate favors a patient's right to sue provided that the claim is first reviewed by an independent medical panel.
 Letter from Georgina Verdugo (Americans for a Fair Chance) says Gov Jeb Bush (Sept 15 Op-Ed) is giving himself premature congratulations on Florida's Talented 20 program and its effect on minority admissions to Florida's colleges We take issue with ''Better Than Affirmative,'' by Jeb Bush (Op-Ed, Sept. 15), about the success of the Talented 20 program and its effect on minority admissions to Florida's colleges. National freshman college admissions have increased sharply for this fall, but the percentage of minority students has remained stagnant. While Mr. Bush nobly concedes the value of diversity in opportunity, diversity cannot be promoted without addressing race and ethnicity. Affirmative action continues to be the best means of fairly addressing existing discrimination. We take issue with ''Better Than Affirmative,'' by Jeb Bush (Op-Ed, Sept. 15), about the success of the Talented 20 program and its effect on minority admissions to Florida's colleges. National freshman college admissions have increased sharply for this fall, but the percentage of minority students has remained stagnant. While Mr. Bush nobly concedes the value of diversity in opportunity, diversity cannot be promoted without addressing race and ethnicity. Affirmative action continues to be the best means of fairly addressing existing discrimination. Mr. Bush seeks a premature ovation by distorting these admissions data for his own political gain. Unfortunately, he has overlooked the real issue: real access to education that provides an opportunity for everyone.
