 Mrs. Cheney's brief biography on the official Bush campaign Web site lists only two books to her credit: a history of the House of Representatives she wrote with her husband, and ''Telling the Truth,'' which argues that political correctness is breaking down America's morality.
 Correction of Sept 26 excerpts from remarks by Gov George W Bush at elementary school that misstated day he spoke The ''His Own Words'' feature yesterday with the campaign coverage, quoting from remarks by George W. Bush at Bethany Elementary School in Beaverton, Ore., misstated the day he spoke. It was Monday, not yesterday. The ''His Own Words'' feature yesterday with the campaign coverage, quoting from remarks by George W. Bush at Bethany Elementary School in Beaverton, Ore., misstated the day he spoke. It was Monday, not yesterday.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, in his toughest attack of presidential campaign, portrays platform of Gov George W Bush and Dick Cheney as wide-ranging deception, speech to bricklayers' union convention, Atlantic City; holds candidates' promises contradict their records; directly scores Cheney's record in House for first time (M) In his toughest attack yet in this campaign, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman yesterday portrayed the platform of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney as a wide-ranging deception, saying their promises contradicted their records. In his toughest attack yet in this campaign, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman yesterday portrayed the platform of Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney as a wide-ranging deception, saying their promises contradicted their records. His remarks signaled an intensified offensive against Mr. Bush, and  echoed the Republicans' main line of attack, the charge of inconsistency and hypocrisy. The Democrats are bent on painting Mr. Bush as a staunch conservative who poses as a moderate with empty promises on education and health care. Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, challenged Mr. Bush's recent claims that public education has stagnated under the Clinton administration, calling the claims unfair to schools that are improving. And while he gave a long list of education projects that Vice President Al Gore would invest in, he said the Republicans would have no money to spend on schools after their tax cuts. ''I'll tell you what the real education gap is in America this year,'' the senator said. ''It's the gap in the Bush-Cheney campaign between what they're talking about and what their plan will actually do. When it comes to education, I promise you Al Gore and I have not only the will to improve education in our country, but the wallet -- or the money left in the wallet -- to make it happen.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said: ''Senator Lieberman would be better served explaining why America's in the midst of an education recession in the Clinton-Gore years. We've seen test scores stagnate, and the achievement gap between minority students and their peers remains wide.'' He also noted that under Mr. Bush, Texas ranks near the bottom among all states in the percentage of its children with health insurance.
 Gore Takes Campaign to MTV  Vice President Al Gore participated in an MTV forum in which, among other topics, he explained his support for civil unions between homosexuals, his opposition to the legalization of medical marijuana and his distaste for misogynistic music.
 Gov George W Bush's campaign, responding to report that Federal Bureau of Investigation focuses probe into stolen debate materials on Yvette Lozano, employee of Maverick Media, which produces Bush's campaign commercials, questions fairness of probe; defends Lozano; suspects Clinton administration tampers with probe to boost Vice Pres Al Gore (M) The campaign of Gov. George W. Bush asserted today that leaked information about a Federal investigation into stolen debate materials had raised questions about whether the inquiry was proceeding in an fair manner. The campaign issued its complaint today in response to a story on the Web site of The Dallas Morning News saying that the Federal Bureau of Investigation was focusing its inquiry on an employee of Maverick Media, an Austin, Tex.-based firm that is producing Mr. Bush's campaign commercials. The campaign of Gov. George W. Bush asserted today that leaked information about a Federal investigation into stolen debate materials had raised questions about whether the inquiry was proceeding in an fair manner. The campaign issued its complaint today in response to a story on the Web site of The Dallas Morning News saying that the Federal Bureau of Investigation was focusing its inquiry on an employee of Maverick Media, an Austin, Tex.-based firm that is producing Mr. Bush's campaign commercials. Tonight, Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said the campaign was convinced the employee, Yvette Lozano, was innocent, and she asserted that the release of confidential information about the investigation had raised questions about political tampering by the Clinton administration to help Vice President Al Gore's campaign. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign said tonight, ''We have a great deal of faith in the F.B.I. investigators who are on the scene.'' She added, ''For Karen Hughes to suggest otherwise is not just an attack on the Gore campaign. It's an attack on the F.B.I. And it raises question about why the Bush campaign doesn't want the F.B.I. to get to the bottom of this.'' The bureau opened its investigation after former Representative Thomas Downey, who has assisted Mr. Gore in debate preparations, turned over a package he received on Sept. 13 containing a video of a mock debate between Mr. Bush and Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire, as well as some briefing books. The package carried an Austin postmark. Last week, the Gore campaign suspended a 28-year-old campaign worker who had bragged to a friend that the Democrats might have a ''mole'' inside the Bush campaign. Mr. Gore's aides said the suspended worker, Michael Doyne, had made the story up. She also rejected out of hand assertions by Molly Beth Malcolm, chairwoman of the Texas Democratic Party, that the pilfered debate materials had actually been sent to Mr. Downey by Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political consultant. Democrats contend that Mr. Rove bugged his own campaign office during the 1986 gubernatorial campaign in order to cast aspersions on the Democrats.
 Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, Gen Henry H Shelton, and other senior commanders reportedly plan to warn Congress that armed services are struggling with aging equipment, parts shortages and training shortfalls that will require billions of dollars in new spending; will report that front-line combat forces remain ready to fight, but that readiness of some support units has fallen, despite two years of budget increases; will argue that Pentagon's procurement budget has not risen quickly enough to replace aging arms and equipment; their argument that combat readiness remains high undercuts charges by Gov George W Bush and some other Republicans that American military might is fraying; warnings about other readiness problems and aging weapons echo those made by Bush; graph (M) Their argument that readiness remains high among combat forces undercuts accusations from some Republicans, including Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, that American military might is fraying. At the same time, their warnings about other readiness problems and aging weapons echo many made recently by Mr. Bush and by other military officials. That has prompted administration officials to complain that scheduling the hearings before Election Day was simply a partisan effort to force the chiefs into voicing readiness concerns raised by Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney. Both major-party candidates have proposed increasing military spending. Mr. Bush has called for $45 billion more over the next decade; Vice President Al Gore has gone even further, proposing the spending of another $80 billion over the same period.
 Since Thursday, after Vice President Al Gore's call for the release of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, prices have fallen by about $4 a barrel. Today in Washington, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson said the administration would consider releasing more oil in 30 days if prices did not stay down. Saudi Arabia, OPEC's biggest producer, initially dismissed Mr. Clinton's move as ''an election ploy requested by Al Gore,'' but upon arrival here Monday, Oil Minister Ali al-Naimi said the American action ''will stabilize the price of oil.''
 ''It has been difficult for Hillary to fit into the perceptions and expectations of the role of first lady,'' said the Rev. Donald G. Jones, her longtime friend and her mentor when she was growing up in Chicago. ''The office of first lady is one of the most unevolved. Perceptions people have of it are pretty much fixed by Barbara Bush, Nancy Reagan, Jackie Kennedy, by people who minded their own business.''
 NO SURPRISE INVITATIONS -- The Commission on Presidential Debates has formally invited Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to participate in the first of three planned debates, on Tuesday at the University of Massachusetts in Boston. NO SURPRISE INVITATIONS -- The Commission on Presidential Debates has formally invited Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to participate in the first of three planned debates, on Tuesday at the University of Massachusetts in Boston. The bipartisan commission said yesterday that of the seven major party and minor party candidates whose names were on ballots in enough states to ''have a theoretical chance of winning a majority of the votes in the Electoral College,'' only Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush met all of the panel's requirements. The central requirement is that a candidate must have the support of an average of 15 percent in five national polls by news organizations. PLEA ON SOFT MONEY -- The Senate's leading supporters of campaign finance legislation appealed to Al Gore and George W. Bush yesterday to follow the lead set in New York's Senate race and ban soft money advertisements in the presidential contest. ''In the same spirit that motivated the Lazio-Clinton agreement, we respectfully encourage you to attempt to make a similar agreement in your race,'' Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, said in a letter sent to the White House hopefuls. Similar letters were also sent to all candidates for the House and Senate. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore did not immediately respond. Gov. George W. Bush continued seeking votes and campaign cash Out West yesterday, courting Californians with his message of a recession in education. Al Gore, meanwhile, worked swing states throughout the Midwest, talking mainly about Medicare but digressing while meeting with some Michigan twentysomethings to rap about everything from medicinal marijuana to recycling. The stats: Length of the Official Day: Gore, 13  1/2hours; Bush, 14 hours States Visited: Gore, 3; Bush, 1 Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 3; Bush, 3 Events: Gore, 3; Bush, 4 Press Conferences/Interviews: Gore, 6; Bush, 7. Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush 1 Main message: Gore, strengthening Medicare; Bush, improving education.
 Census Bureau reports median household income rose by 2.7 percent in 1999 to $40,816, topping $40,000 for first time; reports percentage of households living in poverty dropped to 11.8 percent, down from 12.7 percent in 1998; Clinton administration and Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign claim credit; Gov George W Bush seeks to take credit for economic progress reported in Texas; bureau also reports earnings gap between men and women increased, while income gap between rich and middle class and poor did not change; graphs (M) Released six weeks before the election, the eagerly awaited report often provides fodder for political campaigns. The Clinton administration and Vice President Al Gore's campaign immediately claimed credit for the robust results. ''This certainly shows that progress has been made over the last eight years,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman. ''But the central question of this campaign is how we build on our prosperity to make new progress and to benefit everyone, not just a few.'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas also sought to take credit for the economic progress in his state during the past few years, pointing out that Texas' two-year average median income rose 3.5 percent, higher than the 3.1 percent increase for the country as a whole. The Bush campaign attributed the growth in income to policies he pushed as governor, like the ''two biggest tax cuts in Texas history.''
 Gov George W Bush, in latest sign that he seeks to avoid being pegged as too conservative by moderate voters, will skip Christian Coalition convention, Washington, DC; stance is not stopping coalition and other conservative groups from stepping up behind-the-scenes efforts on his behalf; groups, which are spending heavily on pro-Bush phone banks, commercials and voter drives, are hammering away on issues Bush avoids in campaign speeches (M) In the latest example of how Gov. George W. Bush is going out of his way to avoid being pegged as too conservative by moderate voters, he has decided to skip what for the last two Republican presidential nominees was a must-stop on the election circuit: the Christian Coalition convention that opens here on Friday. In the latest example of how Gov. George W. Bush is going out of his way to avoid being pegged as too conservative by moderate voters, he has decided to skip what for the last two Republican presidential nominees was a must-stop on the election circuit: the Christian Coalition convention that opens here on Friday. They are pouring millions of dollars into phone banks, commercials and voter drives to help elect Mr. Bush. And they are hammering away on issues that Mr. Bush is not addressing in his campaign speeches, from abortion to guns to Vice President Al Gore's character. In the mailing, Lyn Nofziger, a former aide to President Ronald Reagan, wrote: ''The reason we formed this emergency committee is that George W. Bush and the Republican Party cannot talk clearly and plainly about Al Gore's record of corruption and scandal without being accused of negative campaigning. But we can. And we are.'' Still another group, the American Conservative Union, said it was distributing more than three million copies of a book it published that raises doubts about Mr. Gore. ''You know the liberal media will not tell America about Al Gore's far-left socialist vision for America,'' David Keene, the group's chairman, said in a letter to supporters. Some of the same groups that helped Mr. Bush win the South Carolina primary after his defeat in New Hampshire have re-emerged. The Republican Ideas Political Committee has been running a TV commercial in Kansas City, Mo., urging support of Republicans. It features a woman saying she took her son out of public schools partly because there was ''a bit more diversity than he could handle.'' The group has ties to Grover Norquist, head of Americans for Tax Reform, which financed commercials to help Mr. Bush during the primaries. In past campaigns, conservative groups did not hesitate to savage Republican candidates -- even at the risk of damaging the party's prospects -- who were not viewed as sufficiently outspoken on their causes. But conservatives have been notably quiet this year and resisted criticizing Mr. Bush because they felt he had a clear shot at winning. Even as the polls have tightened, and Mr. Bush is not viewed as much as a sure bet, many conservatives said they were sticking with him. Still, while they seek to galvanize their supporters, some prominent conservatives said they had misgivings lately about the Bush campaign. Some complained that Mr. Bush had allowed Mr. Gore to seize the issue of Hollywood and morality. Other said Mr. Bush should have made more of the Supreme Court ruling supporting the Boy Scouts' right to expel a gay assistant scoutmaster. And some said they felt the campaign had marginalized them. The most striking comments came from Mr. Robertson, who has been quite supportive of Mr. Bush. For the first time, he raised warnings about the Republican nominee's strategy, saying that by declining to address the convention he was neglecting conservatives at his own peril. Mr. Robertson also said that Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who has been outspoken on the subjects of values and religion, could eat into Mr. Bush's support. ''With Lieberman, there's going to be some defection on moral issues,'' he said, ''and they have to be aware of that.'' Asked about Mr. Bush's prospects, Mr. Robertson said, ''They're very iffy. They've lost the commanding lead they had. Republicans have a marvelous facility for snatching defeat from the jaws of victory.'' Gary Bauer, who took on Mr. Bush in the primaries and now leads the conservative Campaign for Working Families, said he had no major objections, but thought social issues should be better emphasized. ''The party could still do more on a variety of values issues where the division between Gore and Bush remains substantial,'' he said, ''everything from the Boy Scouts issue to Hollywood.'' Mr. Gore is benefiting from aggressive grass-roots campaigns as well. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. and the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League this week announced huge television campaigns to help the Democratic ticket. But it is quite unusual that so many conservative groups have gone along with efforts by the Bush campaign to keep a distance -- at least publicly. The N.R.A., aware that it could be damaging if Mr. Bush is closely identified with the group, has tentatively decided not to endorse him. But the association is spending millions of dollars to help him and to discredit Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush himself this month endorsed a group connected to the N.R.A., but with a name not apt to stoke controversy: the Law Enforcement Alliance of America. Mr. Bush's disinclination to promote his opposition to abortion was evident at a town hall meeting in Albuquerque about two weeks ago, when an abortion foe looked for assurance on his stand. The governor gave it, but only as he said that good people could disagree on the subject. Such caution does not seem to bother abortion opponents like David N. O'Steen, executive director of the National Right to Life Committee. He said he would not press Mr. Bush to raise the abortion issue next week during his first debate with Mr. Gore. Mr. O'Steen's organization is not so timid, having sent thousands of flyers to Republicans around the country castigating Mr. Gore for his stand on abortion. The flyer quotes a letter in 1997 from Cardinal Roger Mahony, the archbishop of Los Angeles, who said he was ''appalled'' by the vice president's remarks. Ari Fleischer, a campaign spokesman, said Mr. Bush would not attend the Christian Coalition event because it would ''conflict with our debate preparations this weekend.'' Despite his decision not to attend -- coalition officials said Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, also declined -- Mr. Bush has generally drawn better treatment from religious conservatives than Bob Dole, the Republican nominee in 1996, did.
 Bush and the Conservatives  Even as Gov. George W. Bush is playing down his conservative ties, conservative groups are working hard to get him elected. Bush and the Conservatives  Even as Gov. George W. Bush is playing down his conservative ties, conservative groups are working hard to get him elected.
 Democrats hope Vice President Al Gore's rise in popularity will energize the Democrats' 500,000-voter edge in state registration and propel Mr. Klink toward an upset. But, as a House member, Mr. Santorum showed strong resistance to the coat-tail effect in 1992 when his heavily Democratic district voted only 30 percent for President George Bush while Mr. Santorum was re-elected by 61 percent. Emboldened by Mr. Gore's surge in this swing state, Mr. Klink maintains he will win because his party has the more popular positions on the most urgent issues. But state analysts say there is no sign yet that Mr. Klink is scoring significantly with his opposition to Mr. Santorum's proposals to privatize some Social Security investment and to use health maintenance organizations in dealing with the prescription drug problem. ''Klink is running as a little Gore and his message is getting sharper, more populist,'' said G. Terry Madonna, the political science chairman at Millersville University in Lancaster who conducts the Keystone Poll.  ''The polls have been tightening but Klink still needs to get his name recognition much higher.''
 AL GORE admits and George W. Bush implies youthful drug use. So should schools adopt a ''do as I say, not as I do'' drug curriculum, or seek another approach? AL GORE admits and George W. Bush implies youthful drug use. So should schools adopt a ''do as I say, not as I do'' drug curriculum, or seek another approach?
 Vice President Al Gore supports the bill, and Gov. George W. Bush has not taken a position.
 Vice Pres Al Gore takes part in lengthy forum with University of Michigan students broadcast by MTV; photo (M) He did not have to choose between boxers or briefs. But in a lengthy MTV forum today, broadcast tonight, Vice President Al Gore did reveal that he had a compact disc by the alternative rock band Sister Hazel in his CD player right then, that he would probably write for a living if he were not otherwise employed next year, and that he coveted Air Force One more than any other White House perquisite. Between hip cultural references about Napster and the World Wrestling Federation (''Smackdown!'' Mr. Gore exclaimed when the topic was raised), the vice president explained his support for civil unions between homosexuals, his opposition to the legalization of medical marijuana and his distaste for misogynistic music. He was not asked about his underwear preference, as President Clinton was in a now infamous 1994 MTV forum (''Usually briefs,'' he responded). He did not have to choose between boxers or briefs. But in a lengthy MTV forum today, broadcast tonight, Vice President Al Gore did reveal that he had a compact disc by the alternative rock band Sister Hazel in his CD player right then, that he would probably write for a living if he were not otherwise employed next year, and that he coveted Air Force One more than any other White House perquisite. Between hip cultural references about Napster and the World Wrestling Federation (''Smackdown!'' Mr. Gore exclaimed when the topic was raised), the vice president explained his support for civil unions between homosexuals, his opposition to the legalization of medical marijuana and his distaste for misogynistic music. He was not asked about his underwear preference, as President Clinton was in a now infamous 1994 MTV forum (''Usually briefs,'' he responded). Mr. Gore said little in the 90-minute session that he had not said previously during the campaign. But he clearly relished the opportunity to take his case directly to 150 students in an auditorium at the University of Michigan and to a youthful nationwide television audience. A recent poll by MTV found that less than half of those ages 18 to 24 said they planned to vote this year, compared with 80 percent of older Americans. Wearing khaki Dockers and a sage shirt, Mr. Gore pledged to commit more money to college financial aid, to protect the environment and to safeguard abortion rights. But the drama of the session was provided by the students' ability to personalize questions on subjects the Gore campaign is accustomed to addressing in position papers and statements. A black student asked Mr. Gore about racial profiling by telling how he was recently surrounded by six police cars while driving with four black friends. A gay man asked why his heterosexual friends should be able to drive to Las Vegas and marry someone they barely know when he cannot form a legal union with a longtime, committed partner. A woman who opposes abortion rights asked about that issue by pointing out that her friends sometimes use abortion as a form of birth control. Responding to the question about profiling, Mr. Gore pledged to sign a ban on the practice as ''the first civil rights act of the 21st century.'' Mr. Gore said he supported civil unions like those recently approved in Vermont. ''But I think that it's not for the government to make that choice,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I deeply respect your view and I think actually the pro-life and pro-choice forces in this country have more in common than either side is willing to acknowledge. Both sides would like to see a reduction in the number of abortions, and the way to do that is to reduce the number of situations where women feel like they have to make that choice.'' Mr. Gore also took questions on popular culture and the entertainment industry, which has been a focus of his campaign this month. One student told Mr. Gore he was tempted to vote for Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, and challenged him to ''assure me that a vote for Al Gore is a conscientious vote, not simply a vote for the lesser of two evils.'' Mr. Gore cited his support for tough environmental enforcement  and consumer protections. ''I don't think anybody wants to feel like they have no options,'' Mr. Gore said. ''At the same time, they don't want to cast a meaningless vote that doesn't have an impact on the outcome.''
 As for that litter box, it is meant to describe a piercing pungency that sauvignon blancs sometimes achieve. There is even a New Zealand wine that celebrates this odor with humor, calling itself Cat's Phee on a Gooseberry Bush, gooseberry being the other obscure aroma in sauvignon blanc. Smells more like cold metal and lemon to me.
 One convention smooch sent the women scurrying over to Al Gore's side. Then one teary little chat with Oprah about his wife's difficult pregnancy and his love of peanut butter and jelly sandwiches sent the women scampering back to W.
 Senator Joseph Lieberman has only a month to end his safety-net campaign in Connecticut, where he is running for a third term in the Senate as well as for vice president on Al Gore's ticket. His Democratic colleagues in the Senate are pressing him to drop the Senate re-election bid lest his seat be lost if the national ticket wins. Even his own constituents oppose his dual candidacy by a narrow margin. Senator Joseph Lieberman has only a month to end his safety-net campaign in Connecticut, where he is running for a third term in the Senate as well as for vice president on Al Gore's ticket. His Democratic colleagues in the Senate are pressing him to drop the Senate re-election bid lest his seat be lost if the national ticket wins. Even his own constituents oppose his dual candidacy by a narrow margin.
 Editorial in series on key issues in presidential race focuses on importance of two or more Supreme Court appointments that the next president may make; notes even one new justice could be enough to alter court's course on some major issues; cites Gov George W Bush's identification of court's strongest conservatives as his favorite justices and Gore's admiration for liberal jurists of earlier era; notes appointments to lower federal courts will also have major influence on course of justice; urges more attention be paid to issue Asked to identify his favorite justices, George W. Bush names Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, the court's strongest conservatives. Justices Scalia and Thomas were the only dissenters last term when the court, in a decision written by their usual ally, Chief Justice Rehnquist, upheld the longstanding Miranda rule requiring that suspects be read their rights before a formal interrogation. They were also the only justices to dissent when the court, by a surprisingly wide 7-to-2 margin, voted last January to preserve the ability of citizens to bring lawsuits to enforce anti-pollution laws, a valuable tool for protecting the environment. By citing Justices Scalia and Thomas as his favorites, Mr. Bush suggests that he would fill vacancies with conservative nominees who could be expected to support organized school prayer, tuition vouchers and further curbs on the reach of the federal government in the spheres of civil rights, criminal justice and environmental regulation. Mr. Bush would be under fearsome pressure from interest groups within his party to follow through on that implicit pledge. As to abortion, he insists that a  potential justice's views on the issue will not be a ''litmus test,'' but he continues to support his party's platform plank calling for the appointment of anti-abortion judges. Vice President Al Gore says he will make it a point to name justices who respect women's reproductive freedom. Though he names two liberal jurists from an earlier era, Thurgood Marshall and William Brennan, as the justices he most admires, his nominees are likely to be judicial moderates in the mold of President Clinton's two appointees, Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer. They are generally supportive of civil rights and civil liberties, and offended by the Rehnquist court's troubling trend of elevating states' rights over federal authority, in the process substituting the court's own judgment of what national laws are needed for that of Congress.
 The court, which because of its location often finds itself adjudicating politically charged cases, has in recent years been ideologically split among appointees of Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush and those of Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter.
 Conventional wisdom in Washington, especially conservative conventional wisdom, is that campaign finance reform doesn't matter as an issue. Conservatives resolutely refuse to learn any lesson from John McCain's thumping of George W. Bush in New Hampshire, when he made campaign reform his central theme -- or from Mr. McCain's subsequent defeat after he veered from that message. But campaign reform turns out to have surprising political salience. Conservatives should welcome this fact, since they have no stake in the current system.
 Public Lives column; Gore Vidal, encountering Robert F Kennedy Jr at Elaine's restaurant, finds it 'eerie' to look into eyes so like Kennedy's father's; recalls their prickly relationship; Robert Wood Johnson IV hosts party for Sept 25 birthdays of Barbara Walters, Michael Douglas, Catherine Zeta-Jones, USA Films chairman Scott Greenstein and Christopher Reeve; party is also fund-raiser for Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation; dinner marking Daniel Boulud's 30 years of cooking also noted (S) ''He came over, walked up to me and said, 'Hello, I'm Bobby Kennedy,' '' Mr. Vidal said. ''I said, 'How nice to see you.' That was the end of it.'' (A moment later, Mr. Vidal added, ''I think I may have asked him to come to the play.'' That would be ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man,' '' the revival of a 1960 morality play at the Virginia Theater.)
 Mr. Corzine, meanwhile, campaigned today with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut in Union County, Mr. Franks's base, focusing on Vice President Al Gore's proposal for prescription drug benefits under Medicare.
 The tightening presidential race makes it all the more important for Americans to take a close look at Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore at their first debate next Tuesday night. For the NBC and Fox networks, however, baseball and commercial interests appear to be more important than the presidential debates. The tightening presidential race makes it all the more important for Americans to take a close look at Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore at their first debate next Tuesday night. For the NBC and Fox networks, however, baseball and commercial interests appear to be more important than the presidential debates. NBC notes that it has a contract with Major League Baseball to show the game. But this is the same network that was negotiating with the Bush campaign a few weeks ago to pass over the presidential debate commission and broadcast a debate session exclusively, so surely it can be inventive about finding a way to fulfill its civic obligation. For both NBC and Fox, that means carrying the debates live, facilitating programming that produces the largest possible national audience. In the past such debates, simultaneously broadcast on all major networks, have drawn as many as 90 million viewers. The networks' duty is to serve that wide spectrum of the American public rather than their own commercial interests for just a few nights every four years.
 Gov George W Bush, facing problem that his presidential rival, Vice Pres Al Gore, benefits from strong economy, has adopted new slogan, 'education recession'; term ostensibly refers to what he calls 'crisis' in public schools, but is also meant to raise alarms about health of nation's economy in near future; excerpt from Bush remarks on education; photo (M) For decades, political scientists have considered the economy the single best predictor of the electorate's mood. Good times favor incumbents, bad times insurgents. And so for Gov. George W. Bush, one challenge has loomed high above the others in his quest for the White House: how to defeat a sitting vice president during these roaring good times. For a while, it seemed as if Mr. Bush might defy history, as he stayed ahead of Vice President Al Gore in polls even as the economy hummed along. But his lead in those polls has vanished. And the issue that once seemed to play so well for him, character, has diminished in importance, the polls show. For decades, political scientists have considered the economy the single best predictor of the electorate's mood. Good times favor incumbents, bad times insurgents. And so for Gov. George W. Bush, one challenge has loomed high above the others in his quest for the White House: how to defeat a sitting vice president during these roaring good times. For a while, it seemed as if Mr. Bush might defy history, as he stayed ahead of Vice President Al Gore in polls even as the economy hummed along. But his lead in those polls has vanished. And the issue that once seemed to play so well for him, character, has diminished in importance, the polls show. And in raising those red flags, the analysts say, Mr. Bush has turned his signature issue, education, into a weapon for slashing at the central arguments for electing Mr. Gore: peace and prosperity. ''Gore's advantage on the economy is critical for Bush to try to overcome,'' said Evans Witt, president of the Princeton Survey Research, a polling firm. ''If you say we're in a recession long enough, it certainly has an economic connotation, even if you are using it to discuss education.'' Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, acknowledged as much, saying, ''The point of this is that while the economy is strong, there are problems in society.'' During a tour of the West Coast this week, Mr. Bush said he saw warning signs in America. Then he ticked them off: Gasoline prices spiraling out of control. Farmers struggling to survive. The nation in danger of losing its technological edge. And illiterate youths on the cusp of criminality. ''In some places, there is a recession in America,'' Mr. Bush said today at a high school in Northern California. ''In some school districts there is a recession, and this country needs to do something about it early, before it's too late.'' Raising concerns about the economy represents something of a tactical shift for Mr. Bush, who has spent much of the campaign attacking Mr. Gore's character and credibility. But several recent polls indicate that voters now see little difference between the candidates in terms of their morality and honesty. ''It's much harder for Bush because he can't hammer at character anymore,'' said Mr. Witt. But some analysts said Mr. Bush would have trouble tapping into voters' anxieties about the economy, because there is so little there to tap. According to a Fox News poll taken last week, 60 percent of voters said they thought the country was headed in the right direction, one of the highest readings since January 1998. Still, Frank Newport, editor in chief of the Gallup Poll, said he could see the logic to Mr. Bush's strategy because voters care deeply about economic issues even in good times. Aides to Mr. Bush said their internal polls had shown that the slogan ''education recession'' had played well among independent voters and women. Mr. Witt noted that many such swing voters live in the industrial Midwest, where the presidential race is most closely contested, including Missouri, Michigan and Ohio, as well as in Pennsylvania. And they are a group that might find Mr. Bush's plan for across-the-board income tax cuts appealing, he asserted. ''Bush has hit pretty heavily on the idea that Gore's tax cut may leave people out,'' Mr. Witt said. ''That's a point that I think might resonate with some people in this group.'' Because they are on the edge.'' Several analysts also said they thought it was clever of Mr. Bush to tie two major issues together in a way that could undermine Mr. Gore's support. ''It has a subliminal quality to it,'' said Stephen Hess, a presidential scholar at the Brookings Institution, a research organization in Washington.
 Lawrence R Foster letter argues that as much as Vice Pres Gore tries to take credit for booming economy, it was created by business and workers Re ''Gore Takes an Approach Both Risky and Calculated'' (Political Memo, Sept. 24): Re ''Gore Takes an Approach Both Risky and Calculated'' (Political Memo, Sept. 24): As much as Al Gore tries to take credit for the booming economy, it was created by business and workers. He and President Clinton just ''showed up.'' Now Vice President Gore claims to want to rein in ''big business'' while continuing our prosperity. He can't have it both ways. Almost every voter has a stake -- either directly or indirectly -- in the continued success of businesses, both big and small. Mr. Gore's attacks on big business are really attacks on every worker. If you don't think this is true, check out where your 401(k) accounts and pension funds are invested!
 Mrs. Clinton responded by attacking Mr. Lazio's record of votes on the economy and his own call for a large tax cut. ''This is part of his continuing campaign of diversion because he doesn't want people to look at his own tax plans, which total over a trillion dollars,'' she said. ''I've called it Bush Lite, and it truly is a fiscally risky approach that is not good for our country.''
