 Gov. Jeb Bush states that 85 percent of the students in Florida's lowest-performing secondary schools are African-American, Hispanic or members of other minority groups (''Better Than Affirmative,'' Op-Ed, Sept. 15). Gov. Jeb Bush states that 85 percent of the students in Florida's lowest-performing secondary schools are African-American, Hispanic or members of other minority groups (''Better Than Affirmative,'' Op-Ed, Sept. 15).
 PERHAPS it would interest you to know that during the first quarter of this year, 50.4 percent of Internet users were women. You might be intrigued by the recent news that the number of people who visited Gov. George W. Bush's official Web site, www.georgewbush.com, soared 522 percent after a new version opened last month. Or maybe you will find it fascinating to learn that the money spent on business-to-business online advertising is expected to reach $3 billion by 2005. PERHAPS it would interest you to know that during the first quarter of this year, 50.4 percent of Internet users were women. You might be intrigued by the recent news that the number of people who visited Gov. George W. Bush's official Web site, www.georgewbush.com, soared 522 percent after a new version opened last month. Or maybe you will find it fascinating to learn that the money spent on business-to-business online advertising is expected to reach $3 billion by 2005.
 William Safire Op-Ed column on threats posed by high oil prices and possible move by Iraqi Pres Saddam Hussein against Kuwait; urges Pres Clinton, Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush to say how they would deal with threats (M)
 Any intervention could fail, embarrassing the Clinton administration. Or it could work too well, pushing the euro up sharply at the expense of the dollar and making the American trade deficit -- now projected at $354 billion this year -- unsustainable, weakening the economy and hurting Vice President Al Gore's campaign.
 A principal author of Gov. George W. Bush's Medicare plan, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, is on the boards of eight health care companies that could be affected by the proposal. She said her board memberships were a matter of record and posed no conflict. Gore Chastises Drug Makers  Vice President Al Gore accused pharmaceutical companies of gouging elderly people, citing as examples several people he said were having problems paying for their medicine. He omitted any reference to his mother-in-law's situation, details of which Republicans and some news reports have challenged.
 Dick Cheney, using same language critics used against him and former Pres George Bush after Persian Gulf war, charges Clinton administration lets Iraqi Pres Saddam Hussein 'slip off the hook' by avoiding arms inspections; makes charge at campaign stop, Lancaster, Calif; photo (M) Using the same language that some critics used against him and former President George Bush after the Persian Gulf war nearly 10 years ago, former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today accused the Clinton administration of letting Saddam Hussein ''slip off the hook'' by avoiding weapons inspections. Using the same language that some critics used against him and former President George Bush after the Persian Gulf war nearly 10 years ago, former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today accused the Clinton administration of letting Saddam Hussein ''slip off the hook'' by avoiding weapons inspections. ''Now,'' he said, ''we've seen a situation develop in which he's kicked out all the inspectors and this administration appears to be helpless to do anything about it. We're at the point where I think we have not seen the kind of aggressive, effective leadership that President Bush provided with respect to the coalition.'' Mr. Cheney made the charge at a campaign stop in Lancaster, Calif., that began with a teary recollection of the day the ground war began in the Persian Gulf. His words were reminiscent of critics of the Bush administration, who said it let Mr. Hussein off the hook by ending the war while he was still in power. In past appearances, Mr. Cheney has been questioned on why the Bush administration did not continue the gulf war until Mr. Hussein was driven from power. He has answered that the object was to drive Iraq out of Kuwait, not to depose Mr. Hussein, and that the international coalition would have been pulled apart if the United States had continued.
 Gov George W Bush's campaign, seeking to win over female voters polls say are leaning toward Vice Pres Al Gore, is counting on Laura Bush to carry political appeal of her own; she has begun taking center stage while campaigning at husband's side, introducing him and answering questions; photo (M) As Gov. George W. Bush and his wife, Laura, toured a Chicago classroom earlier this week, a sixth grader asked him how he would feel if he were running for election against his wife. ''I'd come in second,'' he said. For even though Mr. Bush still likes to tell audiences how his wife, a former school librarian, married him years ago on the condition that she would never have to make a political speech, those days are long gone. As Gov. George W. Bush and his wife, Laura, toured a Chicago classroom earlier this week, a sixth grader asked him how he would feel if he were running for election against his wife. ''I'd come in second,'' he said. For even though Mr. Bush still likes to tell audiences how his wife, a former school librarian, married him years ago on the condition that she would never have to make a political speech, those days are long gone. Now, with Mr. Bush in a drive to win back some of the female voters who polls say are leaning toward Vice President Al Gore, the governor's campaign is counting on Laura Bush to carry political appeal of her own. And all this week, she has been center stage at her husband's side, holding her own microphone and taking her own questions. ''Our favorite events are these where we actually get to meet with people and talk to people about what their hopes are for our country,'' Mrs. Bush told an audience of loyal Republicans as the couple's campaign day began at around 8:30 a.m. in the Great Hall in Pittsburgh. Though Mr. Bush portrays her as a reluctant convert to politics, Mrs. Bush has become a seasoned campaigner after all her years in the Bush clan. With her twin daughters now off to college, she said she planned to stay on the trail this fall.  ''I am very comfortable with campaigning,'' she said in an interview in the back of his campaign plane. ''I've been the first lady of the state for six years.'' Mrs. Bush suggested that reporters show a ''certain cynicism'' when they think that ''candidates and candidates' families are trying to act a certain way to appeal to voters.'' She said: ''People are more natural than that. George is more natural than that, and I am too.'' But Mr. Bush's aides do not disguise their belief that she is a particular asset with swing voters, independents as well as women. Mrs. Bush can sound like a political pro as she recounts how her husband's television appearance with Oprah Winfrey allowed him to get around the ''press filter.'' And introducing her husband at the town hall meeting today, she stuck faithfully to the message of the day. When Mr. Bush took over the microphone, he once again told the tale about promising that she would never have to make a speech. ''If all goes well, she'll make a fabulous first lady for the United States,'' he said. He accused Mr. Gore of hypocrisy over his appearance at a Hollywood fund-raiser at which he muted his criticism of the entertainment industry. ''Seems like he must be auditioning for a Broadway play,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He keeps changing his tune. Most of the audience's questions played directly into Mr. Bush's campaign themes. The only query that stumped the governor came from a woman who asked him if he supported the Violence Against Women Act, but referred to it only by an acronym. ''What?'' he asked. She then gave the full name of the measure and told him its reauthorization was being held up by Congressional Republicans. Mr. Bush asked her to send him information on the legislation. Later his spokeswoman, Karen P. Hughes, said that he supported the reauthorization. Mrs. Bush is not always at her husband's side. Sometimes she peels off for her own events. On Thursday, when Mr. Bush campaigns in Cincinnati, she is to go to a school in Columbus. When he is in Tampa, Fla., on Friday, she will go to Orlando. At other moments Mrs. Bush leads the George Bush cheering section. When her husband bantered with Ms. Winfrey in Chicago this week, Mrs. Bush sat in a restaurant across the street watching the show on television with Lt. Gov. Corrine Wood, and a group of female supporters. A banner proclaimed ''W stands for women.'' Reporters were invited in as the show came on and the crowd of women tapped their watches and chanted, ''It's time for us to win.'' When Ms. Winfrey said she had interviewed Mr. Gore, too, the group booed. Mrs. Bush says she is often asked who she more resembles -- Hillary Rodham Clinton or Barbara Bush. ''I say I am like myself,'' she said on the campaign plane. On the stump, she speaks of the importance of education or of how Americans for all their diversity have ''so much in common'' such as ''sacrifices we make for our loved ones.''
 Dr Gail R Wilensky, principal author of Gov George W Bush's Medicare plan, serves on boards of eight health care companies that would be affected by Bush proposal and holds stock and stock options in companies worth $4 million to $5 million; she says ties to health care concerns are matter of public record and denies any conflict of interest, interview; says she has recused herself from decisions of panel that advises Congress on Medicare policy while serving as Bush health adviser; Public Citizen, which will release report on her health care holdings, charges she advocates plan that favors providers over consumers and stands to profit personally if plan is enacted; photo (M) A principal author of Gov. George W. Bush's Medicare plan, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, serves on the boards of eight health care companies whose fortunes could be affected by the Bush proposal. A principal author of Gov. George W. Bush's Medicare plan, Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, serves on the boards of eight health care companies whose fortunes could be affected by the Bush proposal. She said her relationships with the health care concerns were a matter of public record and denied that there was any conflict between her service on the corporate boards and her role as a health policy adviser to Governor Bush. She said she has recused herself from decisions of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, the Congressional policy panel, while she serves as a health adviser to Governor Bush to avoid the appearance of a conflict. And she asserted that there was no way to calculate the direct or indirect financial effect of the health plans of Mr. Bush or Vice President Al Gore on individual companies. Nor does her service on those boards in any way affect the public policy positions she advocates, she said. But Public Citizen, a research group founded by Ralph Nader, charged that Dr. Wilensky represented drug and managed-care interests directly affected by Mr. Bush's plan and called her financial relationship to numerous health care concerns ''wholly inappropriate.'' Frank Clemente, director of Public Citizen's Congress Watch, said that Dr. Wilensky advocated a health care proposal that favored providers over consumers. And he contended that she stood to profit personally if the Bush plan were enacted. ''Here is a central health care adviser to Bush who is a major representative of pharmaceutical and insurance interests, which is why the Bush prescription drug program is so favored by the industry and so opposed by consumers,'' Mr. Clemente said. ''It is just wholly inappropriate and a direct conflict of interest.'' Mr. Bush's health care proposal leaves much medical decision-making to private industry, including insurers and health maintenance organizations. The government would still pay most costs and would supervise insurers, approving or disapproving all plans. Public Citizen is planning to release a report this week detailing Dr. Wilensky's holdings in health care companies and accusing her of designing a health plan that could enrich her. The report, which the group made available to The New York Times, contends that her financial stake in the medical industry is more troubling than the Halliburton Company stock options of Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate. Mr. Cheney might shape energy policy some time in the future in a Bush administration, the report states, while Dr. Wilensky is already drafting proposals for the campaign. The Bush campaign reacted angrily to Public Citizen's charges and defended Dr. Wilensky. ''This is a ridiculous assertion by a left-leaning group which supports more government control over health care,'' said Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''Democrats and Republicans in Congress believe she has high integrity and trust her to advise them on health care policy and we believe she is an added asset to our campaign,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''The policy that Governor Bush implements or promotes will be based on what's best for America and will be based on consultation from a wide range of advisers from a wide range of backgrounds.'' Vice President Gore's health policy advisers are chiefly full-time Democratic campaign aides or government officials. The group includes Elaine Kamarck, Mr. Gore's top domestic policy adviser; Sarah Bianchi, a Gore campaign health policy specialist; Donna E. Shalala, the secretary of Health and Human Services; Chris Jennings, the White House's senior health affairs adviser; and Dr. David A. Kessler, the dean of the Yale University Medical School. None appear to hold any outside employment or corporate directorships, according to the Gore campaign and public records. Dr. Wilensky, 57, who holds a doctorate in economics, is the John M. Olin Senior Fellow at Project HOPE, an international health foundation, her only full-time position. She is taking leave and vacation time from Project HOPE to advise the Bush campaign, she said. She served in the White House under President Bush in 1992 as deputy assistant for policy development, working on health care and welfare issues. Dr. Wilensky's largest single holding is in the United HealthCare Corporation, one of the nation's leading managed-care companies. Spokesmen for several of the companies said that they took no position on the Bush or the Gore health care proposals. The industry's trade association, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers Association, has been critical of the Gore plan because, the group contends, it will lead to government price controls. The industry has been more sympathetic to the Bush proposal because it leaves drug purchasing for Medicare largely in the private sector.
 William J Bennett, who has often joined forces with Sen Joseph I Lieberman in assailing violence and vulgarity in popular culture, sharply attacks Lieberman, charging he retreats from cause; Lieberman denies charge, arguing he and Vice Pres Al Gore have been tougher on entertainment industry than Gov George W Bush; suggests Bennett is motivated by his support for Bush (M) Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential candidate, denied the accusation, arguing that he and Vice President Al Gore had, in fact, been tougher on the entertainment industry than their Republican opponents, and suggested that Mr. Bennett's remarks were motivated by his support for Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential candidate, denied the accusation, arguing that he and Vice President Al Gore had, in fact, been tougher on the entertainment industry than their Republican opponents, and suggested that Mr. Bennett's remarks were motivated by his support for Gov. George W. Bush. The exchange between two men who called each other friends stemmed largely from a fund-raiser on Monday night in Beverly Hills, Calif., attended by Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman and several entertainment executives and stars. At that event, Mr. Lieberman muted his criticism of the industry, a week after he and Mr. Gore proposed new regulation of its marketing of violent and sexual material to children. Today, Mr. Bennett, the conservative moralist who was secretary of education under President Ronald Reagan and drug policy director for President George Bush, released a statement saying: ''I am deeply disappointed by Senator Lieberman's recent comments to members of the entertainment industry. Senator Lieberman so softly voiced his criticisms about the products of that industry that they were barely audible.'' Last week, the Federal Trade Commission reported that the entertainment industry routinely marketed adult material to children. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman proposed that if the industry did not change its practices within six months, the commission should impose regulations on the marketing of movies, video games and music, and that a new law to that effect should be passed, if needed. ''The fact is that Al Gore and I, after the F.T.C. report, made the toughest statement,'' Mr. Lieberman said today. ''Where was the Bush-Cheney ticket on the F.T.C. report? They expressed concern, but there was no teeth to anything they said.'' Republicans contend that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman have been hypocritical over the issue, criticizing the industry while raising millions of dollars from it. ''I'm looking forward to the day when I see George Bush and Dick Cheney stand up to their friends in the oil industry,'' he added, ''their supporters in the oil industry, and tell them they think they can do better than they are now for American consumers and the American economy, or to stand up to the tobacco industry or the N.R.A.''
 CLASH ON ENERGY POLICY  Winter is coming, and so, it seems, is a battle between the presidential campaigns over energy policy. Vice President Al Gore, a frequent critic of ''big oil,'' told Fox News yesterday that he would give ''a major policy speech'' today on what to do about the soaring price of home heating oil. Gov. George W. Bush, the former oil man, pounced on that issue yesterday, critizing President Clinton and Mr. Gore for lacking an energy policy and pointing out that the surge in oil prices had occurred in their administration. ''I'm just asking what the man's solution is,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Gore in an interview on MSNBC. CLASH ON ENERGY POLICY  Winter is coming, and so, it seems, is a battle between the presidential campaigns over energy policy. Vice President Al Gore, a frequent critic of ''big oil,'' told Fox News yesterday that he would give ''a major policy speech'' today on what to do about the soaring price of home heating oil. Gov. George W. Bush, the former oil man, pounced on that issue yesterday, critizing President Clinton and Mr. Gore for lacking an energy policy and pointing out that the surge in oil prices had occurred in their administration. ''I'm just asking what the man's solution is,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Gore in an interview on MSNBC. A PLUG WITH A PURPOSE  Beginning a three-day tour of the Midwest, Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, said yesterday in Wisconsin that he thought Vice President Al Gore was pulling away from Gov. George W. Bush. ''I think he's going to do to Bush what Clinton did to Dole in 1996,'' Mr. Nader told reporters. His words seemed intended to reassure liberal voters that casting a ballot for him would not help elect Mr. Bush, an argument that Democrats have used to try to woo Nader supporters into Mr. Gore's camp. Mr. Nader also said he planned to spend more time campaigning in states where the election is expected to be lopsided, so Democrats would feel comfortable about voting for him. Those states include Texas, New York, Massachusetts and California, he said. WHERE BRADLEY IS NOW  Former Senator Bill Bradley, who has been out of the political limelight since losing to Al Gore in the Democratic primaries, has taken a position as a board member and adviser to the chief executive of a new company called UPromise Inc. The Boston-based firm is trying to create a financial product that will allow people to amass tax-free savings accounts for college by purchasing goods from certain vendors. ''Obviously this is to make money,'' Mr. Bradley said. ''But they also want to change the world.'' Mr. Bradley also has written a new political book that will be released next week, entitled ''The Journey From Here.'' It offers his reflections on the issues he tried to raise in his presidential run. THE TRAVEL LOG  A number of new national polls indicate the presidential race may be tightening again. But George W. Bush and Al Gore were a continent apart yesterday when it came to campaigning, with Mr. Bush working Pennsylvania and Mr. Gore in California. The stats for the day: Length of the Official Day: Gore, 11 1/2 hours; Bush, 5 hours  States Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 2  Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 2  Events: Gore, 3; Bush, 2  Interviews: Gore, 1; Bush, 5  Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore, 1; Bush, 0  Main message: Gore, paying for prescription drugs; Bush, tax cuts for the middle class
 Vice President Al Gore is expected to add to the growing political debate over oil prices when he makes a campaign speech today outlining his proposals.
 Republican National Committee's new ad comparing proposals of Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore for Medicare coverage of prescription drugs and Gore's ad campaign responding to Republican ad assessed; photos (M) The advertising war over prescription drugs escalated this week: the Republican National Committee broadcast a biting new commercial in 17 states, and the Gore campaign quickly responded. The advertising war over prescription drugs escalated this week: the Republican National Committee broadcast a biting new commercial in 17 states, and the Gore campaign quickly responded. PRODUCERS -- Cold Harbor Films for the Republicans, The Campaign Company for the Gore campaign. ON THE SCREEN -- The Republican advertisement features a notebook that is ostensibly comparing the Bush and Gore prescription drug plans. Under the Gore column, ''Charges Seniors $600 Big Government Access Fee Annually.'' Under the Bush column, ''Seniors Choose Coverage.'' The advertisement summarizes all its accusations against Gore, then cuts to the Democratic candidate himself in a television set, while the words appear, ''Gore's Rx Plan? PrescriptionForDisaster.com.'' As the advertisement ends, Mr. Gore is speaking with the sound turned off, but he appears to be saying, ''For you.'' The Democratic advertisement opens with the picture of a Washington Post analysis of a Bush television commercial, saying it ''misrepresents'' Mr. Gore's policy on prescription drugs. It then cuts to images of the elderly with Mr. Gore, and with health care providers, while the words ''The Facts'' appear on the screen, buttressing what the narrator says. ''Al Gore covers all seniors through Medicare, not an H.M.O.,'' one screen says. The advertisement also shows Mr. Bush, then cuts to elderly people talking to what is apparently intended to be an H.M.O. bureaucrat. The words on the screen: ''Bush forces seniors to go to H.M.O.'s and insurance companies. ... They have no choice.'' THE REPUBLICAN AD -- Narrator: ''On prescription medicines, compare: Al Gore will charge seniors a new $600-a-year government access fee. George Bush opposes Gore's $600 fee. Gore's plan: When seniors turn 64, they must join a drug H.M.O. selected by Washington or they are on their own.  Bush's plan: Seniors choose, and it covers all catastrophic health care costs. Gore's plan doesn't and has a government H.M.O. and a $600 fee. A prescription for disaster.'' THE GORE AD -- Narrator: ''Newspapers say George Bush's prescription drug ad misrepresents the facts.  In fact, Al Gore's plan covers all seniors through Medicare, not an H.M.O. Under Gore, seniors choose their own doctor and doctors decide what drugs to prescribe. George Bush forces seniors to go to H.M.O.'s and insurance companies for prescription drugs. They have no choice. And Bush leaves millions of middle-class seniors with no coverage. Al Gore -- the only prescription plan that gives all seniors coverage and choice.'' THE REPUBLICAN AD -- The ''government access fee'' the Bush campaign talks about is the estimated premium for a year's worth of prescription drug coverage in the year 2009 -- eight years after the Gore plan takes effect. The premium in the first year is $25 a month, or $300 a year. It is impossible to compare it with Mr. Bush's, because his plan makes few commitments on premiums, deductibles or copayments. But Democratic analysts assert that the cost to beneficiaries under Mr. Bush's proposal would be significantly higher. The accusation that people are ''forced,'' under the Gore plan, to join a ''government H.M.O.'' is misleading. The Gore plan is voluntary; the elderly are free to get their prescription drug coverage through retiree plans, through H.M.O.'s, through Medicare or to waive coverage altogether. The new drug benefit would be provided through the Medicare program. The ''government H.M.O.'' is apparently the pharmaceutical benefit managers, essentially middlemen who administer these benefits in the private sector and would also do so for Medicare. The Bush plan, many analysts say, would actually rely more heavily on H.M.O.'s and other private health plans. THE GORE AD -- This is essentially a defensive advertisement, responding to the accusations of the Republicans. But it also makes a few accusations of its own -- that the Bush plan would force seniors to go to H.M.O.'s and insurance companies for drug coverage. While the Bush plan would encourage more involvement by private health plans in Medicare, Mr. Bush has said that people could stay in the traditional government program and still have the ability to get drug coverage; the Health Care Financing Administration, which runs Medicare, would be required to offer a ''high option'' plan that includes drugs, although the details are not yet clear. SCORECARD -- The Republican advertisement is appealing to two powerful fears: The fear of ''big government'' intruding into private health care decisions, and the fear of H.M.O.'s doing the same thing. The ''big government'' argument is a traditional line of attack against Democrats, although, of course, Medicare is, itself, a big government program and a very popular one. The attack against ''Big Government H.M.O.'s'' in the Gore plan may be a simple attempt at inoculation. Mr. Bush's plan envisions a greater role by H.M.O.'s and other private plans in Medicare, and Republicans have been bracing for a Democratic assault against it.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, campaigning in Sunnyvale, Calif, charges pharmaceutical companies gouge elderly; does not repeat personal anecdote about arthritis drug Republicans have sharply ridiculed; Gov George W Bush, keeping heat on, charges Gore tends to make up facts; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore accused pharmaceutical companies today of gouging the elderly, pointing to the examples of several people he said were having problems paying for their medicine. But he did not repeat a personal anecdote about prescription drugs that Republicans have sharply ridiculed: the one about his mother-in-law, who, he said last month, paid three times as much for her arthritis medication as he did for the same drug for his dog. Mr. Gore has since said he based the anecdote on a Congressional study rather than on any actual bills paid by his mother-in-law, Margaret Ann Aitcheson, who lives with his family at the vice president's residence in Washington. Vice President Al Gore accused pharmaceutical companies today of gouging the elderly, pointing to the examples of several people he said were having problems paying for their medicine. But he did not repeat a personal anecdote about prescription drugs that Republicans have sharply ridiculed: the one about his mother-in-law, who, he said last month, paid three times as much for her arthritis medication as he did for the same drug for his dog. Mr. Gore has since said he based the anecdote on a Congressional study rather than on any actual bills paid by his mother-in-law, Margaret Ann Aitcheson, who lives with his family at the vice president's residence in Washington. Though Gov. George W. Bush's campaign has seized on news accounts casting doubt on the anecdote's accuracy, Mr. Gore's aides have insisted that the overall point -- that drug companies are gouging the elderly -- was valid. Republicans have kept the matter alive, saying the anecdote demonstrated that Mr. Gore makes up stories. Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore's Republican rival, kept the heat on today, saying in an interview with Reuters that Mr. Gore had a tendency ''to make up facts to make his case.'' Mr. Bush added, ''The idea that he would make up facts about a family member confirms what I have said in the past, that he'll say anything to be the president.'' Mr. Gore, at a rally in a park here this morning, devoted much of his speech to the problems people on Medicare face. The Tampa Tribune gave this account of the meeting: ''After hearing from several retirees about having to choose which medications to buy, Gore suggested the pharmaceutical industry should lower prices. As an example, he offered the plight of his mother-in-law, who spends $108 a month for a drug called Lodine, which helps relieve the pain of arthritis. Gore said his 14-year-old black Labrador retriever, Shilo, also suffers from arthritis and he has a veterinarian's prescription for Lodine. The difference? It costs less than $39 a month to fill the dog's prescription for what Gore said is the exact same drug. 'Don't you think that ought to be changed?' he asked as the crowd applauded.'' The Boston Globe reported on Monday that Mr. Gore's remarks were based on figures from a Congressional report, not on his family's actual drug bills, and the matter has nipped at Mr. Gore's heels all week. On Tuesday, the Gore campaign said the report that Mr. Gore had cited put the wholesale price of Lodine, the arthritis drug for humans, at $1.20 per capsule and Etogesic, the one for dogs, at 42 cents. The Lodine for Mrs. Aitcheson cost $2.13 per capsule, while Shiloh's Etogesic cost 92 cents per capsule, the campaign said. The campaign did not specify the dosage for humans or for dogs. A check by The New York Times of several pharmacies and veterinary clinics in Washington found a price disparity between Lodine and Etogesic capsules roughly similar to that given by Mr. Gore. But the capsules were different sizes. For Lodine, the cost ranged from $1.81 to $2.29 per 300-milligram capsule. For Etogesic, the prices were 80 cents to 96 cents per 150-milligram capsule. By the milligram, Lodine and Etogesic are much closer in price than Mr. Gore's anecdote suggests. Mr. Gore's spokesman, Chris Lehane, was inundated again today with questions about the vice president's mother-in-law. Asked why Mr. Gore had not mentioned her today as he cited personal stories, Mr. Lehane said: ''The issue is not about him, the issue is about the American people, and that's the point of this. The Bush campaign has spent two years trying to find an issue. Apparently they think dogs is their issue.'' The campaign was eager to move on to other subjects. Mr. Gore said today in an interview with Fox News that on Thursday he would address the increase in the price of heating oil, no doubt affording him the opportunity to discuss Mr. Bush's ties to the oil industry. ''The profits of the big oil companies have skyrocketed just at the time when the American people have been paying these gigantic price increases,'' Mr. Gore told Fox. ''I'm going to be making a major policy speech tomorrow outlining a specific course of action.''
 ANN RICHARDS, the former governor of Texas, tells a revealing story about running for re-election against George W. Bush in 1994. He had accused her of being soft on crime because she supported probation for nonviolent  small-time offenders (to make room in prisons for violent felons). So she worked hard to prove her toughness. She lost anyway, for many reasons, and has since turned philosophical. ''Everybody assumes George Bush is going to be tough on criminals; I have to prove that I'm going to be tough,'' said Ms. Richards, quoted in ''Madam President,'' by Eleanor Clift and Tom Brazaitis (Scribner, 2000). ''You see the difference?'' ANN RICHARDS, the former governor of Texas, tells a revealing story about running for re-election against George W. Bush in 1994. He had accused her of being soft on crime because she supported probation for nonviolent  small-time offenders (to make room in prisons for violent felons). So she worked hard to prove her toughness. She lost anyway, for many reasons, and has since turned philosophical. ''Everybody assumes George Bush is going to be tough on criminals; I have to prove that I'm going to be tough,'' said Ms. Richards, quoted in ''Madam President,'' by Eleanor Clift and Tom Brazaitis (Scribner, 2000). ''You see the difference?''
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column on pro-Republican television ad by independent Missouri group presenting 'diversity' as threat to white child in Kansas City, site of bitter battle over school desegregation; holds ad, work of conservative commentator Richard Nadler, is potentially embarrassing to Gov George W Bush, who seeks to portray Republican Party as more diverse and inclusive; notes Bush has disavowed ad; Nadler comments (M) George W. Bush has been trying mightily to present to the nation an image of a more diverse, more inclusive Republican Party. But it's not an easy sell because his is a party with more than its share of troglodytes. So this week, even as Mr. Bush was sending his own message by happily and comfortably kissing Oprah on the cheek, a pro-Republican television ad by an independent group in Missouri was featuring a white woman complaining that she had to ''act fast'' and get her son out of a public school that had ''a bit more diversity than he could handle.'' George W. Bush has been trying mightily to present to the nation an image of a more diverse, more inclusive Republican Party. But it's not an easy sell because his is a party with more than its share of troglodytes. So this week, even as Mr. Bush was sending his own message by happily and comfortably kissing Oprah on the cheek, a pro-Republican television ad by an independent group in Missouri was featuring a white woman complaining that she had to ''act fast'' and get her son out of a public school that had ''a bit more diversity than he could handle.'' Whatever Mr. Nadler's motivations, his ad was potentially embarrassing to Mr. Bush and the national Republican Party. In addition to undermining Mr. Bush's efforts to promote diversity within the party, it comes just a week after it became widely known that the word ''rats,'' in large white capital letters, had been inserted into a Republican Party ad attacking Vice President Al Gore on the issue of prescription drugs. Mr. Bush quickly disavowed Mr. Nadler's ads. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Texas governor, said: ''We talked to the governor about that. His thought is that it is an inappropriate message and the ad should not air.'' I called Mr. Nadler and asked if Governor Bush's objections would lead him to pull the ad. He said: ''Probably not. But we'll see.''
 Gov George W Bush, who joined Texas National Guard and did not go to Vietnam, has far more support among military personnel than Vice Pres Al Gore, who enlisted in Army and went to Vietnam; interviews indicate Bush enjoys some automatic credibility with military because of his party affiliation, policy positions, running mate, Dick Cheney, advisers and his father, former Pres George Bush (M) Al Gore enlisted in the Army and went to Vietnam. George W. Bush joined the Texas National Guard and did not. But for many people in uniform, that makes little difference. It is Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, who seems to enjoy some automatic credibility with the military because of his party affiliation, his policy positions, his running mate, his advisers -- and his father. If Mr. Gore hoped his own military record would make him more palatable to the nation's 1.4 million men and women in uniform -- and by extension the 24 million who are veterans -- he might be disappointed. Al Gore enlisted in the Army and went to Vietnam. George W. Bush joined the Texas National Guard and did not. But for many people in uniform, that makes little difference. It is Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, who seems to enjoy some automatic credibility with the military because of his party affiliation, his policy positions, his running mate, his advisers -- and his father. If Mr. Gore hoped his own military record would make him more palatable to the nation's 1.4 million men and women in uniform -- and by extension the 24 million who are veterans -- he might be disappointed. Eight years after President Clinton's lack of a military record and his advocacy for gays in the military set the stage for his roiling relations with the Pentagon, Mr. Gore appears to have far less support in the military, especially among the officer corps, than his opponent. Mr. Bush, who did not serve in Vietnam but trained as a fighter pilot during his National Guard stint, has wide support. In about 20 interviews in recent weeks, those in uniform or recently retired from service expressed overwhelming, though not universal, support for Mr. Bush -- not only as the Republican presidential candidate, but as a veteran and the son of former President Bush, who many said served ably as commander in chief during the military's shining moment after Vietnam, the Persian Gulf war. They cited Governor Bush's policy proposals, his accusations that the Clinton administration had overseen a ''military in decline,'' and his high-profile military advisers, including his vice-presidential running mate, Dick Cheney, a former secretary of defense, and Gen. Colin L. Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who Mr. Bush has all but said would be a member of his cabinet. ''People are just more comfortable with the idea of a Bush-Cheney-Powell team in the White House again,'' an Army colonel said. (Even an Air Force colonel inclined to vote for Mr. Gore said he wished he could still cast a vote for General Powell as secretary of state.) And when it comes to military service, an issue that dogged Mr. Clinton's campaign in 1992, many of those interviewed gave Mr. Bush the benefit of the doubt for his time in the National Guard, which attracted thousands of young people trying to avoid going to war in Vietnam. And they offered only grudging respect for Mr. Gore's decision to volunteer. By contrast, it is not hard for Mr. Bush's supporters in uniform to find something to admire in his service flying F-102 Delta Dagger fighters for the Guard, even if he never went to war. ''Anybody who was willing to take the risks to learn to be a fighter pilot is worthy,'' said one Army general, himself a Vietnam combat veteran. ''He made a contribution.'' Several military men noted that Mr. Gore was an Army journalist -- a profession of ill repute to many in uniform even if he was toiling on behalf of the Pentagon -- and served an abbreviated tour in Vietnam. ''If he had served in combat and brought home a Purple Heart,'' an Army colonel said, ''the contrast might have been greater.'' So support for Mr. Bush from those in uniform is not altogether surprising. Throughout his campaign, Mr. Bush has surrounded himself with so many retired generals and admirals, including General Powell and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, that some Gore advisers have taken to envious sniping. ''This is the kind of thing you see in the Third World -- all these generals lining up behind the politicians,'' one Gore adviser said. Today, Mr. Cheney announced the endorsements of an array of retired military leaders, including several senior officers who served in influential positions under Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, a fact the Bush campaign was careful to emphasize. One of those endorsing Mr. Bush, Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, who recently stepped down as commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf, said he did not agree with some of the harshest accusations that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore had deliberately run down the military. ''We've have these problems for a couple years and they haven't been addressed,'' General Zinni said. He, too, praised Mr. Bush's advisers, including Richard L. Armitage, a senior Pentagon official in President Reagan's administration. ''To think that people like Cheney and Powell and Armitage will be part of a Bush administration,'' he added, ''encourages me that there might be answers.'' The military is not monolithic, of course. And Mr. Gore has several high-ranking military retirees supporting him. Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Adm. William Owens, a former vice chairman, have both advised the Gore campaign. Several of those interviewed said Mr. Gore had stronger support among the enlisted ranks, which are more racially and economically diverse than the officer corps. One Army officer said that Mr. Gore was seen as more likely to be supportive of expanding the presence of women in uniform, noting that the Republican platform calls for separating new recruits by sex in basic training, something many women in uniform do not support. Still, it was clear that Mr. Gore -- despite his own record, his service on the Senate's Armed Services Committee and his relatively more hawkish views on defense issues compared with other Democrats -- suffered from his association with Mr. Clinton, whose relations with the military, especially early in his first administration, were tumultuous. Several said concerns about military readiness, which Mr. Bush has relentlessly raised, had grown on Mr. Gore's watch. They also cited one of Mr. Gore's early missteps. During the primaries Mr. Gore said he would make support for gays serving openly in the military a condition for officers being considered for a position on the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Mr. Gore reversed himself within days, but to many the damage was done. Leon S. Fuerth, a senior adviser to Mr. Gore, said that Mr. Gore had built enormous credibility on defense issues as a senator and as vice president. Mr. Fuerth also said Mr. Gore's service as an Army private would give him ''some insight and understanding of military life'' that would help him in dealing with the Pentagon's brass. ''President Clinton developed an excellent rapport with the armed services as time went on, but at the very beginning of the first Clinton administration, that wasn't yet in place,'' Mr. Fuerth said. ''In the very beginning of a Gore administration, it would be in place.'' Even one of Mr. Bush's staunchest supporters -- the former commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Charles C. Krulak -- agreed.
 After my mother-in-law died nine months ago, my family found itself among the 2 percent of Americans required to pay an estate tax. Suddenly we are among those whom President Clinton and Al Gore tag as ''very rich.'' After my mother-in-law died nine months ago, my family found itself among the 2 percent of Americans required to pay an estate tax. Suddenly we are among those whom President Clinton and Al Gore tag as ''very rich.''
 Photo of Pres Clinton at black church, Washington, DC, where he asked blacks to vote for Vice Pres Al Gore
 The Times/CBS poll also found that in the presidential race in New York, the Democrat, Al Gore, is leading George W. Bush, the Republican, by nearly two to one. That, too, is unwelcome news for Mr. Lazio, since it almost certainly means that Mr. Bush will not devote time or money to this state, and that the Democratic turnout could be particularly high for Mr. Gore. In a contest roughly analogous to this one, when Robert F. Kennedy moved from Massachusetts to New York State and run for Senator in 1964, Mr. Kennedy won in no small part because Lyndon B. Johnson was elected president with a 2.4 million vote margin in New York.
