 In February, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas lost the Michigan Republican primary to Senator John McCain of Arizona, thanks to a notably poor showing among independents, moderates and women. Seven months later, he is having trouble attracting the same voters in his race against Vice President Al Gore. In February, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas lost the Michigan Republican primary to Senator John McCain of Arizona, thanks to a notably poor showing among independents, moderates and women. Seven months later, he is having trouble attracting the same voters in his race against Vice President Al Gore. With a Bush lead, then a Gore bounce and now bit of a Bush comeback, the presidential race is close in Michigan, a battleground state that is demographically very similar to the United States.
 Gov George W Bush tacitly praises Pres Clinton's past calls for end to 'big government' and says Vice Pres Al Gore is not heeding them; Bush, addressing workers at manufacturing plant in Green Bay, Wis, says Gore is proposing new level of federal spending and regulation that would endanger country's current prosperity; Bush seeks to make case that electing Gore might mean return to 'old ways of tax and spend'; excerpts from Bush remarks; photo (M) After more than a year of trying to hang President Clinton around Vice President Al Gore's neck, Gov. George W. Bush took the opposite tack today, saying the main problem with Mr. Gore was that he was not enough like his boss. In a speech to workers at a manufacturing plant here, Mr. Bush tacitly praised Mr. Clinton's past calls for an end to ''big government'' and said Mr. Gore was not heeding them. After more than a year of trying to hang President Clinton around Vice President Al Gore's neck, Gov. George W. Bush took the opposite tack today, saying the main problem with Mr. Gore was that he was not enough like his boss. In a speech to workers at a manufacturing plant here, Mr. Bush tacitly praised Mr. Clinton's past calls for an end to ''big government'' and said Mr. Gore was not heeding them. Instead, the vice president had ''cast his lot with the old Democratic Party'' in proposing a new level of federal spending and regulation that Mr. Bush said would endanger the country's current prosperity. ''The vice president was seated right behind Bill Clinton at the State of the Union when the president declared, 'The era of big government is over,' '' Mr. Bush said, referring to Mr. Clinton's address in January 1996. ''Apparently, the message never took.'' ''My opponent seemed interested in reinventing government,'' Mr. Bush said, alluding to one of Mr. Gore's signature phrases. ''Now he seems interested only in expanding it. For him, big government has never really been dead. It's simply been biding its time, waiting for its next chance.'' Those comments made up some of the sharpened language that Mr. Bush unveiled today to make the case that electing Mr. Gore might mean a return to ''the old ways of tax and spend.'' Pressing the point, Mr. Bush called on Mr. Gore to promise unequivocally that he would never raise the payroll taxes for Social Security to keep the entitlement program financially solvent. Mr. Bush has made that pledge. The references to Mr. Clinton revealed a fresh tactic in Mr. Bush's intrinsically difficult quest to persuade Americans that they should unseat an incumbent administration in a period of unparalleled prosperity. Mr. Bush was essentially saying that electing Mr. Gore would not be like re-electing Mr. Clinton, because Mr. Gore was less protege than dissident. ''He is proposing the largest increase in federal spending in 35 years, since the presidency of Lyndon Baines Johnson,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The vice president's spending plan proposes three times more in new spending than Bill Clinton proposed in 1992. If the vice president gets elected, the era of big government being over is over. And so, too, I fear, could be our prosperity.'' In casting Mr. Gore as financially profligate and trying to plant fears that he might raise taxes, Mr. Bush sounded much like his father did in 1988, when then-Vice President George Bush waged a successful campaign for the presidency against Michael S. Dukakis, then the governor of Massachusetts. Mr. Bush did not use the word ''liberal,'' which was the tag his father placed on Mr. Dukakis at the time. But that was clearly what the Texas governor meant. And what he intended was to persuade voters that prosperity was a potentially fragile thing and that Mr. Gore was not its surest protector but its direst threat, someone who would not use the projected federal surpluses in the right way. Mr. Bush began an effort to wrest  the issue of prosperity at least partly away from Mr. Gore this week when he warned that the vice president was not taking the necessary steps to end an ''education recession'' that imperiled the American economy down the line. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, called Mr. Bush's assessments ''absolutely laughable.'' Mr. Hattaway acknowledged that Mr. Gore's 10-year budget plan called for higher expenditures in ''education, health care, Medicare and the environment.'' But he said Mr. Gore's proposal for an estimated $500 billion in tax cuts over 10 years -- less than half the size of Mr. Bush's -- made that spending affordable. By contrast, Mr. Hattaway said, Mr. Bush's budget ''wastes most of the surplus on a massive tax cut and keeps the nation in debt.'' Asked about Mr. Bush's pledge not to raise payroll taxes for Social Security, Mr. Hattaway said, ''Did he say, 'Read my lips'? The last time a Bush made a silly pledge like that, he broke it.'' Mr. Hattaway said Mr. Gore would not be making a similar vow, because the vice president had already outlined a plan for safeguarding Social Security that did not involve a tax increase. Mr. Bush mentioned Mr. Clinton twice -- and twice flattered him in comparison with Mr. Gore. Previously, Mr. Bush had loudly rued the possibility of ''four more years of Clinton-Gore'' and implied that the vice president was a participant in an administration that, in Mr. Bush's view, was guilty of serious ethical lapses, divisive partisanship and failed leadership. But today, Mr. Bush described Mr. Gore as an entirely different kind of politician from Mr. Clinton, one who had ''left the vital center of American politics'' and headed left, leaving behind a moderate group of Democrats that he championed. ''He has claimed to invent many things,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to that organization, ''but he did help invent the Democratic Leadership Council.'' Remarks yesterday in Green Bay, Wis., on Vice President Al Gore's spending proposals: Vice President Gore has cast his lot with the old Democratic Party. His promises throw the budget out of balance. He offers a big federal spending program to every -- to nearly every -- single voting bloc in America. He expands entitlements without reforms to sustain them. And when others, Republican or Democrat, propose needed reforms in Social Security or Medicare or education, he opposes them vigorously, and he attacks them. Just when progress on important issues seemed within reach, my opponent has left the vital center of American politics.''
 Vice Pres Gore has invited 13 'regular folks,' including 14-year-old high school freshman and 76-year-old retiree, to help him prepare for presidential debates; Gore aides say these people, all of whom Gore met in campaign appearances, will help brief him about concerns of real Americans; another purpose might be to provide fodder for newspaper and television stories in three days that Gore will be sequestered in Sarasota, Fla, for mock debates and strategy meetings; almost all of those Gore has invited come from important swing states where media is likely to compile reports about new Gore advisers; photos (M) When Vice President Al Gore travels to his debate preparation camp in Sarasota, Fla., on Saturday, he will be accompanied by many of the usual campaign suspects: his chairman, his media consultant and his message guru. But he will also bring along some unusual -- and unsuspecting -- advisers he picked up on the campaign trail, like Erin K. Conner, a 14-year-old freshman at Belleville West High School in Belleville, Ill., and Joyce E. Martin, a 76-year-old retiree from Clearwater, Fla. At considerable expense that some Gore aides do not even want to think about, Mr. Gore has invited 13 ''regular folks'' -- including Miss Conner's mother, who will chaperone her -- to help him prepare for one of the pivotal moments in the 2000 campaign. When Vice President Al Gore travels to his debate preparation camp in Sarasota, Fla., on Saturday, he will be accompanied by many of the usual campaign suspects: his chairman, his media consultant and his message guru. But he will also bring along some unusual -- and unsuspecting -- advisers he picked up on the campaign trail, like Erin K. Conner, a 14-year-old freshman at Belleville West High School in Belleville, Ill., and Joyce E. Martin, a 76-year-old retiree from Clearwater, Fla. At considerable expense that some Gore aides do not even want to think about, Mr. Gore has invited 13 ''regular folks'' -- including Miss Conner's mother, who will chaperone her -- to help him prepare for one of the pivotal moments in the 2000 campaign. Gore aides say the purpose is for these people, all of whom Mr. Gore has met in campaign appearances, to help brief the vice president about the concerns of real Americans. But clearly, another purpose, or at least a consequence, is to provide fodder for newspaper and television stories in the three days that Mr. Gore will be sequestered for mock debates and strategy meetings. Not coincidentally, almost all of those Mr. Gore has invited come from important swing states where newspapers and television stations are likely to compile reports about the new Gore advisers. Three are from Michigan, two are from Illinois, and others are from Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida, Georgia, New Mexico, Maine and Oregon. There are none from, say, Massachusetts, New York, Texas or Alabama -- states assumed to be squarely in either Mr. Gore's camp, or that of his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush. When the briefings and rehearsals end on Tuesday, Mr. Gore's guests are to accompany him to Boston for that night's nationally televised debate. Gore aides hope to secure tickets for the guests to sit in the debate hall, raising the prospect that Mr. Gore will allude to them during his thrust and parry with Mr. Bush. Using audience members as props has become a regular feature of presidential debates and major speeches like the State of the Union in recent years, and Mr. Gore uses the tactic frequently. In his acceptance speech at the Democratic convention, for instance, he illustrated positions on prescription drug costs, education and a patient's bill of rights by pointing to several people who had been planted in the crowd. Expected to be among those in the debate entourage will be Winifred Skinner, a 79-year-old widow from Des Moines who has become an overnight national celebrity since an encounter with Mr. Gore on Wednesday at a forum on Medicare in Altoona, Iowa. Mrs. Skinner told Mr. Gore that she had to collect cans to make ends meet because her prescription drugs were so expensive. When Mr. Gore asked how much she raised that way, she charmed him by responding: ''You're not going to tell the government, are you?'' Mrs. Skinner has since been inundated by network TV reporters, making appearances this morning on NBC's ''Today'' and ABC's ''Good Morning America,'' among other shows. The Gore campaign offered to fly her to Sarasota and Boston, but she declined because she is afraid to fly. The campaign then offered to drive her to Boston. She hesitated because she did not want to leave behind her 6-year-old toy poodle, Bridget. You can bring the dog, the campaign said. The preparation sessions are to be held at the Mote Marine Laboratory, an 11-acre research and conference center where Mr. Gore also prepared for his 1996 vice-presidential debate. William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman and the former secretary of commerce, said today that the guests would help Mr. Gore stay focused on the debate's audience. Mr. Gore's guests are demographically diverse. Short biographies distributed today by the Gore campaign note that Joseph Austin, a construction worker from Albuquerque, is Hispanic and Joseph Dulin, a principal from Ann Arbor, Mich., is black. Most of those invited were notified earlier this week. Several invitees, like Donald Jalbert of Lewiston, Me., and Claudia Amboyer of Shelby Township, Mich., are teachers Mr. Gore met while staying at their homes during his various campaign ''school days.'' Miss Conner caught his attention when she introduced him at an appearance at her school on Sept. 11. Mrs. Martin met Mr. Gore on Monday during a discussion about Medicare that preceded a speech in St. Petersburg. Her doctor had wanted to charge $450 for a recent office visit to examine an ailing wrist but accepted a $125 Medicare payment instead, she told Mr. Gore. ''If I didn't have Medicare I'd have been out of luck,'' she said today. Another guest will be an Atlanta firefighter, Matt Moseley, who is himself a bit of a celebrity since the day last year when he dangled from a helicopter to rescue a construction worker trapped by a raging fire. Mr. Gore called Mr. Moseley shortly after the rescue and then met him during a trip to Atlanta. Mr. Moseley said he had been asking colleagues at his firehouse and other friends about the subjects they would like him to raise with Mr. Gore. His topics so far: prescription drug coverage, education, gun control, tax cuts and welfare reform.
 Gore Hits Bush Tax Cuts  Vice President Al Gore said ''prosperity itself will be on the ballot'' on Nov. 7 and portrayed Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut proposal as a threat to the country's economic health. Bush Hits Gore Spending Plans  Gov. George W. Bush tacitly praised President Clinton's past calls for an end to ''big government'' and said Vice President Al Gore was endangering prosperity by having ''cast his lot with the old Democratic party'' in proposing a new level of federal spending and regulation.
 ''While this is a sweet victory, it could be short-lived if we elect an anti-choice president,'' said Kate Michelman, president of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, which has endorsed Vice President Al Gore. ''You have all three branches of government in play right now, with the real possibility that strong conservatives could end up controlling all three.'' Representative J. C. Watts Jr., chairman of the House Republican Conference and an abortion opponent, declared in a statement that he was confident that a new administration ''with moral leadership and a commitment to the family will reverse this Clinton-Gore decision.'' He asserted, ''Do-it-yourself abortion has no place in a civilized society.'' For many years, RU-486 has been a symbol of the differences between the two parties on abortion -- President George Bush blocked its importation; President Clinton called for a review of the drug just days after taking office. The reaction from the presidential candidates today, while brief and careful, highlighted those differences anew. Gov. George W. Bush issued a statement declaring that he believed the agency's decision was ''wrong'' and feared that it would make abortions ''more and more common, rather than more and more rare.'' He added, ''As president, I will work to build a culture that respects life.'' Mr. Bush supports a ban on abortion except in cases of rape, incest or when the life of a woman is at stake. When asked specifically what Mr. Bush would do about the agency's action, a spokesman, Scott McClellan, responded: ''It appears the president does not have the authority to order drugs off the market. As president, he would order a careful review to ensure that the F.D.A. considered all the risks and did not do this as a result of political pressure from the White House.'' Mr. Gore issued a statement declaring that he was ''pleased'' with the agency's decision, and added, ''Today's decision is not about politics, but the health and safety of American women and a woman's fundamental right to choose.'' The administration, meanwhile, dismissed the notion that the drug agency had acted because of political pressure. But Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster, argued that it could make a difference with ''independent and Republican-leaning women who are pro-choice,'' who ''might feel perfectly comfortable with Bush on a whole host of other issues.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush seek to draw sharp distinctions over energy policy, issue on which both candidates have political vulnerabilities; Gore called for government to release oil from Strategic Petroleum Reserve to head off shortages of home heating oil, which Clinton did, even though he and Gore had opposed such a move earlier in year; Bush criticized decision as political ploy; Bush, who worked for years in oil industry, as did his running mate, Dick Cheney, supports opening some environmentally sensitive areas to oil exploration and production (M) With oil prices up, consumers agitated and the winter heating season looming, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are going at it on energy policy, seeking to draw sharp distinctions over an issue on which both candidates have political vulnerabilities. With oil prices up, consumers agitated and the winter heating season looming, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are going at it on energy policy, seeking to draw sharp distinctions over an issue on which both candidates have political vulnerabilities. Mr. Gore forced the topic back onto the campaign agenda last week with his call, acceded to by President Clinton, for the government to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to head off shortages of home heating oil -- an action that both the president and the vice president had opposed earlier in the year. Mr. Bush, who criticized the decision as a political ploy to drive down prices just ahead of Election Day, is scheduled to discuss energy policy in a speech on Friday. The most basic question facing the country on energy is how to keep supply and demand in line. Mr. Bush, like most Republicans, emphasized finding new oil and ensuring a flow from other oil-producing nations. Mr. Gore, like many Democrats, focuses on trying to use less energy, or at least on using existing energy supplies as efficiently as possible. There are a number of other clearly defined differences between them. Mr. Gore sees global warming as a serious threat, and strongly backs an international agreement reached three years ago in Kyoto, Japan, which calls for substantial reductions in emissions of industrial gases from burning coal, oil, wood and natural gas. Mr. Bush acknowledges that global warming is a potential problem, but says the Kyoto agreement would be too costly to the United States and would not ensure that developing countries do their part. Mr. Bush, who worked for years in the oil industry and whose running mate, Dick Cheney, ran an oil field services company, supports opening some environmentally sensitive areas, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska, to oil exploration and production. Mr. Gore opposes such steps. Mr. Gore, who has long said he is willing to pay a political price for his environmental principles, has suggested that the United States needs to take drastic steps, like eliminating the internal combustion engine, a goal that is widely mocked by Republicans. In an effort to encourage conservation, Mr. Gore has also supported higher taxes on energy consumption, including a broad-based energy tax proposed by the Clinton administration in 1993 but never adopted, and a 4.3-cents-a-gallon increase in the federal gasoline tax, which became law in 1993 over the objection of every Republican in Congress. In some ways, the two candidates are not as far apart as they seem. For all his focus on reducing demand, Mr. Gore has supported limited expansion of domestic exploration and production, including in the Gulf of Mexico and on federal land. Mr. Bush backs policies that promote conservation and energy efficiency. Although Mr. Gore would rely more heavily on a government role than Mr. Bush, both candidates see the market as the most powerful force for addressing energy problems. Both generally support the deregulation of the electric power industry to allow power producers to compete in serving consumers. Mr. Gore's general philosophy, and some of the specific positions he has taken over the years, are based in part on the idea that higher oil prices could be a good thing in holding down consumption and encouraging conservation and use of alternative energy sources. Yet Mr. Gore has also sought to portray himself as defender of the consumer against higher gasoline and heating costs. During the summer, he called for a federal investigation into whether oil companies were unfairly jacking up gasoline prices. And with winter looming and crude oil prices rising, he tried to pre-empt a possible spike in home heating oil prices with his call last week for release of supplies from the reserve. ''Gore is right that there is vast potential for alternative technologies and fuels,'' said Pietro S. Nivola, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a liberal-leaning research organization. ''But every time we try to manipulate or depress the price of oil, we put off the day when some of these innovations come online.'' Mr. Bush has said the surge in oil prices this year has resulted from  what he says is the Clinton-Gore administration's ineptitude in dealing with the oil-producing nations of the Middle East and on its failure to promote new oil production and modernization of power plants, pipelines and refineries at home. But his own close ties to the oil industry and problems with air quality in Texas have sometimes left him on the defensive, and his choice of Mr. Cheney as a running mate only exacerbated the problem. And while Mr. Bush's advisers say his criticism of Mr. Gore for tapping the nation's oil reserves makes the vice president look like a crass panderer, it is unclear whether voters will appreciate that kind of principle more than immediate action to help them deal with surging prices. Lawrence B. Lindsey, Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser, told reporters this week that energy was the ''best issue'' for the Texas governor in the campaign right now. Mr. Lindsey said Mr. Bush's policy prescriptions would center on promoting more domestic exploration and production of oil, speeding the process of granting permits for new refineries, power plants and pipelines, more active diplomatic efforts to persuade oil producing nations to keep oil prices stable and at reasonable levels and a greater emphasis on working with Western Hemisphere oil producers, especially Mexico. Mr. Bush would also work with industry to promote conservation and efficiency through innovations like time-of-day pricing, under which energy users would pay more at peak hours of demand, Mr. Lindsey said. In a series of speeches this year, Mr. Gore set out a list of energy initiatives. He relies heavily on tax credits -- for the purchase of fuel-efficient vehicles and homes, use of low-polluting fuels and solar power, investment by business in energy efficient equipment and for production of electricity from renewable and alternative fuel sources. His plan, Mr. Gore said at a campaign stop in Pennsylvania last week, would ''create millions of new jobs by getting out in front of the market for these new boilers and new furnaces and new cars and trucks and buses and revamped power plants and new technologies that help us to conserve more energy.''
 When Vice President Al Gore chose Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate, even many Jews wondered how an Orthodox Jew would reconcile his religious obligations with the demands of the job he was seeking. Would Mr. Lieberman take an official phone call on the Sabbath? Would he fly to Washington for a tie-breaking vote in the Senate? When Vice President Al Gore chose Senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate, even many Jews wondered how an Orthodox Jew would reconcile his religious obligations with the demands of the job he was seeking. Would Mr. Lieberman take an official phone call on the Sabbath? Would he fly to Washington for a tie-breaking vote in the Senate?
 Battlegrounds, series on Presidential election of 2000, focuses on Michigan, where race is close and where Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore have traded lead in polls over last few months; Bush, arriving in state for campaign swing, seeks ways to ratchet his campaign up; prominent Republicans in state are offering their advice on how he could cut into Gore's union support; although latest polls show Gore ahead by seven points, interviews with voters suggest he has been damaged by tendency to exaggerate or even to fabricate; maps; charts (L) Last Feb. 22, Gov. George W. Bush lost the Michigan Republican primary to Senator John McCain of Arizona, thanks to a notably poor showing among independents, moderates and women. Seven months later, in this same pivotal Great Lakes state, he is again having trouble attracting independents, moderates and women in his race against Vice President Al Gore. The race is close here, with Mr. Gore very narrowly ahead. Demographically very similar to the United States as a whole, Michigan has seen a Bush lead, a Gore bounce and now a bit of a Bush comeback. Last Feb. 22, Gov. George W. Bush lost the Michigan Republican primary to Senator John McCain of Arizona, thanks to a notably poor showing among independents, moderates and women. Seven months later, in this same pivotal Great Lakes state, he is again having trouble attracting independents, moderates and women in his race against Vice President Al Gore. The race is close here, with Mr. Gore very narrowly ahead. Demographically very similar to the United States as a whole, Michigan has seen a Bush lead, a Gore bounce and now a bit of a Bush comeback. Yet as Mr. Bush arrived in the state for a pair of fund-raisers tonight in Oakland County, just north of Detroit, and an appearance Friday in Saginaw, he was still searching for ways to ratchet his campaign up a notch. Other Republican officials said Mr. Bush should carry the fight more directly to the vice president by attacking him as a threat to the auto industry, which is still Michigan's lifeblood (although much of the action has switched from the Big Three automakers to dozens of small, innovative engineering outfits along the expressways fanning out from Detroit). Anything that cut into Mr. Gore's union support here would be invaluable to the Texas governor. Almost a third of Michigan's likely voters live in union households, and Mr. Gore leads among them by 55 percent to 28 percent, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll of 1,145 registered voters between Sept. 22 and 25.  Governor Bush leads among nonunion voters. The survey, which had a margin of sampling error of three percentage points, showed Mr. Gore ahead by seven points among all registered voters, but only four points ahead, 45 to 41, among likely voters. If the numbers are adjusted to account for past turnout patterns, the race is even. Bill Ballenger, who publishes ''Inside Michigan Politics,'' a highly regarded newsletter, said that Mr. Bush's ''character'' campaign against Mr. Gore had failed, and that the focus of the campaign had switched to issues. On the most important ones, he asserted, the vice president has the advantage, with ''a more understandable prescription drugs plan and a tax plan that's selling because it helps pay down the deficit and puts more resources into the kind of programs that people here want.'' On the other hand, interviews with voters in the state suggest, Mr. Gore has been damaged by a tendency to exaggerate or even to fabricate, and his staunch advocacy of protecting the environment can cut both ways. In his book ''Earth in the Balance'' Mr. Gore described the internal combustion engine as ''a mortal threat to the security of every nation -- more clearly than that of any military enemy we are again likely to confront.''  Sensing a big opening for Mr. Bush, Rusty Hills, the Michigan Republican chairman, who is a close associate of Gov. John Engler, said on Wednesday: ''That is just plain nutty. If we can tell every auto worker Gore said that, we can win this election.'' One way to do so would be in television commercials, but 35 percent of Michigan voters, the Times/ CBS poll shows, already view Mr. Bush's advertisements as negative, compared with 21 percent who view Mr. Gore's as negative. Probably not coincidentally, 48 percent said the vice president's commercials had given them an improved image of him, while only 32 percent thought better of Mr. Bush after watching his commercials. The uncommitted and uncertain voters in this state tend to be ticket-splitters, a phenomenon evident as long ago as 1964, when President Lyndon B. Johnson, a Democrat, carried the state by a million votes, while George Romney, a Republican, was winning the governor's race by 300,000 votes. So local politicians would not be even slightly surprised to see Mr. Gore and Senator Spencer Abraham, a Republican, pulling off the same trick in November. Mr. Bush's fate in Michigan may well depend on how he does in Macomb and Oakland, both of which were carried by his father in 1988 and 1992. Former Senator Bob Dole of Kansas lost both, and Michigan, four years ago. Representative Sander M. Levin, a Democrat whose district includes parts of both counties, said he thought that Mr. Gore had ''managed to hack his way through most of the thicket of negative Clinton associations, like Monica and Whitewater, which has allowed prosperity to pop through as the leading issue.'' In his area, he said, ''virtually everything has gotten better for most people, though not everyone, over the last eight years, from better schools to better race relations to considerably better pay and conditions on the job.'' Former Gov. William G. Milliken, a moderate Republican, said he thought that despite Mr. Bush's promise of ''compassionate conservatism,'' he was having trouble fitting into the pattern of economic conservatism and moderation on social issues that seems to succeed best in the suburbs. Specifically, Mr. Milliken mentioned as problems Mr. Bush's opposition to campaign-finance reform, as espoused by Senator McCain, and his steadfast opposition to abortion. Governor Engler ran Mr. Bush's campaign against Mr. McCain, promising to erect a firewall against the insurgent. He and the wall were torched. Now he is once again at the helm, with assistance from Warren K. Erdman, a former aide to Senator Christopher S. Bond of Missouri, who was sent into the state when Mr. Bush began slipping. But this time, Mr. Engler's profile is lower. Professor Rohde of Michigan State said the best the governor could do for Mr. Bush in any event is ''some small influence on the Republican turnout, roughly equal to the impact of the labor unions on the other side.'' This week, Mr. Bush has promised larger public roles for, and better coordination with, Republican governors in two neighboring Midwest states -- Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin and Bob Taft of Ohio. But so far at least, there has been no evidence that he is planning to push Mr. Engler out front. ''George Bush doesn't want to turn this into another referendum on a controversial governor,'' said Mr. Ballenger, the newsletter publisher, ''and pull the independents out to cast protest votes for Al Gore.'' But Mr. Cheney did not mention the subject in a speech in Troy on Wednesday, and Mr. Bush, an eager advocate of vouchers, is not expected to use the ''v-word'' here either.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on presidential campaigning as television entertainment, and whether Al Gore and George W Bush are spending too much time hanging around softer side of media, where they do not have to answer tough questions (M) The Nixon moment was one step in the road toward our current controversy over the amount of time presidential candidates are spending on television, talking about their families and favorite foods. The other night you could flip back and forth between Al Gore on MTV, looking stern at the mere mention of marijuana, and George W. Bush on CNN, hanging out with Larry King. On NBC, I swear I saw Dick Cheney mounting the pommel horse. (Has anybody noticed, by the way, that none of the candidates have spent much time cheering on our Olympic athletes? This is particularly disappointing in the case of Mr. Bush, who did such a great job of psyching up the Ryder Cup golf team by reading them a letter from the commander of the Alamo, vowing ''victory or death.'' I think I am speaking for all Americans when I say that if Mr. Bush had taken the trouble to read his Alamo letter to the women's soccer team, they would not have lost to Norway.) We digress. Our topic today was whether the candidates are spending too much time hanging around the softer side of the media, where they do not have to answer tough questions. The whole debate is truly touching, since it presumes that when they aren't on Oprah, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are at the mercy of bloodthirsty  journalists who are forcing them to finally come clean about the contradictions in their Medicare plans. Actually, the campaigns are so controlled that it's a challenge to get much more than the message of the day, and in the case of Mr. Gore, the press conference of every other month. If the TV hosts think they can pry something surprising out of these guys, more power to them. David Letterman gave it the old college try when he demanded to know what Mr. Gore thought we should do about global warming. (Great news! The problem can be solved by new, job-creating technology.) Ms. Winfrey didn't exactly go for the jugular, but it was still fun to watch the presidential candidates groveling at the feet of a powerful woman. Mr. Gore was in such full pander mode that when asked to name his favorite cereal, he blurted out, ''Oprah.'' Mr. Bush's least threatening interviewer had to be Regis Philbin, who spent an inordinate amount of time questioning him closely about what the ''W.'' stands for. (''Walker . . . of course, Walker. . . . George Walker Bush. . . . Yeah, yeah.'') Perhaps Mr. Philbin was worried about all the trouble Mr. Bush had earlier in the campaign, when people asked him about world affairs. Sunday -- Dueling centrists Bush and Gore attempt to elbow Malcolm out of the Middle. Wednesday -- The ''NYPD Blue'' gang gets to escort Mr. Gore to a fund-raiser. Friday -- Mr. Bush appears on a special edition of ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' limited to questions about people's middle names.
 The standards involve a 15-square-mile area 6 miles east of Sandy Hook, N.J., known officially as the Historic Area Remediation Site, or HARS, and commonly as the mud dump. The site was closed to most dumping in September 1997, following an agreement brokered a year before by Vice President Al Gore.
 Correction of Sept 28 article on accusations by Bush campaign that Gore campaign sent out misleading solicitation letters for fund for legal and accounting expenses, regarding spelling of name of spokesman cited An article yesterday about accusations by the Bush campaign that the Gore campaign sent out misleading solicitation letters for a fund for legal and accounting expenses misspelled the surname of a spokesman for the Federal Election Commission, who declined to say whether the agency was examining the solicitations. He is Ian Stirton, not Striton. An article yesterday about accusations by the Bush campaign that the Gore campaign sent out misleading solicitation letters for a fund for legal and accounting expenses misspelled the surname of a spokesman for the Federal Election Commission, who declined to say whether the agency was examining the solicitations. He is Ian Stirton, not Striton.
 The magazine said that 1,078 readers sent in ballots after the magazine printed the recipes in July and that 77.4 percent favored Mrs. Bush's cookies, which are made with sweet coconut as well as chocolate chips.
 Food and Drug Administration approves marketing of abortion-inducing pill mifepristone, or RU-486, first alternative to surgical abortion approved in United States; pill, a prescription drug, will be available to doctors in four weeks, and will allow them to offer abortions outside of specialty clinics; it will allow women to have abortions in privacy of their homes up to seven weeks after their last menstrual period; most women who seek abortions do so later in their pregnancies, but drug has taken on immense symbolic importance for both supporters and opponents of abortion rights; approval of drug brings out sharp contrasts in views on abortion of Vice Pres Al Gore, who supports FDA move, and Gov George W Bush, who says FDA is wrong; Dr Jane E Henney, FDA commissioner, says decision was based on persuasive data showing that drug is safe and effective; says politics played no role in decision; chart; map (L) Approval of the drug immediately brought out the sharp contrasts in the views on abortion of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. Gore said he was pleased with the decision, and Mr. Bush said it was wrong.
 Gov George W Bush will devote much of weekend to debate preparation; process began last spring; Bush team recognizes that campaign is entering new phase, to be dominated by three Bush-Gore debates, and that these events represent Bush's best chance to erase any lingering questions about how serious and seasoned he really is; fresh, thorough review of Bush's 10 debates during primaries and two earlier debates in Texas shows him to be unpredictable, uneven performer; at same time, it also reveals someone who, despite his image in some quarters as overconfident slacker, can be capable of significant improvements, important adjustments and little surprises; Bush debate sampler; photo (M) In the first debates of the Republican primaries, Gov. George W. Bush did not have to do much. With six candidates dividing an hour and a half, no one got more than 15 minutes. Yet Mr. Bush filled up even less than that, his diaphanous answers sometimes ending many seconds before the allotted time. And while his opponents talked longer and louder  during those early December meetings, few seemed as self-satisfied as the Texas governor. His lips twisted into an expression that opponents  quickly branded ''the smirk.'' In the first debates of the Republican primaries, Gov. George W. Bush did not have to do much. With six candidates dividing an hour and a half, no one got more than 15 minutes. Yet Mr. Bush filled up even less than that, his diaphanous answers sometimes ending many seconds before the allotted time. And while his opponents talked longer and louder  during those early December meetings, few seemed as self-satisfied as the Texas governor. His lips twisted into an expression that opponents  quickly branded ''the smirk.'' Within two months, however, he had grafted a layer of earnestness over any arrogance for his ninth debate, a special edition of CNN's ''Larry King Live.'' There were just two other contenders left at that point. But Mr. Bush was suddenly a font of interjections and rebuttals, as if he had to rush to fit in all that he had to say. As he approaches his first debate with Vice President Al Gore in Boston next week, it is impossible to know which incarnation of Mr. Bush will show up. He and his aides are hoping for the better version, and will devote much of the weekend to debate preparation. It is their final push in a process that began last spring, and it is a recognition both that the campaign is entering a new phase, to be dominated by the three debates between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, and that these events represent Mr. Bush's best chance to erase any lingering questions about how serious and seasoned he really is. But while Mr. Gore is a well-known quantity in this arena, a fresh, thorough review of Mr. Bush's 10 debates during the primaries and his two earlier debates in Texas showed him to be an unpredictable, uneven performer. At the same time, it revealed someone who, despite his image in some quarters as an overconfident slacker, can be capable of significant improvements, important adjustments and little surprises. ''The jury is still kind of out on Bush,'' said Greg Mueller, who was a senior adviser to the publisher Steve Forbes, one of Mr. Bush's former rivals for the Republican presidential nomination. Mr. Mueller was referring to Mr. Bush's aptitude for debates, but he said there was one clear lesson from the primaries: Mr. Bush brings weapons to the battle that should not be overlooked. Foremost among them is his talent for humorous asides, some cleverly self-effacing and some clearly spontaneous, and Mr. Bush drew on this with increasing frequency and effectiveness as he progressed through the debates last winter. ''I would take an expression into the Oval Office of 'Dear God, help me,' '' Mr. Bush answered, without missing a beat. When Gary L. Bauer, another rival, muttered that the same thought would go through his head if Mr. Bush were president, Mr. Bush again found a fast and fitting retort. But Mr. Bush also, in the same forum, mispronounced ''obfuscate,'' even though he was following his habit of edging up slowly to multisyllable clusters of consonants, as if pondering dangerous potholes on his oratorical highway. That error demonstrated one of his debate liabilities: a wobbliness (and sometimes wackiness) with words that was present even in the Larry King performance, when Mr. Bush signaled his commitment to a growing economy by saying, ''We ought to make the pie higher.'' At his worst, Mr. Bush came across as cocky, tongue-tied and only glibly engaged with the nuts and bolts of the matters at hand. At his best, he projected a genuineness of belief, buoyancy of spirit and affability of character that trumped any of his opponents' charms. The most memorable example was his answer, in a December debate in Phoenix, to a question about what he had learned from a biography of former Secretary of State Dean Acheson that he had previously said he was reading. Mr. Bush simply reverted to foreign-policy lines from his stump speeches. But his aides and advisers are not talking much these days about that balance sheet of strengths and weaknesses; they are too busy building Mr. Gore into the most fearsome forensic gladiator in the empire. In recent interviews, one of them called the vice president ''the most effective and lethal debater in modern presidential politics.'' Several others said Mr. Bush would be lucky simply to remain upright in the face of Mr. Gore's onslaught. The name of this game is the management of expectations, and Mr. Bush's associates played it perfectly in 1994, when he was running for Texas governor against a quick-witted incumbent, Ann Richards. A recent look at the sole Bush-Richards debate that year left little doubt that she was funnier, more agile with facts, and more authoritative. And some of Mr. Bush's canned goods verged on hokey, as when he concluded his remarks by quoting the state song, ''Texas, our Texas, all hail the mighty state.'' Mr. Bush's advisers are now trying to create a similar dynamic. They can, and will, tell anyone who asks that since 1984, Mr. Gore has debated about 45 times. They can,  and will, recite chapter and verse of a long article about Mr. Gore's evolution as a debater in the July issue of Atlantic Monthly, the cover of which depicted the vice president as a political vampire. But many of Mr. Bush's advisers acknowledge that behind the scenes, Mr. Bush has been practicing and practicing, to a degree that is not wholly characteristic. During the primaries, for example, he did not bother with a single mock debate. For the general election, he began such rehearsals about four months ago, several advisers said. In May, he sat with aides in the governor's mansion in Austin and watched a videotape, edited by the campaign's chief media adviser, Mark McKinnon, that included scenes from Mr. Gore's debates as well as high points from past presidential debates. In early June, he and Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, the stand-in for Mr. Gore, actually stood at lecterns in a room at the Bush family compound in Kennebunkport, Me. It was a scenario repeated over subsequent months, with Stuart Stevens, another media adviser with the campaign, acting as a moderator. On Friday night, at Mr. Bush's ranch near Waco, he and Mr. Gregg will hold a timed rehearsal at the same late hour as Tuesday's event, a dry run that will test him past his usual bedtime. They may do a second rehearsal on Saturday. Advisers said that one goal of all this work had been to brief Mr. Bush thoroughly on the details of Mr. Gore's record and proposals. But another goal has been simply to make sure that Mr. Bush goes into Tuesday's debate feeling as comfortable as possible, because that often dictates whether he seems clipped or convivial, herky-jerky or fluid. ''His forte is not speed or specificity,'' said Roderick P. Hart, a University of Texas professor of communication and government who has observed Mr. Bush through the years. ''But contrary to popular reports, he's an intelligent man.'' The debates in the primaries bear out that assessment. Some of Mr. Bush's best moments came when he relaxed enough to unleash a playful streak that made him seem accessible and smart and accomplished other goals as well. But this was also the debate in which Mr. Bush went a laugh too far, chuckling when one of his questioners mentioned that some death row convicts in Texas had had lawyers who slept during their trials. A more persistent trait of Mr. Bush's responses was his tendency to talk about foreign policy in the most general, well-worn terms. When Mr. King asked about the appropriate occasions for military force, Mr. Bush lapsed into a kind of mantra.
 LIEBERMAN CONTINUES CRITICISM  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman accused Republicans yesterday of deceiving voters about the Democratic plan to pay for prescription drugs, the second time this week he has called them dishonest. ''What Bush and Cheney are saying about our Medicare plan is downright deceptive,'' Mr. Lieberman said, joined by other Democratic lawmakers on the steps of the United States Capitol. On Tuesday, he said Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney had repeatedly made promises that were contradicted by ''their records and the details of their plans.'' LIEBERMAN CONTINUES CRITICISM  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman accused Republicans yesterday of deceiving voters about the Democratic plan to pay for prescription drugs, the second time this week he has called them dishonest. ''What Bush and Cheney are saying about our Medicare plan is downright deceptive,'' Mr. Lieberman said, joined by other Democratic lawmakers on the steps of the United States Capitol. On Tuesday, he said Gov. George W. Bush and Dick Cheney had repeatedly made promises that were contradicted by ''their records and the details of their plans.'' Vice President Al Gore has proposed adding a prescription drug benefit to Medicare. Mr. Bush has derided the plan as forcing older people into a government-run health maintenance organization and has proposed a more limited program. BROTHER AGAINST BROTHER  Handgun Control Inc. will begin broadcasting television commercials this weekend that feature the actor Martin Sheen criticizing Gov. George W. Bush's record on gun control. In the 30-second commercial, Mr. Sheen, who portrays the president on the television series ''The West Wing,'' sits in front of an American flag and says: ''Should the next president be the candidate of the gun lobby? Should he have signed a bill that allows hidden handguns in churches, hospitals and amusement parks? Should he be someone of whom the N.R.A. has said, that if he is elected, they'll be working right out of the Oval Office? That's Governor Bush's record.'' Economic expansion is over if Vice President Al Gore becomes president, Gov. George W. Bush told supporters in Michigan and Wisconsin. Mr. Gore, in Washington, said as much of Mr. Bush. The candidates continue racking up frequent flier miles, wooing voters and hacking away at their opponents' credibility. Length of the Official Day: Gore, 13 1/2 hours; Bush, 13 hours States Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 2 Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 2 Events: Gore, 1; Bush, 2 Press Conferences/Press Availability: Gore, 0; Bush, 0 Press Interviews (Includes newspaper and television interviews): Gore, 5; Bush, 0 Debate preparation: Gore, 1 hour; Bush, 0 hours Main message: Gore, economics; Bush, economic agenda, budget comparisons
 TITLE -- ''Affordable''  PRODUCER -- Team Hillary  ON THE SCREEN -- Various images of Mrs. Clinton campaigning, including shots of her holding a baby, meeting with the elderly and talking with people at a diner. The main points appear in writing superimposed over the video clips. When Representative Rick A. Lazio is mentioned, the screen goes black and the written words appear alone.  THE SCRIPT -- ''Hillary Clinton supports tax cuts. That's right. She has a plan for a $10,000 tax deduction to help pay for college, tax credits for long-term care and for child care, a reduction of the marriage tax and the estate tax, and Hillary's tax cut plan is affordable. We'd still be able to pay down the debt, and extend Social Security. Rick Lazio's tax plan costs more than a trillion dollars. And just like George Bush, Lazio's plans squander the whole surplus. Hillary. The right tax cuts. The right choice.''  ACCURACY -- While opposing across-the-board tax relief, Mrs. Clinton has pushed for limited tax cuts, including those mentioned in the commercial, that promote certain social goals. With her proposal to place ''debt-reduction caps'' on tax cuts and new spending, it is true that her tax cuts would not get in the way of paying down the debt or continuing Social Security. Mrs. Clinton's claim about the high cost of Mr. Lazio's tax plan is grounded in an analysis by Frank J. Mauro of the liberal Fiscal Policy Institute in Albany. The institute is independent, but is financed in part by labor organizations, and Mr. Mauro has worked for the Democrats in the State Assembly. Mr. Lazio's campaign says that the analysis is not objective and estimates that his tax cuts would cost about $776 billion over 10 years, not the $1.1 trillion suggested by Mr. Mauro. The ad's claim that Mr. Lazio's plans would consume the entire surplus is also based on Mr. Mauro's report; Mr. Lazio offers very different numbers. The ad does not make clear that Mr. Lazio's ''plans'' are not just tax cuts, as implied, but include new spending on such things as education and prescription drugs.  SCORECARD -- By its own admission, the ad surprises the viewer with its notion that Mrs. Clinton advocates tax cuts. She has not made cutting taxes a hallmark of her campaign, instead suggesting that far-reaching tax relief would be fiscally irresponsible. Her tax cut proposals are very modest, especially compared with those proposed by Mr. Lazio and other Republicans. Her approach to taxes is very similar to that of Vice President Al Gore, who began running an ad this week that mentions the same college tuition deduction. Dan McLagan, Mr. Lazio's spokesman, said, ''Mrs. Clinton has told a number of fibs during this campaign; this ad is a whopper.'' More accurately, the ad presents a particular version of the truth, one that appears to be aimed at voters who like the idea of tax cuts but assume that Mrs. Clinton opposes them. It also seeks to steal the thunder from one of Mr. Lazio's major campaign initiatives.
 Mr. Lazio has spent the past few days emphasizing his tax-cut plan in speeches, but he no longer assigns a figure to it. When he unveiled it in a speech last month, he said it would amount to $776 billion over the next decade, but Democrats and news reports suggested the figure was closer to $1 trillion, putting it much more in line with the one proposed by Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Lazio's aides have since conceded that some of the figures he used were outdated, though he has stood by the plan. Mr. Lazio's assistants said he would spend considerable time upstate next month, focusing on potential supporters of Vice President Al Gore who tell pollsters they are undecided on a choice for Senate. ''Anyone who says they support Gore but are undecided in this race does not want to vote for Hillary Clinton,'' a top Lazio official said. ''They are looking for a reason not to vote for Clinton.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore says Gov George W Bush's proposed income tax cut is serious threat to country's economic health; his brief speech to scholars and staff members of Brookings Institution is designed as test drive for first debate with Bush (S) Vice President Al Gore said today that ''prosperity itself will be on the ballot'' on Nov. 7 and then repeatedly portrayed Gov. George W. Bush's proposed income tax cut as a serious threat to the country's economic health. ''That's not tax relief,'' Mr. Gore said of his Republican rival's $1.3 trillion tax reduction plan. ''That's a massive tax on America's potential.'' Vice President Al Gore said today that ''prosperity itself will be on the ballot'' on Nov. 7 and then repeatedly portrayed Gov. George W. Bush's proposed income tax cut as a serious threat to the country's economic health. ''That's not tax relief,'' Mr. Gore said of his Republican rival's $1.3 trillion tax reduction plan. ''That's a massive tax on America's potential.'' Mr. Gore made his comments in a notably brief speech to a group of scholars and staff members at the Brookings Institution, one of Washington's most prominent research organizations. It is a nonpartisan group that conducts research on a broad range of domestic and foreign policy topics. The vice president made no new proposals during his address, which he read somewhat impassively from a teleprompter while standing at a lectern. But he did introduce new language, and aides said the speech, like other Gore addresses this week, was designed as something of a test drive for Mr. Gore's first debate with Mr. Bush, which is set for Tuesday night in Boston. If that is the case, viewers can expect to hear a vigorous assault on Mr. Bush's tax cut plan. Mr. Gore attacked the Bush plan five times in his 13-minute address. The candidates' disparate approaches to tax cuts provide perhaps the clearest distinction in this year's campaign, and Mr. Gore has long maintained that the Republican plan risks a return to heavy deficits. The Bush proposal would reduce all income tax rates, double the child credit, provide a break for married couples, repeal the federal estate tax and expand the deductibility of charitable contributions. Mr. Gore, by contrast, opposes any across-the-board reduction in tax rates. He has proposed a $500 billion array of targeted tax cuts and credits aimed at providing relief for the middle class. They would include financial breaks intended to encourage retirement savings and to make college tuition, health insurance and child care more affordable. Mr. Gore would spend more than Mr. Bush on education and health care, and he would devote significant sums to paying down the national debt. ''Consider this fact,'' Mr. Gore said of Mr. Bush's proposal. ''The other side's plan gives more in tax cuts to the wealthiest 1 percent -- $667 billion of the surplus -- than all the new money they would invest in education, health care, prescription drugs and the national defense combined.''
