 ON THE SCREEN -- As with several previous advertisements supporting Hillary Rodham Clinton, this one focuses on Representative Rick A. Lazio's tax proposal and his stand on Medicare. The spot opens with white words on a black screen that ask whether Mr. Lazio can be trusted. He is shown standing at a lectern with Newt Gingrich, then sitting next to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas at a meeting. This is the first time that a Democratic commercial has used an image of Mr. Bush in this Senate campaign. During both scenes, the narration criticizes Mr. Lazio's economic policies. The advertisement ends by repeating the two images of Mr. Lazio next to Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Bush. ON THE SCREEN -- As with several previous advertisements supporting Hillary Rodham Clinton, this one focuses on Representative Rick A. Lazio's tax proposal and his stand on Medicare. The spot opens with white words on a black screen that ask whether Mr. Lazio can be trusted. He is shown standing at a lectern with Newt Gingrich, then sitting next to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas at a meeting. This is the first time that a Democratic commercial has used an image of Mr. Bush in this Senate campaign. During both scenes, the narration criticizes Mr. Lazio's economic policies. The advertisement ends by repeating the two images of Mr. Lazio next to Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Bush. THE SCRIPT -- ''Can we trust Rick Lazio to fight for us? He helped write the Gingrich budget slashing Medicare. Now Lazio's trying to hide the true cost of his trillion-dollar tax plan. Like the Bush plan, experts say Lazio's would eat up the surplus, leaving no money to pay off the debt and extend the life of Social Security and Medicare. Hillary's plan? Affordable tax cuts, to help families pay for college and long-term care, and to help small businesses create jobs. Tell Lazio he's not fighting for us. Not then. Not now.'' SCORECARD -- The first line in the commercial raises the question of trust, one that Mrs. Clinton's campaign has been trying to raise with Mr. Lazio. It takes a swipe at a Lazio advertisement saying he is ''one of us.'' By associating Mr. Lazio with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gingrich, the spot seeks to project the image of conservative politicians whose policies could spell economic disaster for middle-class New Yorkers.
 ''It's not an attempt to change the overall market dynamics,'' said Ms. Tyson, who has been advising the Gore campaign on economic issues. ''That's perfectly consistent with the formulation of the reserve.'' Since last autumn, Senator Charles Schumer, Democrat of New York, has tried to convince the Clinton administration to use the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, arguing that the reluctance on the part of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to provide more crude called for the government to step in to halt spiraling prices. Although Mr. Schumer had proposed that 30 million barrels be released, he said he believed the Gore proposal was a fair first step, and more important, a sign that the administration may be closer to unlocking the oil.
 The old Bush Terminal on the waterfront in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, for example, is being converted into a technology campus. Other dot-com and telecommunications companies have been moving into industrial buildings in the Brooklyn waterfront area known as Dumbo and in Long Island City, Queens.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column assesses Ralph Nader's presidential campaign, listing a number of subjects that Nader is 'furious about'; notes Nader is not troubled by possibility that Gov George W Bush could win as result of his (Nader's) candidacy, contending that a really conservative Republican admininstration would 'mobilize the forces of progressivism' (M) The Republican and Democratic tickets probably could not get this kind of youthful turnout if they paid the audience. And let's all breathe a sigh of relief for that. No matter whom you hope to see elected president in November, you certainly do not want to live in a country where the universities are filled with students who are passionate about Al Gore and George W. Bush. What would they save for middle age? Mr. Nader comes onstage to thunderous applause and launches into a long and rambling speech, attacking Joe Lieberman as the ''consummate corporate Democrat, that hybrid Republicrat.'' Mr. Nader is furious about the selection of Mr. Lieberman for the Democratic ticket. Why, he demands of the audience, couldn't Mr. Gore have picked a running mate like the pure of heart (albeit somewhat charisma-challenged) Senator Russ Feingold of Wisconsin, the champion of campaign finance reform? Mr. Nader is furious about campaign finance, along with -- this is a very, very incomplete list -- the World Trade Organization, Nafta, the death penalty, genetically engineered food, child poverty, the military budget, the Taft-Hartley Act, tuition at public universities, the evening news's obsession with the weather, the ban on industrial hemp and the fact that Al Gore didn't show up for the Farm Aid concert. And there's no apparent priority to his outrage -- in Wisconsin on Wednesday, child poverty did not get nearly so much of a raking-over as the Farm Aid snub. Lack of access is a big theme in this campaign. He told a long story to one editorial board about how Al Gore had weaseled out on a meeting, and complained bitterly about black political leaders who denied him a platform while Mr. Gore and President Clinton were welcomed at Sunday services. (''They've got the cadence down, they pander. It's disgusting to watch.'') Mr. Nader, who by any possible standards is one of the great living heroes of American public life, has been frozen out by the Democratic power structure for a long time. It's astonishing when you think about it. He may be an irritating nag, but there are tens of thousands of people alive today because of Mr. Nader's 35 years of work in the consumer movement. And the vice president won't take his phone calls. No wonder he's mad. He generally shrugs off charges that a strong showing for him will throw the election to Mr. Bush. Sometimes his team argues that a Gore victory is already inevitable -- the only time the Nader campaign is guilty of giving the vice president too much credit. Sometimes Mr. Nader says the two candidates are so much alike, it doesn't make any difference who wins. (He seems particularly serene about abortion rights, which he claims the Republicans don't really want to see overturned.) But even if Mr. Gore does lose and Mr. Bush turns out to be not quite as moderate as Mr. Nader thinks, that would be O.K. too. A really conservative Republican administration, he said, would mobilize the forces of progressivism. ''I remember how  Jim Watts [the Reagan administration's Interior secretary] galvanized the environment movement,'' he recalled nostalgically. We've already had one lanky and distinctly uncuddly progressive candidate who felt Al Gore wasn't strong enough on issues like racial injustice, child poverty and the struggles of working families. Bill Bradley's campaign never caught on, but Mr. Nader says that was more a problem of style than substance. ''He just didn't show the passion,'' said Mr. Nader. ''His rhetoric didn't rise to the indignation level.''
 Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush have received immense publicity recently from spots on talk shows; photos (M) This week the presidential candidates revealed a new campaign strategy: sight gags. On Tuesday, Al Gore made a cameo appearance during Jay Leno's monologue, holding cue cards. (''It's the man who invented the cue card,'' Mr. Leno said while the laughing vice president shook hands with audience members.) Then yesterday on the syndicated ''Live with Regis,'' George W. Bush walked out wearing a dark silk tie and matching shirt, a jokey reference to Regis Philbin's trademark wardrobe from his other show, ''Who Wants to be a Millionaire.'' This week the presidential candidates revealed a new campaign strategy: sight gags. On Tuesday, Al Gore made a cameo appearance during Jay Leno's monologue, holding cue cards. (''It's the man who invented the cue card,'' Mr. Leno said while the laughing vice president shook hands with audience members.) Then yesterday on the syndicated ''Live with Regis,'' George W. Bush walked out wearing a dark silk tie and matching shirt, a jokey reference to Regis Philbin's trademark wardrobe from his other show, ''Who Wants to be a Millionaire.'' Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have received immense publicity recently from spots on puffball talk shows, vapid though their conversations were. Each candidate had a full hour on ''Oprah'' to say he loved his family and to reveal his favorite food. Mr. Gore appeared with David Letterman, but left the singing to his vice-presidential candidate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who belted out ''My Way'' on Conan O'Brien's show. The ripple effect has sent giddy sound bites everywhere. Behind their smiles, the candidates are fiercely playing the politics of personality. And as the sound bites get so silly that they call for drum rolls, the differences between the candidates all but vanish. Making identical points, that they have a sense of humor and are solid family men, the candidates could easily have emerged as one affable two-headed creature called GoreBush. Such alternate television appearances are meant to reach voters who are not glued to CNN, but they reach them with a hollow message: vote for me, I'm a good guy. The candidates' appearances with Oprah Winfrey included her regular segment called ''Remembering your Spirit,'' which presented filmed reports on how the Gores and the Bushes preserve the spirit of their marriages. Apparently a large photo album and sappy piano music help. On ''Regis,'' Mr. Philbin showed family snapshots of George W. Bush as a baby with his dad, as a boy on a pony and as a father holding his newborn twin daughters. The candidates even echoed each other on ''Oprah'' by saying that the elderly should not have to choose between buying food or prescription drugs; such feel-good phrases do not help voters decide who has a better health care plan. But Ms. Winfrey, who could be as tough as any political reporter if she wanted to, knows her audience too well to expect it to sit still for a heavy policy discussion. The unspoken bargain is that serious considerations are outside the range of these shows, a conspicuous point during Mr. Gore's visit to ''Late Show with David Letterman.'' Of all the talk-show hosts, Mr. Letterman tried hardest to get answers to substantive questions. After asking about the famous Al-Tipper convention kiss, he got around to global warming and the plea bargain of Wen Ho Lee, accused of mishandling nuclear secrets. Mr. Gore deflected the questions with jokes. ''You're such a wonk,'' he told Mr. Letterman, and seemed a bit baffled, as if he were thinking, ''Hey, this is supposed to be a comedy show.'' Though the content is vacuous, these guest spots matter a lot in terms of media imagery. Since the Democratic convention, the wooden Al Gore seems to have disappeared and his poll numbers have risen; talk shows give him a chance to keep the laughing, kissing Al Gore visible. But as Mr. Bush's media fortunes have fallen, he needed to put himself in situations that played to his strengths. He got days of bad publicity (and comedians got a windfall of material) after an open mike caught him referring to a reporter for The New York Times with a bleepable term. Soon after, his use of the nonword ''subliminable'' brought back the persistent question of his intellectual capabilities. Talk shows could help counter that image of blundering, letting him display his personal appeal in a friendly atmosphere. Even in comic settings, the candidates can make a few sideswiping points against their opponents. On the Letterman show, Mr. Gore's Top 10 List of rejected Gore-Lieberman campaign slogans included, ''We know when the mike is on.'' But the candidates themselves face little danger. On ''Regis,'' one tantalizing, dangerous possibility never materialized. Mr. Philbin's co-host for the day was Susan Hawk, the truck driver who appeared on ''Survivor'' and who memorably ranted at the two finalists, calling them a rat and a snake. She could have screamed at Mr. Bush, ''You're a rat, and Gore's a snake'' (or vice versa). In fact, she was extremely polite. In the loss of dignity department, the show featured a man who smashed wooden boards against his head, trying to set a world record (he only tied it), though he was not on the same segment as Mr. Bush. When a candidate is behind in the polls, he has to take some media risks. Recently Mr. Bush's staff has contacted the Letterman show to discuss a possible appearance. His last,  by satellite, featured a time delay and jokes no one got. It is still replayed as evidence of a talk-show disaster. Conquering the Letterman show might do him more good than dozens of policy speeches.
 Republican governors are hitting campaign trail on behalf of one of their own, Gov George W Bush (M) Just in case voters needed clarification of Gov. George W. Bush's education proposals, here was Gov. Bill Owens of Colorado on Tuesday, playing host to reporters from local and national news organizations on a telephone conference call. Around the same time, Gov. Jane Dee Hull of Arizona was standing on the Capitol steps in Phoenix, announcing the formation of the Arizona Bush-Cheney Farm and Ranch Team, a group to build support among agricultural interests. Just in case voters needed clarification of Gov. George W. Bush's education proposals, here was Gov. Bill Owens of Colorado on Tuesday, playing host to reporters from local and national news organizations on a telephone conference call. Around the same time, Gov. Jane Dee Hull of Arizona was standing on the Capitol steps in Phoenix, announcing the formation of the Arizona Bush-Cheney Farm and Ranch Team, a group to build support among agricultural interests. Earlier in the week, Gov. John Engler of Michigan and Gov. Bob Taft of Ohio each held a news conference to promote what Mr. Bush calls his blueprint for middle-class voters. Take a good look out there on the Republican presidential campaign trail: Mr. Bush's gubernatorial brethren seem to be everywhere. One actually is a brother, Jeb Bush of Florida. But steadily, the campaign is calling on many of the 28 other Republican governors to promote the Texas governor, who has fallen behind in recent national polls. At least one governor, Mr. Engler, has actually complained to the campaign that the governors have not been asked to do more. ''This is a very close campaign,'' Mr. Owens said during the telephone call, explaining why he had become active in the Bush campaign. ''It will be decided by the electoral votes in one, two, three, maybe four states. So it is critical for governors like myself to be very involved.'' Bush campaign officials say efforts by the governors provide a major asset in helping to offset the widespread political connections Al Gore has built over nearly eight years as vice president, including the Democratic governors who are working for him, like Parris N. Glendening of Maryland and Gray Davis of California. Mr. Owens, who has led efforts to improve the educational system in Colorado, spent 30 minutes on the telephone, drawing sharp distinctions between Mr. Bush's ideas for education and those offered by Mr. Gore, whom Mr. Owens criticized as a pawn of teachers' unions. Other governors have spoken for Mr. Bush on issues they are especially familiar with, like Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, on the welfare system; James S. Gilmore III of Virginia, on criminal justice; and  Marc Racicot of Montana, on the management of public lands. As the latest indication that governors are influencing campaign strategy, Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, has been meeting with party officials in Midwestern states to discuss using localized commercials, a tactic some of the governors have been urging Mr. Bush to adopt. In addition, the governors are proving to be assets in statewide organization and fund-raising. Even Gov. Michael O. Leavitt of Utah, whose work has been minimal because of Utah's overwhelming support for Republicans and his own re-election efforts, has helped raise $500,000 for the Bush ticket. ''Governors are our secret weapon,'' said Terry Holt, a spokesman for Victory 2000, the branch of the Republican National Committee that coordinates activities with the Bush campaign. ''They are often the most aggressive grass-roots workers in their state, so they help us organizationally, and they understand the issues.'' The governors have grown so eager to help that, one Bush aide said,  ''there are not enough national television shows'' to accommodate them, and some are not known well enough nationally to be persuasive outside of their states. The governors' willingness to play a role in Mr. Bush's campaign began long before he declared himself a candidate, several governors said. Mr. Racicot said the first conversations were at a meeting of the National Governors Association in Washington in February of 1999, a time when other Republicans were contemplating a presidential run. ''I remember talking about it with Engler and Cellucci, specifically about how many people at the N.G.A. meeting would be supportive of Governor Bush running for president,'' Mr. Racicot said. ''We decided that maybe we should ask around, and before we knew it, we had 12 to 15 of the Republican governors, which I thought was very significant. This was still a full year before the primaries, but we had a critical mass.'' By the end of the meeting, Mr. Racicot said, about two-thirds of the Republican governors had agreed to support Mr. Bush, giving him a huge organizational advantage over other potential candidates. Those talks led to agreement among the governors that they would do whatever a Bush campaign asked. And it has asked a lot, leaning especially hard on governors with higher national profiles, like Mr. Engler, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Racicot, Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, George E. Pataki of New York and Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania. Like other Republican governors, Mr. Owens volunteered to serve as state chairman for the Bush campaign. He said he was planning to do more for Mr. Bush, including traveling with other governors through Western states to drum up support.
 On Sunday at noon, a brunch sponsored by New York Is Book Country and The New York Times will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Park Avenue at 50th Street. Scheduled to appear are Candace Bushnell, Arthur Miller, Cynthia Ozick, Liz Smith and Nicholas Sparks. Admission is $110; $100 for Times Card members. Information:  (888) 698-1870.
 Floyd Norris comment on whether Democratic Presidential candidate Al Gore can survive rising oil prices and falling stock prices; says history has shown in most cases that if Dow Jones industrial average rises from end of July through end of October--three months when investors are most attuned to political season--the incumbent party will win the election; adds if the Dow falls the incumbents will be thrown out; holds Republicans could have picked better candidates to fight over oil; both George W Bush and Dick Cheney are former oil company executives who once praised rising oil prices; says Gore will bash sky-high profit margins that oil refiners now enjoy; contends Bush will denounce Clinton administration as not having effective energy policy, and that could have effect; holds the Dow and the election may turn on whether oil prices stay high for next six weeks; graph (M) AS election forecasters go, the Dow Jones industrial average has a better record than most. And its latest swan dive may be bad news for Al Gore. AS election forecasters go, the Dow Jones industrial average has a better record than most. And its latest swan dive may be bad news for Al Gore. It has been 32 years since the Dow last blew an election call. In 1968, the Dow rose 7.9 percent during the three key months, but that was not enough to put Hubert H. Humphrey -- the last Democrat to run for president while serving as vice president -- over the top. Mr. Humphrey faced a few problems that Al Gore does not, notably a party that was badly split by the Vietnam War and by the third-party candidacy of George C. Wallace. This year, most pundits treated Mr. Gore as a long shot through much of the summer, notwithstanding the strong economy. They reversed course as he pulled ahead in the polls after the Democratic Convention in August. As it happened, the Dow started an impressive rise before the convention, gaining 7.6 percent, or almost 800 points, from July 27 through Sept. 6. With August up nicely, it looked as if the Dow was backing Mr. Gore. The Republicans, to be sure, could have picked better candidates to fight over oil. Both George W. Bush and Dick Cheney are former oil company executives who once praised rising oil prices. Mr. Gore will bash the sky-high profit margins that oil refiners now enjoy. For his part, Mr. Bush will denounce the Clinton administration as not having an effective energy policy, and that could have an effect. Like it or not, the Dow -- and the election -- may turn on whether oil prices stay high for the next six weeks.
 Gov George W Bush criticizes Vice Pres Al Gore's call to tap nation's petroleum reserves as 'bad policy' that sought 'short-term political gain at the cost of long-term national security'; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush today criticized Vice President Al Gore's call to tap the nation's petroleum reserves as ''bad policy'' that sought ''short-term political gain at the cost of long-term national security.'' On a day when high gasoline prices moved to the center of the presidential race, Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, turned to the issue repeatedly in response to Mr. Gore's proposal that oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve -- a government stockpile of nearly 600 million barrels of crude oil -- be made available to the market. Mr. Gore called it a way to bring down oil costs before winter arrived. Gov. George W. Bush today criticized Vice President Al Gore's call to tap the nation's petroleum reserves as ''bad policy'' that sought ''short-term political gain at the cost of long-term national security.'' On a day when high gasoline prices moved to the center of the presidential race, Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, turned to the issue repeatedly in response to Mr. Gore's proposal that oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve -- a government stockpile of nearly 600 million barrels of crude oil -- be made available to the market. Mr. Gore called it a way to bring down oil costs before winter arrived. Mr. Bush, who was once in the oil business, attacked the Democrat's plan as he met with employees at  Thermagon, a technology company, in a session set up to showcase Mr. Bush's proposal to shore up Social Security by diverting a portion of payroll taxes to individual investment accounts. ''The strategic reserve is an insurance policy meant for a sudden disruption of our energy supply or for war,'' Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, said. ''These reserves should not be used as an attempt to drive down oil prices right before an election.'' Mr. Bush said the Gore proposal was an example of the vice president's willingness to shift his positions on policy and pander to voters. He said Mr. Gore had resisted such a move last winter, pointing out then that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries could nullify the effects of any oil release by simply cutting back on production. ''Now that we are 47 days away from the election, he's changed his mind and is ignoring his own advice,'' Mr. Bush said. At the company and earlier in the day in an appearance on the morning television talk show ''Live With Regis,'' Mr. Bush laid the blame for high oil prices with the Clinton administration. ''It means we haven't had an energy policy in this country for a long time,'' he said. He called for a combination of big-stick diplomacy and increased domestic oil exploration. ''We need to use our strong hand in the diplomatic circles to make clear to our friends overseas that we don't want them holding our nation and our consumers hostage,'' Mr. Bush said. He also said the government should help low-income elderly people with their heating bills this winter, and should expand electric generating capacity and support hydroelectric projects. But in response to a questioner at Thermagon who favored nuclear power, Mr. Bush said he did not think Americans were ''ready for a nuclear initiative.'' In Springdale, Ark., Mr. Cheney echoed Mr. Bush's accusations and also called for more domestic oil drilling and the building of more refineries. He had particularly harsh words for the Department of Energy, saying, ''These are the same folks who are safeguarding our nuclear secrets down at Los Alamos who are responsible for our energy policy.'' Mr. Cheney said he was especially interested in allowing oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge  in Alaska, a proposal that Mr. Bush supports and that environmentalists, and Mr. Gore, fiercely oppose. The Republicans' remarks drew quick criticism from the Gore campaign. ''Of course Bush and Cheney would oppose measures to bring down the cost of oil because they're in the pocket of the oil industry,'' said Kym Spell, a campaign spokeswoman. At his appearance in Ohio, a hotly contested state, Mr. Bush received an endorsement from Elliott Roosevelt Jr., a grandson of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Democratic president who signed Social Security into law in 1935, creating one of the government's most cherished programs. Mr. Roosevelt, who has long worked in the oil and gas business in Texas, said he believed his grandfather would have approved of Mr. Bush's Social Security plan. Striking themes he has been sounding all week as he has showcased an array of policy proposals, Mr. Bush reminded his listeners that the Social Security payroll tax ''is not the government's money, it's your money.'' He presented a couple who he said would end up with a $130,000 nest egg at their retirement if they were allowed to put 2 percent of their payroll taxes into private investment accounts. Such investment, he said, ''is no longer a government program. It's somebody's portfolio. It's somebody's assets.'' Aides to Mr. Gore asserted that Mr. Bush would have to slash the remaining Social Security benefit to make the transition to private accounts. Otherwise, they said, the Bush plan would push the retirement system into insolvency even earlier than currently projected.
 Price of crude oil falls after Vice Pres Al Gore urges Pres Clinton to tap nation's oil reserves; in New York, crude oil for November delivery falls $1.24, or 3.5 percent, to $34 a barrel; graph; chart (S) CRUDE OIL FALLS. Crude oil fell after Vice President Al Gore urged President Clinton to tap the nation's emergency oil reserves. In New York, crude oil for November delivery fell $1.24, or 3.5 percent, to $34 a barrel. CRUDE OIL FALLS. Crude oil fell after Vice President Al Gore urged President Clinton to tap the nation's emergency oil reserves. In New York, crude oil for November delivery fell $1.24, or 3.5 percent, to $34 a barrel.
 Vice Pres Al Gore says that White House should release a modest amount of oil from government stockpiles to try to stabilize oil prices, move that Gov George W Bush denounces as political ploy that could endanger national security; if Clinton acts on Gore's proposal to release at least five million barrels of oil--about what United States consumes every six to nine hours--it would be first time reserve had been tapped since Persian Gulf war; energy analysts say that it will take weeks and maybe months for any savings to flow to consumers (L) Vice President Al Gore said today that the White House should release a modest amount of oil from government stockpiles to try to stabilize oil prices, a move that Gov. George W. Bush immediately denounced as a political ploy that could endanger national security. If Mr. Clinton acts on Mr. Gore's proposal to release at least five million barrels of oil -- about what the United States consumes every six to nine hours -- it would be the first time the reserve had been tapped since the Persian Gulf war. Though the amount proposed for release was  small, analysts said it could bring down crude oil prices by sending a signal that the United States could be willing to follow up with larger interventions. Vice President Al Gore said today that the White House should release a modest amount of oil from government stockpiles to try to stabilize oil prices, a move that Gov. George W. Bush immediately denounced as a political ploy that could endanger national security. If Mr. Clinton acts on Mr. Gore's proposal to release at least five million barrels of oil -- about what the United States consumes every six to nine hours -- it would be the first time the reserve had been tapped since the Persian Gulf war. Though the amount proposed for release was  small, analysts said it could bring down crude oil prices by sending a signal that the United States could be willing to follow up with larger interventions. With fuel prices rising and the winter heating season approaching, both campaigns see energy prices as a potentially potent political issue. ''Families need action now,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and there are steps that we can take right now, before winter sets in, to make heating oil affordable and to bring gasoline prices down at the pump.'' But Mr. Bush blamed the Clinton administration for the rising prices, saying, ''We haven't had an energy policy in this country for some time.'' [Page A18.] Mr. Gore's recommendation is a break with long-standing administration policy about utilizing the reserves, and it is a reversal of his own earlier recommendations, made last winter when prices were significantly lower than they are now. Mr. Clinton has been reluctant to tap into the reserves as well, noting that they were created to assure an oil supply in case of a major disruption,  brought on by a war or an embargo, rather than as a method of counteracting price increases. Nonetheless, administration officials broadly hinted today that Mr. Clinton would probably permit at least one ''test release'' of oil soon. Mr. Gore urged several such releases in his speech today. ''The thinking is that it may be worth determining how the market would react,'' one senior official said. Another official noted that when the idea was first floated at White House meetings last week, two of Mr. Gore's senior aides, including his national security adviser, Leon Fuerth, sat in the meetings. The White House apparently decided to let Mr. Gore propose the idea first, giving him public authorship of the plan. Mr. Gore's aides have regularly tried to portray Mr. Bush, a former oil company executive, and his running mate, Dick Cheney, who recently ran a company that services the oil industry, as captive of oil interests. In recent days, Mr. Gore has been seeking ways to demonstrate his concern about rising prices. Today, Mr. Summers issued a statement endorsing Mr. Gore's far more modest proposal, saying,  ''There are a number of approaches for prudent use of the strategic petroleum reserve, including those the vice president has proposed, which could be appropriate in current circumstances.'' Mr. Gore went out of his way today to portray his proposal as a grand one that would have a broad, immediate effect. ''We cannot just wait around,'' Mr. Gore said, 47 days before the presidential election, as he stood in front of oil storage tanks at a family-owned oil distribution business. ''In the face of rising prices for gasoline and home-heating oil, I support oil releases from our national strategic petroleum reserve.'' At a campaign appearance in Cleveland, Mr. Bush derided the initiative and suggested that Mr. Gore was ignoring advice from top officials of his own administration. ''The strategic reserve is an insurance policy meant for sudden disruption of oil supplies or for war,'' Mr. Bush said, adding that it ''should not be used as an attempt to drive down oil prices right before an election.'' Even so, Mr. Gore has calculated that rising costs could hurt him in  several swing states, which are heavy users of home heating oil. In interviews today, administration officials and economists outside government said that it was hard to predict how a modest increase in the supply could affect the psychology of the oil markets. But Mr. Gore's hope is that the threat of tapping the strategic reserve would have much the same effect as the threat of a currency intervention by the Federal Reserve Bank: The mere suggestion of a future willingness to act can move prices. In fact, when news of Mr. Gore's proposal reached the markets today, oil prices immediately dropped by $1.24, or 3.5 percent, to $34.20 a barrel in New York trading. Mr. Gore was vague today about exactly how much oil might be released under a system of ''swaps,'' in which oil is essentially lent to oil companies in return for a commitment from them to refill the strategic reserve next spring. He said he advocated several of the 5-million-barrel swaps, until prices stabilized. Although Mr. Gore's proposal is unlikely to bring consumer prices down before the election, President Clinton noted two days ago that there is ''still plenty of time'' to affect home heating oil prices. And that could be a potent issue in another election -- the one that pits Hillary Rodham Clinton against Rick Lazio for the New York Senate seat. Home heating oil is widely used in upstate New York. One of the strongest arguments against releasing oil from the reserves was publicly articulated earlier this year by Mr. Gore himself. Back then, as heating-oil prices rose, Mr. Gore said he was afraid that tapping into the reserve would prompt oil-producing countries to cut back on their production. ''All they would have to do is cut back a little bit on supply and they'd wipe out any impact from releasing oil from that reserve,'' Mr. Gore said in mid-February. The Gore campaign said today that circumstances had become more urgent. ''We're on the cusp of a real issue right now,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. ''People have to buy this stuff and it's at a 10-year high today. It's gone up $10 a barrel over the last couple weeks. Those are very, very high prices and for middle-class families, for working families all over the country; those prices are being passed on to them, and they're having a difficult time affording that.'' Mr. Gore used his speech today to return to his populist theme that oil companies are too powerful and are ''profiteering'' as prices rise. Mr. Gore's proposal today was part of a larger energy package that also calls for giving people up to $6,000 in tax credits to purchase more fuel-efficient cars. The Administration has proposed giving $4,000 in tax credits for the purchase of electric cars and $3,000 for hybrid cars, which use a combination of gas and electricity, at a total cost of $2 billion over five years. Mr. Gore is proposing a $6,000 credit for electric or fuel cell cars and $5,000 for hybrid cars.
 A SHOW OF SUBSTANCE -- All year, Vice President Al Gore has campaigned as the candidate of substance and detail (sometimes numbing detail), while portraying Gov. George W. Bush of Texas as fuzzy on substance and detail. Now Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, is following suit. Yesterday while visiting a computer chip plant in Florida, a major swing state, he delivered the first in a series of speeches that his aides said were designed to reinforce the image that the Democratic ticket is one of substance and detail. For 45 minutes he spoke on the ''new economy'' and the glories of high-tech training and research, and by the time he finally finished he had also touched on the uses of steam engines in the 18th century, the computing capacity of electronic gadgets like Palm Pilots and the need for the government to pay down debt to keep interest rates low. ''We are literally at what might be called the big bang stage of the information technology universe,'' he said. A SHOW OF SUBSTANCE -- All year, Vice President Al Gore has campaigned as the candidate of substance and detail (sometimes numbing detail), while portraying Gov. George W. Bush of Texas as fuzzy on substance and detail. Now Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, is following suit. Yesterday while visiting a computer chip plant in Florida, a major swing state, he delivered the first in a series of speeches that his aides said were designed to reinforce the image that the Democratic ticket is one of substance and detail. For 45 minutes he spoke on the ''new economy'' and the glories of high-tech training and research, and by the time he finally finished he had also touched on the uses of steam engines in the 18th century, the computing capacity of electronic gadgets like Palm Pilots and the need for the government to pay down debt to keep interest rates low. ''We are literally at what might be called the big bang stage of the information technology universe,'' he said. THE TRAVEL LOG -- Yesterday was the kind of day that saw Gov. George W. Bush don a blue-on-blue Regis Philbin ensemble to go ''Live With Regis,'' where he talked of strengthening Social Security and cutting taxes. It was also the kind of day that led Al Gore to suggest that Mr. Bush must have thought he was on Mr. Philbin's other show, ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' given his views on taxes and retirement money. The stats for the day: Length of the Official Day: Gore, 13 hours (6 1/2 debate preparation); Bush, 15 hours  States Visited: Gore 2, Bush 3  Towns and Cities Visited: Gore 3; Bush, 3  Events: Gore, 2; Bush 2  Press Conferences/Interviews: Gore, 0; Bush 5  Diners Visited/Unscheduled Drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush 1  Miles Jogged: Gore, 0; Bush 3  Main Message: Gore, energy independence; Bush, Social Security
 Gore Urges Tapping Into Oil Reserve  Vice President Al Gore said that the White House should release a modest amount of oil from government stockpiles to stablize oil prices, a move that Gov. George W. Bush immediately denounced as a political ploy that could endanger national security. [A1.]
 Editorial says Vice Pres Al Gore has proposed 'sensible' policy to mitigate soaring gasoline prices and anxiety in Northeast about cost of home heating fuel; charges that Gov George W Bush offers consumers 'little more than bromides' Vice President Al Gore proposed a sensible policy yesterday to mitigate soaring gasoline prices and anxiety in the Northeast about the cost of home heating fuels. Coming seven weeks before elections, Mr. Gore's proposal is, as the Bush campaign charges, patently political. But Gov. George W.  Bush offers consumers little more than bromides. Vice President Al Gore proposed a sensible policy yesterday to mitigate soaring gasoline prices and anxiety in the Northeast about the cost of home heating fuels. Coming seven weeks before elections, Mr. Gore's proposal is, as the Bush campaign charges, patently political. But Gov. George W.  Bush offers consumers little more than bromides. Mr. Gore proposes to open the reserve for ''swaps,'' a procedure that this page has already endorsed. The idea is to permit companies to remove oil from the reserve and sell it at current prices. That could put modest downward pressure on prices. But the companies would be required to return not only all the oil they remove but some extra amount, at a fixed date in the future. The reserve would thus be left larger than before the swaps took place. The only flaw in Mr. Gore's plan is timidity. He calls initially for withdrawals of only five million barrels. With swaps, the draw should be as large as needed to stabilize prices with no threat to long-term reserves. Mr. Gore also called on Congress to create a permanent reserve for home heating oil in the Northeast, a sensible long-term buffer for a vulnerable area. He proposed early release of money for a program that subsidizes the purchase of home heating oil, propane or natural gas by poor families. Mr. Bush opposes tapping the reserve. Instead he urges an energy policy that would promote oil exploration at locations including environmentally vulnerable areas of Alaska. He also proposes increased refining capacity and development of more hydroelectric power. Even if environmental risks could be eliminated, the proposal would provide no relief anytime soon. Mr. Gore's plan does.
 White House aides said they chose to come to Flint because of an innovative computer center for the disabled here, not because of an embarrassing episode involving Vice President Al Gore this month. Mr. Gore apologized to Chad Swiatecki, a local reporter who uses a wheelchair, after the journalist wrote an article saying he was unable to cover a Gore campaign event because it was not accessible to the handicapped.
 Gore Seeks Oil Release To Stabilize Prices  Vice President Al Gore said the White House should release a modest amount of oil from government stockpiles to stabilize oil prices, a move that Gov. George W. Bush denounced as a political ploy that could endanger national security.
 Oil stocks fell as UBS Warburg cut its rating of Exxon Mobil and the Clinton administration seemed to edge toward tapping the strategic reserve, an idea embraced yesterday by Vice President Al Gore.
 HAMDEN: GORE AHEAD IN STATE POLL -- Vice President Al Gore, benefiting from his selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as his running mate, leads Gov. George W. Bush by 52 to 33 percent, according to a poll released Wednesday by Quinnipiac University. The poll, which has a three percentage point margin of error, contrasts with a July poll that showed the candidates in a statistical tie. In this latest poll, two-thirds of voters interviewed said the choice of Mr. Lieberman made them think more favorably of Mr. Gore.
 This district looks Republican. Bob Dole carried it in 1996. Gov. George W. Bush has a double-digit lead in Republican polls. Eleven of the 13 state legislators are Republican.
