 Richard N Goodwin Op-Ed article recalls helping prepare John F Kennedy for first presidential debate in 1960 and advises George W Bush and Al Gore that their debate is about making votes, not making debating points or winning arguments; holds debate winner will be candidate who better conveys abilities needed to deal with problems of national concern, not who better conveys policy details; holds Bush needs to erode widespread, but only tentatively held, view that Gore is man of greater competence and command; drawing That same desire is what will animate George W. Bush and Al Gore when they face off on Tuesday in Boston: not to make debating points, win arguments or uncover contradictions, but to make votes. That is why we won't know the winner of the debate until Election Day. Columnists will express opinions, but the outcome of a debate depends on something larger -- something not susceptible to logical analysis. Still, even though there is no reason to lose a debate on the issues, there will be a winner. He will be the candidate who better conveys the abilities needed to deal with problems of national concern, not who better conveys the particulars of policy. People can evaluate these qualities. They do so in daily life. So candidates have to dissolve apprehensions already present in the public mind: that Mr. Gore is stiff, for example, or that Mr. Bush is a lightweight. The most important issue for the coming debates is whether Mr. Bush can erode the perception, widespread but only tentatively held, that Mr. Gore is a man of greater competence and command. If Mr. Bush does his homework, and if he holds his own on the dais, he may accomplish that.
 Mattel Sells the Learning Company  Mattel said it was selling the Learning Company, the educational software unit it bought for $3.6 billion in May 1999, to Gores Technology Group, a private equity buyout firm in Los Angeles, for undisclosed terms. Mattel also said it would eliminate 350 jobs and cut its dividend from 9 cents a quarter to 5 cents a year. [C3.]
 Before the murder, Mr. O'Malley said, he never much thought about hate-crime legislation, let alone felt a need for it. A registered Republican who voted for George Bush in 1992 and Bob Dole in 1996, he accepted the notion that any crime is a hate crime, so why make the distinction?
 But nobody was quite sure what it would be, in part because so much depends on the outcome of the November election, and whether the White House is occupied by Gov. George W. Bush, who opposes legalized abortion in most cases, or Vice President Al Gore, who supports abortion rights. It is not a simple solution to an unwanted pregnancy. And, these leaders said, it will work against the Clinton-Gore promise to make abortion ''safe, legal and rare.'' He added: ''I think frankly this is a trap. I'm hoping that Mr. Bush will avoid the trap. I think his statement was good, I think what's needed is medical evidence to make sure we don't damage American women.'' Some in the anti-abortion movement disagreed that Mr. Bush's careful statement -- saying he thought the F.D.A.'s decision was wrong but stopping short of promising its reversal -- was the right approach. But after eight long years without an ally in the White House, social conservatives have given Mr. Bush considerable running room this year in his bid for the center, which includes many women who support legalized abortion.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, using Houston oil refinery as backdrop, scores Gov George W Bush's environmental record in Texas and his proposal to allow oil drilling in Alaska wilderness; displays his talent for making attacks that do not come across as attacks; photo (M) Senator Joseph I. Lieberman came here today to deliver a blistering assault on Gov. George W. Bush's environmental record, depicting him as hellbent on ravaging the Alaskan wilderness, and Texas as choking in smog. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman came here today to deliver a blistering assault on Gov. George W. Bush's environmental record, depicting him as hellbent on ravaging the Alaskan wilderness, and Texas as choking in smog. In fact, Mr. Cobarruvias and 150 others, standing in a forlorn little park in the shadow of an oil refinery, had just heard Mr. Lieberman attack Mr. Bush and belittle Texas for a full 20 minutes. He derided Mr. Bush's program that emphasizes self-policing by industrial polluters, and said the governor's proposal to drill for oil in an Alaskan wilderness ''would cause irreversible damage to one of God's most awesome creations.'' Critiques of Mr. Bush's policies are a regular part of Mr. Lieberman's pitch, in keeping with the traditional role of the No. 2 man on the ticket, going on the offensive while the presidential candidate tries to float above the fray. He routinely says that Mr. Bush would wreck the economy, return the government to deficits and endanger Medicare; that his record on children's health care in Texas has been disastrous; and that the Republican nominee's promises are hollow because he cannot pay for them. Mr. Lieberman often delivers barbs that his running mate, Vice President Al Gore, avoids, as when he suggested that Mr. Bush was evading debates and coddling the oil industry. ''Governor Bush and Dick Cheney, as you know, have spent most of their professional lives in the oil business,'' Mr. Lieberman said today. ''In fact, within the last 48 hours, I gather that Dick Cheney attended a fund-raiser mostly among oil executives that raised $8 million. That's an awful lot of $2-a-gallon gasoline.'' Where Mr. Cheney, who has taken the lead in attacking Mr. Gore, comes across as reserved on the stump, even dour, the main impression Mr. Lieberman leaves is that he is enjoying himself. Even on the offensive, his relaxed tone never varies, his voice never rises, no hint of distaste crosses his face. And even Mr. Lieberman's recent, more charged remarks have lacked the sharp, sometimes personal, edges wielded by some other vice-presidential nominees, in a long, bloody, bipartisan tradition. Last week, for example, Mr. Cheney charged that Mr. Gore ''simply makes some things up out of whole cloth.'' In 1988, Senator Dan Quayle said of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, ''He's taken off his Halloween mask'' and ''exposed'' himself as a liberal, while Senator Lloyd Bentsen called Vice President George Bush's campaign ''a carnival sideshow of nonsense and negativism.'' Eight years earlier, Vice President Walter F. Mondale said, ''At least when Ronald Reagan rode off in the movies into the fiery sunset, he didn't take us with him'' -- a not-so-subtle play on fears that Mr. Reagan would drag the country into war, while George Bush accused President Jimmy Carter of ''inciting hatred and division among Americans'' by running a ''low road, hatchet road'' campaign. This campaign does not appear to have dented Mr. Lieberman's positive image, much to the frustration of the Bush campaign, which has accused him of hypocrisy in assuming the mantle of bipartisanship while going on the attack. His aides say Mr. Lieberman can pull it off because he sticks to substance, and his criticisms are well grounded. The candidate himself suggests as much, saying repeatedly, as he did last week at a rally in Fresno, Calif., ''Al Gore and I are not going to say a negative personal word about our opponents, but we are going to talk about their policies and where they're wrong.'' Actually, she just had. Mr. Lieberman had sought at some length to tear apart, piece by piece, the Bush and Cheney plans for Medicare. ''Their plan is not a real plan, it's a real problem for real people and particularly for real seniors,'' Mr. Lieberman had said, mocking Mr. Bush's campaign slogan ''Real plans for real people.'' ''America deserves, Al Gore and I believe, better than a plan that takes the care out of Medicare, and the trust out of the Medicare trust fund,'' Mr. Lieberman said. As disputes have arisen in this contest, the harshest words out of the Democratic camp have often come from Mr. Lieberman -- a pattern repeated in today's responses to Mr. Bush's energy plan. Mr. Gore has said little publicly about Republican criticism over the last week that the Democrats should not raise money from the entertainment industry while attacking it. But last week, Mr. Lieberman said the attacks smacked of desperation by a losing campaign, noting that while he and Mr. Gore had a plan to address violence and vulgarity in popular culture, the Republicans did not. ''I'm looking forward to the day when I see George Bush and Dick Cheney stand up to their friends in the oil industry,'' he added, ''or stand up to the tobacco industry or the N.R.A.'' Earlier this month, when Mr. Bush balked at the proposed presidential debates, Mr. Lieberman implied that Mr. Bush was afraid of facing Mr. Gore on national television, and he likened the governor's stance to a football team trying to change the location and rules of the Super Bowl just before the game. Mr. Bush eventually agreed to the debates, though with some changes in format. In the last week, Mr. Lieberman has taken to poking fun at the many slogans Mr. Bush has used. ''He says that we should leave no child behind,'' Mr. Lieberman said in Albuquerque. ''But I am sad to say that in Texas, the fact is that he has left more than one million children who need health insurance behind. That's Governor Bush's real record, what that real record has meant to real people, real children, in the state of Texas.''
 CBS STATIONS EXPAND COVERAGE -- Starting on Monday, 17 CBS television stations, including WCBS in New York and KCBS in Los Angeles, will devote five minutes each night to political coverage on their news programs, the network announced. In making the decision, CBS joined broadcasters like the Belo Corporation., Hearst Argyle Television and Bloomberg Business News in accepting the recommendation of a presidential commission that local stations set aside five minutes for political discourse each night in the 30 days before an election. CBS Television, whose president, Leslie Moonves, was a commission chairman, became the first major network to involve its stations. Under the plan, the network said, each station will produce five-minute segments each night from 5 p.m. to 11:35 p.m. that concentrate on local and national elections. In addition, the network has invited Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush to appear on the ''CBS Evening News'' for one-on-one interviews on election eve. CHENEY ON COMEDY TRAIL -- Joseph I. Lieberman isn't the only candidate trying out a comedy routine. Dick Cheney offered up some jokes this week. ''Putting Al Gore in charge of campaign finance reform,'' Mr. Cheney told Republican senators and contributors at the Senate Majority Dinner, ''is a lot like putting Bill Clinton in charge of abstinence.'' Then he turned to oil. ''The vice president, lately, has especially gotten worked up about gasoline prices,'' he said. ''It bothered him to hear the other day that some people are having to pay more than two dollars a gallon. But he really got mad when he found out his dog is getting it for only a buck.'' Judging from the laughs, the crowd had followed the twists and turns of Mr. Gore, prescription drugs, his mother-in-law and his dog Shiloh. The candidates ended the week with a debate about about how best to deal with high energy prices. But that debate was conducted across hundreds of miles. In a few days they will be standing side by side in Boston for the first of three debates. And this weekend, both will be practicing at their respective debate camps. Vice President Al Gore heads to Sarasota, Fla., with 13 ''regular folks'' in tow to watch him face off against an aide, Paul Begala, flashing a George W. Bush smile and Texas drawl, while Governor Bush will square off with his surrogate rival, Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, at the Bush ranch outside Crawford, Tex. Length of the Official Day: Gore, 11 1/2 hours; Bush, 11 1/2 hours  States Visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 2  Events: Gore, 1; Bush, 1  Press Conferences/Press Availability: Gore, 0; Bush, 0  Press Interviews (Includes Newspaper and TV Interviews): Gore, 4; Bush, 3  Diners visited/unscheduled drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush, 0  Debate preparation: Gore, 1 hour; Bush 4 hours  Debate Camp: Gore, Sarasota, Fla.; Bush, Crawford, Tex.  Main message: Gore, environment; Bush, energy independence
 Mr. Kirk, who won a hotly contested 10-way primary, is distancing himself from Gov. George W. Bush, his party's nominee for president, whom polls show losing ground in Illinois.
 Appearing on ''Oprah'' gave George W. Bush and Al Gore the chance to reach out to the oh-so-important-but-only-at-election-time women's vote. Only during campaign season do you hear this many pundits and politicians talking about the ''power of women.'' Especially about the power of black women. Our 15 minutes are here -- we'd better grab them before it's lights out until 2004. Appearing on ''Oprah'' gave George W. Bush and Al Gore the chance to reach out to the oh-so-important-but-only-at-election-time women's vote. Only during campaign season do you hear this many pundits and politicians talking about the ''power of women.'' Especially about the power of black women. Our 15 minutes are here -- we'd better grab them before it's lights out until 2004. But if Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore want to capitalize on this, they must focus on developing trust. Only 9 percent of black women in the survey agreed that ''most people who run for office are committed to what they think is right,'' compared with 17 percent for white women and 20 percent of all respondents. Black women also said they see little difference between Republicans and Democrats once they're in office. Come time for governing, they said, compromises too often come at the expense of what is important to black women. The message for Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush? Concentrate on a greater good that includes black women. Starting with Oprah is great. Just don't end there.
 Senator Joseph I. Lieberman has a rare talent for making harsh attacks that do not come across as attacks. He has stepped up criticism of Gov. George W. Bush, but he often sounds less like a politician than like a neighbor sharing a troubling bit of gossip. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman has a rare talent for making harsh attacks that do not come across as attacks. He has stepped up criticism of Gov. George W. Bush, but he often sounds less like a politician than like a neighbor sharing a troubling bit of gossip.
 Gov George W Bush proposes wide-ranging $7.1 billion 10-year energy plan to curb rising oil and gas prices and limit nation's vulnerability to international oil market, speech, Saginaw, Mich; calls for more domestic fuel output, better ties with foreign oil suppliers and opening Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for drilling; also proposes incentives for developing alternative energy sources and clean-burning fuels; charges Clinton administration and Vice Pres Al Gore failed to develop energy policy, forcing them to release oil from strategic reserves; Gore and running mate, Sen Joseph I Lieberman, rearrange schedules to deliver own remarks on energy and environment; environmentalists reject Bush's stand that limited oil exploration in Arctic refuge can be done in environmentally sensitive way; excerpt from Bush speech; table of candidates' energy proposals; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush outlined a wide-ranging energy plan today that called for more domestic fuel production, better relations with foreign oil suppliers and opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for drilling, all of which he framed as potential remedies for rising oil and gas prices. Mr. Bush said the plan, which also included incentives for developing alternative energy sources and clean-burning fuels, reflected his determination to limit the country's vulnerability to the international oil market and to avert escalating prices and energy shortages. Gov. George W. Bush outlined a wide-ranging energy plan today that called for more domestic fuel production, better relations with foreign oil suppliers and opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for drilling, all of which he framed as potential remedies for rising oil and gas prices. Mr. Bush said the plan, which also included incentives for developing alternative energy sources and clean-burning fuels, reflected his determination to limit the country's vulnerability to the international oil market and to avert escalating prices and energy shortages. But it also gave Mr. Bush, the Texas governor, an opportunity to attack Vice President Al Gore on the heels of Mr. Gore's call last week for the release of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Mr. Bush characterized this step, which President Clinton indeed took, as proof of how shortsighted the Clinton administration had been. ''They have had seven and a half years to develop a sound energy policy,'' Mr. Bush said. ''They have had every chance to avoid the situation that confronts us today. And now they have nothing but excuses, bad ideas and -- as the clock runs out -- one last ploy.'' In a sign of the issue's sudden potency, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, rearranged their schedules so they could deliver their own remarks on energy and the environment. Both said Mr. Bush's plans for the Arctic refuge would cause irreversible environmental damage. [Page A13.] The political cross-fire was intense. Mr. Bush, in a speech to workers at a plant here that produces machinery for car manufacturers, cast Mr. Gore as a liberal extremist -- and a slightly loopy one at that. The terms he used were tailored to Michigan, a swing state economically dependent on the automobile industry. ''The administration seems never to have concerned itself with the domestic energy supply, except to tax, regulate and therefore diminish it,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The vice president likes electric cars -- he just doesn't like making electricity. In speeches, he calls autoworkers his friends. In his book, he declares the engines they make an enemy.'' Although Mr. Bush had drawn the contours of his positions on energy issues before, he filled them in with new details today, and he put the price of his proposals at $7.1 billion over 10 years. Of Mr. Bush's proposals, the most contentious is the opening of the Arctic refuge, about 19 million acres of wilderness in northeast Alaska that is home to caribou, bears, musk oxen and migratory birds. Mr. Bush specified that he wanted to allow oil exploration in only 8 percent of this federally owned land and insisted it could be done in an environmentally sensitive manner. Mr. Bush also said he would instruct the Department of Energy to identify other federal lands that could be opened to oil and natural gas exploration, which many environmentalists also oppose. Mr. Bush repeatedly alluded today to the administration's move to release 30 million barrels of oil from the strategic reserve, a resource usually seen as a fallback during times of war or major supply disruptions. Mr. Bush called the current release ''a calculated political move'' and noted its timing ''just weeks before an election.'' ''This administration tries to take credit for our economy,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But they seem too have forgotten what makes it run. Even today -- in our new, high-tech economy -- America runs on oil and gas and coal gained from the earth and water held behind our dams.'' Continuing a weeklong effort to wrest the issue of prosperity from Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush warned that the absence of a comprehensive energy plan, which he said the Clinton administration had never developed, was an invitation to economic gloom. ''Our nation has had three recessions in the last generation,'' Mr. Bush said, ''and each one was tied to an energy shock.'' His plan also contained an array of other proposals intended to please a variety of constituencies. Mr. Bush called for an additional $1 billion over 10 years for the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, which helps low-income people with their heating and cooling costs. He also called for $1.4 billion over 10 years in additional federal financing for federal and state programs that encourage energy conservation. Expressing a concern for clean air, Mr. Bush proposed an investment of $2 billion over 10 years for research into ''clean coal'' technologies; tax credits of $1.4 billion over 10 years for companies that produced electricity from renewable and alternative fuels, and legislation requiring electric utilities to reduce harmful emissions. Mr. Bush said he would channel the billions of dollars the federal government would receive from the oil companies that went into the Arctic refuge toward land conservation efforts and research into alternative energy resources. One advocacy group, Environmental Defense, even while voicing opposition to drilling in the Arctic refuge, praised Mr. Bush for suggesting steps to cut down on pollution. Mr. Bush also sought to tailor his plans to the high-tech world. He said  the equipment needed to power the Internet consumes 8 percent of all the electricity produced in the United States, and he pledged to promote the production of more electricity to meet that demand. Democrats have characterized both Mr. Bush, a former oilman in Texas, and his running mate, Dick Cheney, the former chief executive of the world's largest oil-fields services company, as pawns of the oil industry. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, charged today that portions of Mr. Bush's plan were ''of big oil, by big oil and for big oil.'' And part of what Mr. Bush was trying to accomplish today was the portrayal of his and Mr. Cheney's professional backgrounds in a positive light. When Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, introduced him to the crowd in Saginaw, she said that because he had grown up in Midland, Tex., and later worked in the oil business there, he had an especially keen understanding of the energy industry.
 Mattel is selling Learning Co, its educational software unit, to Gores Technology Group; will cut about 350 jobs at its headquarters and reduce its dividend from quarterly 9 cents a share to annual 5 cents a share (S) Mattel Inc. said yesterday that it was selling the Learning Company, its educational software unit, to the Gores Technology Group, a private equity buyout firm based in Los Angeles. Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but Mattel said it would take an after-tax loss from discontinued operations of about $430 million. Mattel paid $3.6 billion for the Learning Company in May 1999. The move was meant to broaden Mattel's reach, but instead it contributed to huge losses, a steep drop in the company's stock and the resignation of Jill Barad as chief executive. Mattel also said yesterday that it would cut about 350 jobs at its headquarters and reduce its dividend from a quarterly 9 cents a share to an annual 5 cents a share. Mattel Inc. said yesterday that it was selling the Learning Company, its educational software unit, to the Gores Technology Group, a private equity buyout firm based in Los Angeles. Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but Mattel said it would take an after-tax loss from discontinued operations of about $430 million. Mattel paid $3.6 billion for the Learning Company in May 1999. The move was meant to broaden Mattel's reach, but instead it contributed to huge losses, a steep drop in the company's stock and the resignation of Jill Barad as chief executive. Mattel also said yesterday that it would cut about 350 jobs at its headquarters and reduce its dividend from a quarterly 9 cents a share to an annual 5 cents a share.
 After some prominent Christian conservatives grumbled about Gov. George W. Bush's decision to skip the Christian Coalition's annual conference this weekend, the Bush campaign reversed itself today and announced that the governor would address the convention by videotape on Saturday. The announcement of Mr. Bush's change of heart came after Pat Robertson, the Christian Coalition chairman and founder, had complained earlier this week, and again today, that Mr. Bush was ''taking a risk'' by not speaking before the group. After some prominent Christian conservatives grumbled about Gov. George W. Bush's decision to skip the Christian Coalition's annual conference this weekend, the Bush campaign reversed itself today and announced that the governor would address the convention by videotape on Saturday. The announcement of Mr. Bush's change of heart came after Pat Robertson, the Christian Coalition chairman and founder, had complained earlier this week, and again today, that Mr. Bush was ''taking a risk'' by not speaking before the group. Responding to questions about whether Mr. Bush, who has tried to avoid being labeled as too conservative, was trying to distance himself from the evangelical organization, Mr. Robertson replied, ''He's not distancing himself, but he's taking a risk. He thinks that he has the Christian base all locked up.'' Asked if he thought that Mr. Bush indeed had the Christian conservative vote in hand, Mr. Robertson smiled and said, ''We'll find out the first week of November.'' Mr. Robertson's remarks echoed concerns he raised when aides to Mr. Bush said he would not attend the convention because he would be preparing for the debate with Vice President Al Gore next week. The Christian Coalition has been considered a powerful ally of the Republican Party and its presidential nominees since it was created in 1989. In 1992, President George Bush  spoke before the group. In 1996, Bob Dole made a surprise appearance at the conference -- though only after coming under sharp criticism for initially turning down an invitation. There was little doubt in the convention hall today that Mr. Bush had the group's overwhelming support. The featured speakers included most of the Republican Congressional leadership, all of whom promoted Mr. Bush's campaign agenda. Lynne Cheney, wife of Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, used her afternoon speech to challenge the honesty of Vice President Al Gore.  Mrs. Cheney accused the Democrats of duplicity for criticizing the entertainment industry for marketing adult materials to children, and then accepting its campaign contributions, and of trying to mislead voters about their views on abortion. Most of the speakers warned that a Democratic president would appoint federal judges that would tolerate abortion rights. But to an unusual degree, many of the speakers avoided the kind of heated words on contentious social issues that had typified past conventions. That is in keeping with the tone of Mr. Bush's campaign, which has focused on education and economic issues. Many people here said that they would like to hear Mr. Bush talk more about his opposition to abortion, as well as other moral issues. But most said they understood that he might have to minimize those views to win centrist voters.
 Bush Energy Plan Favors More Domestic Exploration  Gov. George W. Bush, saying the Clinton administration has been shortsighted, outlined a broad energy plan that calls for more domestic fuel production, better relations with foreign suppliers and the opening of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for drilling, all of which he framed as potential remedies for rising oil and gas prices. He also offered incentives for developing alternative energy sources and clean-burning fuels. The Bush campaign reversed a decision to bypass the Christian Coalition's conference, saying he would address it by videotape today. Gore Sees Danger in Bush Plan  Vice President Al Gore criticized the Bush proposal to open Alaska's protected wilderness to oil drilling, saying it would bring ''decades of environmental damage to reap just a few months of increased oil supply.'' Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, went to Texas to deliver a blistering assault on Governor Bush's environmental record, depicting Texas as choking in smog and Mr. Bush as bent on ravaging the Alaskan wilderness for oil.
 Already, abortion opponents are looking for ways to limit mifepristone use. Gov. George W. Bush has criticized the F.D.A.'s action as ''wrong,'' and his spokesman says he would order a review of the F.D.A.'s decision. Representative Tom Coburn of Oklahoma will introduce legislation to limit the use of the drug to doctors who currently perform surgical abortions, thus depriving women of easier access. He may also include in his bill a requirement for a registry of those dispensing the drug, which could make doctors targets for anti-abortion harassment.
 While both the Bush and Gore campaigns said they welcomed any decision that increased viewership of the forum, some groups that monitor television coverage of politics said that NBC's making the debate optional was distressing. (The debate was always to be carried on the network's cable outlet, MSNBC.) NBC figured prominently in the debate negotiations earlier this month, when Mr. Bush announced his proposal for a series of forums as an alternative to the debates organized by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. One of Mr. Bush's proposed debates was to have occurred on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' but the Bush campaign eventually abandoned the idea.
 Gustav Niebuhr Religion Journal discusses Vice President Al Gore's selection of Senator Joseph I Lieberman as running mate; Rabbi Norman Lamm, president of Yeshiva University, and Rabbi Ismar Schorsch, chancellor of Jewish Theological Seminary, offer thoughts on how Lieberman's new status might be incorporated into sermons for upcoming Jewish High Holy Days (M) When Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, chose Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, the decision made history, as Mr. Lieberman became the first Jew on a major party presidential ticket. When Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, chose Senator Joseph I. Lieberman as his running mate, the decision made history, as Mr. Lieberman became the first Jew on a major party presidential ticket. Even when these suggestions are taken into account, it is possible that one of the more resonant statements about Mr. Lieberman's nomination has already been made -- and by a non-Jew. It happened after the news broke that Mr. Lieberman was to be Mr. Gore's running mate.
 For if Mr. Milosevic is removed from power, as now seems more likely than at any time in the last decade, the last major obstacle to a Europe of democracies and market economies from the Atlantic to the Urals would disappear. Such liberty, for the whole continent, would be unprecedented, and would effectively achieve what former President George Bush called ''a Europe whole and free.''
 Anthony Lewis Op-Ed column scores view of Gov George W Bush and his foreign policy advisers that United States troops should not be used to stop genocide and ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, Kosovo and other places unless US strategic interests are involved (M)/ When Slobodan Milosevic's forces ravaged Croatia in 1991, and then began their campaign of genocide in Bosnia, President Bush decided that the United States would do nothing meaningful to stop him. It was one of the most shameful episodes in the history of American foreign policy. If George W. Bush is elected president, the indications are that he would follow his father's example. That appears from his own words and the views of those who would advise him. When Slobodan Milosevic's forces ravaged Croatia in 1991, and then began their campaign of genocide in Bosnia, President Bush decided that the United States would do nothing meaningful to stop him. It was one of the most shameful episodes in the history of American foreign policy. If George W. Bush is elected president, the indications are that he would follow his father's example. That appears from his own words and the views of those who would advise him. ''We should not send our troops to stop ethnic cleansing and genocide in nations outside our strategic interest,'' Governor Bush said earlier this year. Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's campaign adviser on foreign policy, won applause at the Republican Convention when she said: ''America's armed forces are not a global police force. They are not the world's 911.'' But the key figure is Gen. Colin Powell, the almost certain Bush choice for secretary of state. I am a great admirer of General Powell -- but not of what has come to be called the Powell Doctrine. It is that American soldiers should not be used abroad except in overwhelming force when fundamental U.S. strategic interests are threatened. The consequences of U.S. inaction through the Bush and early Clinton years were terrible. Hundreds of thousands of Bosnians were killed or forced to flee. In the end, shamed by the mass murder of Bosnians in Srebrenica, the U.S. negotiated the Dayton accords and sent forces to help police them -- under much less favorable conditions than would have existed years before. The premise of President Bush's decision to ignore the Milosevic aggression when it began in 1991 was that it was a European problem and should be handled by our European allies. But the Europeans will not act without American leadership, as events proved. The same thinking is evident now in the Bush campaign. Dick Cheney, the vice-presidential nominee, said last month that it was time to consider recalling our ground troops from Bosnia and Kosovo, leaving the job to the Europeans. If we followed that course, the situation in both territories would quickly unravel. Genocide in Bosnia does not engage our strategic interests as would, say, a threat to our supply of oil. When those two oil men, George W. Bush and Dick Cheney, talk about the vital interests that alone would justify the use of American forces abroad, they may well be thinking precisely of oil. The odd thing is that Governor Bush and his campaign colleagues talk with great emphasis about the need to build up our armed forces. To do what? And there is another consideration that makes the inclinations of George W. Bush unrealistic. Americans do not like to see mass cruelties ignored by the one country that can stop them. Perhaps that is why President Bush, when he and Brent Scocroft published a book on his foreign-policy record, did not even mention Bosnia.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, visiting Audubon Naturalist Society, Chevy Chase, Md, scores Gov George W Bush's proposal to open Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling; defends his call to use oil from government strategic reserves to try to stabilize prices; photo (M) refinery; cites past ties of Bush and Dick Cheney to oil industry; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore today sharply criticized his opponent's proposal to open Alaska's protected wilderness to oil drilling, saying it would bring ''decades of environmental damage to reap just a few months of increased oil supply.'' Mr. Gore delivered his stinging critique from the wooded 40-acre grounds of the Audubon Naturalist Society, soon after Gov. George W. Bush unveiled a $7.1 billion energy plan in Michigan. Vice President Al Gore today sharply criticized his opponent's proposal to open Alaska's protected wilderness to oil drilling, saying it would bring ''decades of environmental damage to reap just a few months of increased oil supply.'' Mr. Gore delivered his stinging critique from the wooded 40-acre grounds of the Audubon Naturalist Society, soon after Gov. George W. Bush unveiled a $7.1 billion energy plan in Michigan. Eager for a face-off with the Republicans over oil and the environment, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, changed their schedules today to react to Mr. Bush's plan. Mr. Lieberman even journeyed to Houston, to attack Mr. Bush's environmental record in his home state. From a lectern set up in a glade on a glorious fall day, Mr. Gore called the 19-million-acre Arctic National Wildlife Refuge one of the nation's ''greatest treasures'' and said that allowing oil drilling on its coastal plain would be ''bad environmental policy and bad energy policy.'' Mr. Gore called the preserve a ''fragile'' area and said, ''It would take years and years of development, which would cause decades of environmental damage, to reap just a few months of increased oil supply. I oppose it.'' He defended his call last week to use oil from government strategic reserves to try to stabilize oil prices. A day after Mr. Gore made his proposal, President Clinton ordered the release of 30 million barrels of oil, prompting charges from Mr. Bush that the nation's national security was being jeopardized for short-term political gain. Mr. Gore, who had spoken out against tapping the oil reserve over the winter when oil prices were lower than they are now, defended his recommendation as an example of the kind of leadership needed to be steward of the strong economy. ''We don't have to build our lives around a fuel source that is distant, uncertain and too easily manipulated,'' said Mr. Gore, who has long been interested in environmental issues. He called for investments in light rail and mass transit, in the development of cleaner cars and in new energy technologies. ''To me the refinery behind us represents, unfortunately, what Governor Bush has done for the air and water in the state of Texas,'' the Connecticut senator said. ''No child in America should be forced to play in a park like this with air that is hard to breathe.'' He pointed to the past ties of Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, to the oil industry, as well as Mr. Cheney's recent attendance at an $8 million fund-raiser that drew oil company executives. And he pointed to Houston's standing as the nation's smog capital. The city had 38 days this year in which smog levels exceeded federal standards, and the Environmental Protection Agency is threatening sanctions. Mr. Lieberman added, ''I want to ask the American people to ask themselves, 'Does Governor Bush now want to do for America's environment what he's done here in Texas?' ''
 ''A problem for Lazio is what is going on at the top of the ticket with Vice President Al Gore,'' said Larry Hugick, vice president of Princeton Survey Research Associates in Princeton, N.J. ''If Gore is really as far ahead in New York as he seems, and it stays that way, it is going to be hard for Lazio. He is getting crossover votes now, but he needs a lot more.''
