 A chart yesterday showing the effect of the presidential candidates' tax plans on 12 hypothetical individuals and families misstated the taxes for one case -- a single parent with three children and an annual income of $29,000. That family would be due a rebate of $1,210 under current law, $2,218 under the Bush plan and $3,462 under the Gore plan; it would not owe those amounts. The chart also labeled one case incorrectly. The family that would save $2,322 under the Bush plan and $1,038 under the Gore plan was a working couple with three children and an annual income of $39,000 -- not two children and an income of $39,000. A chart yesterday showing the effect of the presidential candidates' tax plans on 12 hypothetical individuals and families misstated the taxes for one case -- a single parent with three children and an annual income of $29,000. That family would be due a rebate of $1,210 under current law, $2,218 under the Bush plan and $3,462 under the Gore plan; it would not owe those amounts. The chart also labeled one case incorrectly. The family that would save $2,322 under the Bush plan and $1,038 under the Gore plan was a working couple with three children and an annual income of $39,000 -- not two children and an income of $39,000.
 Florida has been a battleground in the debate over vouchers. Last year, with the support of Gov. Jeb Bush, a Republican, the Legislature enacted a voucher law that provided private school tuition payments in the worst-performing schools. But, the next day, a group of parents and teachers' unions sued, arguing that the law was unconstitutional. In Tallahassee today, Governor Bush said he was gratified by the court's decision. ''Nothing in Florida's Constitution prohibits the state from allowing the use of public funds for private school education,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Particularly when used to help children trapped in chronically failing schools.''
 Ms. Tanden went to the University of California in Los Angeles and became involved in politics on the Dukakis campaign, where she met her husband, Ben Edwards, an artist. After graduating from Yale Law School in 1996, she worked on the Clinton-Gore presidential campaign in California. She went to the White House, first in the press department, then as an aide in the domestic policy office. In the wake of the Columbine massacre, she worked closely with Mrs. Clinton on school safety issues. ''I think after that she saw I could handle stress.''
 Analysis of presidential debate holds both Republicans and Democrats had some reason for satisfaction; notes both Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore target small segment of undecided voters in Pennsylvania and some 5 other key states; Pennsylvania politicians comment on debate's outcome (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas set out to show that he is a plausible, knowledgeable candidate for the presidency, not the political novice, as deep as a birdbath, that his detractors describe. Vice President Al Gore set out to demonstrate that he is neither an attack dog nor a robot, as some who dislike him suggest.  And both worked hard to convince the crucial undecided voters that their programs on education, on taxes and on medical care merit support. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas set out to show that he is a plausible, knowledgeable candidate for the presidency, not the political novice, as deep as a birdbath, that his detractors describe. Vice President Al Gore set out to demonstrate that he is neither an attack dog nor a robot, as some who dislike him suggest.  And both worked hard to convince the crucial undecided voters that their programs on education, on taxes and on medical care merit support. When it was over, both the Republican and the Democrat had some reason for satisfaction. Amid a welter of conflicting claims and numbers, Mr. Bush had managed to paint Mr. Gore as a Washington insider who would ''increase the size of government substantially,'' and Mr. Gore had tarred the Texan as an advocate of using the federal budget surplus to ''enrich the few, the wealthiest 1 percent.'' Mr. Bush chose a family from Allentown to illustrate how his tax plan and Mr. Gore's would work out. ''I didn't think the debate changed anything fundamental,'' said Drew Lewis, a prominent Pennsylvania Republican who served as transportation secretary in the Reagan administration. ''If I had to pick a winner, I'd flip a coin. I thought Gore made a very strong point on that 1 percent, but at the same time I was pleasantly surprised by how well Bush handled his material. He wasn't overwhelmed at all.'' Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, also a Republican, said rin an interview that he was struck by the contrast in debating styles. Although Mr. Gore spoke more extensively than Mr. Bush, Mr. Ridge said, ''he sounded as if he was lecturing the country, tutoring it, and Bush was conducting a personal conversation with the voters.'' Neil Oxman of Philadelphia, a leading Democratic political consultant, gave the nod to Mr. Gore on points, saying there had been no knockouts. Although he thought the vice president's command of the issues had been superior, he said Mr. Bush had done well enough. After watching the debate, Mr. Oxman added, ''I don't think that people would think, 'Geez, that guy knows absolutely nothing.' '' A Democratic veteran of many campaigns, former Mayor Pete Flaherty of Pittsburgh, said both candidates had spent too much time niggling over details. He said Mr. Bush had looked a bit out of his depth on the Balkans, but credited the governor with an effective rejoinder to the charge that he favors the rich in noting that Mr. Gore's tax plan would save the middle-class Strunks of Allentown $145 and his own would save them $1,800. Neither man committed an obvious gaffe; Mr. Bush avoided stumbling over his own syntax or comically mispronouncing words as he had in the past. Clearly less fluent than the vice president, he hesitated at times and gave incomplete replies at others, but on occasion he seemed more spontaneous and less programmed than Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush attacked more directly, accusing his rival of making ''totally false'' statements about his health care proposals, using ''fuzzy math'' and ''phony numbers,'' and ''running on Medi scare.'' More money has been spent on the presidential race so far in Pennsylvania than in any other state -- in excess of $21 million, one study indicates. The contest here is close, according to the polls, but not so close as in some other states. While they insist that Pennsylvania's 23 electoral votes are still in play, important Bush backers here concede that winning them will probably be harder for the governor than winning Ohio, Michigan or Wisconsin. Still, in Pennsylvania as elsewhere, there is a discrepancy between polls. A survey taken last Tuesday through Thursday for The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette showed Mr. Gore up by only four percentage points, 45 to 41, while a new Keystone Poll, taken Thursday through Sunday for a group of media clients in the state, showed him ahead by 12 points, 49 to 37. The director of the Keystone Poll, Bernard Yost of Millersville University, said it showed that voters here ''really do question Bush's intellect.'' This much, at least, is evident: On Wednesday, both candidates will resume their courtship of the swing states. Mr. Bush is to appear in West Chester, Pa., which lies in pivotal Chester County, just west of Philadelphia, and in Columbus, Ohio. On Thursday he will be in Michigan. Mr. Gore will campaign in Ohio on Wednesday and in Michigan on Thursday. Mr. Bush was especially careful tonight when dealing with abortion, a highly divisive issue in Pennsylvania. He made clear his opposition to abortion, but he declined to say either that he would seek as president to reverse the Food and Drug Administration's approval of RU-486, the abortion pill, or that he would nominate opponents of Roe v. Wade to the Supreme Court. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE CONTEXT  Correction:  October 5, 2000, Thursday  A news analysis article yesterday about the performances of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in their first debate referred imprecisely in some copies to a criticism of the candidates. The observation that they took ''too much time niggling over details'' was a paraphrase of comments by former Mayor Pete Flaherty of Pittsburgh, not a quotation. In some copies the article misstated the location of West Chester, Pa., where Mr. Bush campaigned yesterday. It is in Chester County, not Montgomery. A news analysis article yesterday about the performances of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in their first debate referred imprecisely in some copies to a criticism of the candidates. The observation that they took ''too much time niggling over details'' was a paraphrase of comments by former Mayor Pete Flaherty of Pittsburgh, not a quotation. In some copies the article misstated the location of West Chester, Pa., where Mr. Bush campaigned yesterday. It is in Chester County, not Montgomery.
 Mr. Cunneen promises to ''resist George Bush's temptation to cut taxes too much and Al Gore's temptation to spend the surplus.'' He says he wants ''government out of the boardroom and out of the bedroom.''
 UNITED STATIONERS, Des Plaines, Ill., named Eileen A. Kamerick as executive vice president and chief financial officer. She succeeds Daniel H. Bushell who resigned in March.
 When it was over, her vote was still in balance, but Vice President Al Gore impressed her more than did Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''I'm still undecided because my Republican thing is all about fiscal responsibility,'' she said. ''But Gore seemed to understand the issues better than Bush. Bush obviously understands the business person and the wealthy.'' She thought the debate was civil, devoid of gotchas or zingers, though she was mildly annoyed at Mr. Bush's repeated use of the phrase ''fuzzy math'' to describe Mr. Gore's criticisms. ''Both of them were doing some fuzzy math,'' she said. ''But Gore was better at articulating what he would do.'' When Mr. Bush talked about the need for  children ''to read and write, add and subtract,'' she said to the screen, ''It's way more complicated than that.'' ''Gore seems to be way better than Bush on education,'' Mrs. Rudolf said. ''He seems to know his facts. Bush doesn't seem to understand the specifics of the issue.'' An accountant who is staying home to rear her children, whose husband, Matt Rudolf, helps to run an investment and stock brokerage firm in Seattle, Mrs. Rudolf is well-versed on the tax code. Her response to Mr. Bush's answers on tax cuts was generally positive. ''Gore won,'' said Cammie, ''because he supported his arguments and he trapped Bush more than Bush trapped him.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush present starkly different stands on wide range of issues in their first presidential debate; Gore repeatedly casts Bush as friend of the rich; Bush upbraids Gore as Washington insider with big promises and few accomplishments; neither candidate mentions Pres Clinton; both try to show good humor throughout debate; Bush, addressing criticism that he is unprepared for presidency, cites his experience as governor; Bush's muted response to questions about his opposition to abortion make it clear he, like Gore, makes case to key sliver of swing voters; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush presented starkly different stands on issues ranging from taxes to abortion to oil drilling tonight as Mr. Gore repeatedly cast Mr. Bush as a friend of the rich and Mr. Bush upbraided his rival as a Washington insider with big promises and few accomplishments. In the first debate of the 2000 presidential campaign, at the University of Massachusetts, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore engaged in blunt condemnations of each other's proposals. Even when attacking, they smiled their way through the 90-minute encounter. They steered clear of personal criticisms until the final few minutes, when Mr. Bush questioned the vice president's credibility and his involvement in the campaign fund-raising scandals of 1996. [Transcript, Page A30.] Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush presented starkly different stands on issues ranging from taxes to abortion to oil drilling tonight as Mr. Gore repeatedly cast Mr. Bush as a friend of the rich and Mr. Bush upbraided his rival as a Washington insider with big promises and few accomplishments. In the first debate of the 2000 presidential campaign, at the University of Massachusetts, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore engaged in blunt condemnations of each other's proposals. Even when attacking, they smiled their way through the 90-minute encounter. They steered clear of personal criticisms until the final few minutes, when Mr. Bush questioned the vice president's credibility and his involvement in the campaign fund-raising scandals of 1996. [Transcript, Page A30.] Neither candidate mentioned President Clinton, but from the opening of the debate to its last moments, Mr. Bush criticized the vice president as part of an administration that squandered its opportunities to make progress on issues like prescription drugs and Social Security. Portraying himself as governor of a large state who effectively reached out to Republicans and Democrats alike, Mr. Bush assailed Mr. Gore as deeply entrenched in a poll-driven Washington culture that had little to show for itself. ''I fully recognize I'm not of Washington,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I'm from Texas. And he's got a lot of experience. But so do I. And I've been the chief executive officer of the second biggest state in the union. I've had a proud record of working with both Republicans and Democrats, which is what our nation needs.'' In delivering their pitches, both contenders offered distinct philosophies as to how they would approach governing and the presidency. Mr. Gore spoke of proposals that would help Americans at every income level and embraced views favored by liberals, like abortion rights and protecting the environment. Mr. Bush unabashedly referred to conservative principles and underscored his party's long-held tenets that the federal government is too powerful and that the military needs to be strengthened. But his muted response to questions about abortion made it clear that he, like Mr. Gore, was making his case to the sliver of swing voters likely to determine the outcome of the race. Mr. Bush said his opponent had accomplished little in his eight years in office. ''Look,'' he said, ''let's forget all the politics and all the finger-pointing and get some positive things done on Medicare and prescription drugs and Social Security.'' Mr. Gore, not wanting to invoke Mr. Clinton, refrained from agressively defending the administration,  instead turning his fire on Mr. Bush. In a phrase he repeated again and again, Mr. Gore asserted that the Texas governor's tax plan was tilted to the rich. ''He would spend more money on tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new spending that he proposes for education, health care, prescription drugs and national defense all combined,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Now, I think those are wrong priorities.'' He mentioned the ''wealthiest 1 percent'' 10 times during the debate. In response, Mr. Bush said tartly said that the vice president was guilty of ''fuzzy math'' and trying to ''scare'' the people with inaccurate depictions of his proposals. ''This man is running on 'Medi-scare,' '' Mr. Bush said after Mr. Gore asserted that under the governor's Medicare prescription drug plan ''95 percent of all seniors'' would get no assistance for four or five years. Both candidates, the scions of famous political fathers, tried to show good humor throughout the debate. The vice president spoke somewhat hurriedly and seemed determined to keep a pleasant demeanor. At several points Mr. Gore sighed loudly at Mr. Bush's answers. When Mr. Bush voiced positions that the vice president agreed with, Mr. Gore noted their agreement. Mr. Gore often appeared calm but still jumped in constantly, betraying his eagerness to debate. He knowingly violated the rules, saying, ''I know we're not supposed to ask each other questions'' and proceeded to ask one of Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush was on the attack from the outset and proved much more assertive about the vice president's vulnerabilities than Mr. Gore was about the governor's. But Mr. Bush, who has far less debating experience than the vice president, seemed more at ease and less scripted than he did in most of his encounters during the Republican primaries. Mindful, perhaps, that voters do tire of negative politics and personal attacks -- and that they sometimes backfire -- Mr. Bush resisted references to Mr. Clinton and his administration's scandals. And Mr. Gore, seeking not to appear mean-spirited, did not dwell on what for months he and his campaign have assailed as failures in Mr. Bush's Texas record. But in the closing minutes of the debate, Jim Lehrer of PBS, the moderator, asked Mr. Bush about Mr. Gore's ethical conduct, and the governor jumped at the opportunity. After crediting Mr. Gore for loving his wife and family, Mr. Bush referred pointedly to the vice president's explanation for his involvement in a fund-raising event at a Buddhist temple. ''The thing that discouraged me about the vice president was uttering those famous words, 'No controlling legal authority.' I felt like there needed to be a better sense of responsibility of what was going on in the White House. I believe they've moved that sign 'the buck stops here' on the Lincoln Bedroom, and that's not good for the country. It's not right.'' He did not stop there. ''I don't know the man well,'' Mr. Bush said, ''but I have been disappointed about how he and his administration has conducted the fund-raising affairs. You know, going to a Buddhist temple and then claiming it wasn't a fund-raiser is just not my view of responsibility.'' Mr. Gore, seeking to rise above the criticism, responded, ''I think we ought to attack our country's problems, not attack each other. I want to spend my time making this country even better than it is, not trying to make you out to be a bad person. You may want to focus on scandals. I want to focus on results.'' As they stood side by side at lecterns in a red-carpeted gymnasium here, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush tangled over strikingly different visions -- and prescriptions -- on major issues of the day as they were questioned by Mr. Lehrer. On the issue of RU-486, a newly approved abortion drug, Mr. Bush, who opposes abortion, first tried to play down the difference between himself and Mr. Gore. He said he did not believe as president he would have the power to overturn the decision last week by the Food and Drug Administration to legalize the drug. But Mr. Bush said that he would appoint Supreme Court justices who ''look at the Constitution as sacred'' and that he believed in ''strict constructionists.'' Mr. Gore sought to sharpen their differences on abortion by warning that Mr. Bush had said he would make appointments in the mold of the court's two staunchest conservatives, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas. The vice president said of Mr. Bush's references to strict constructionists, ''Those are code words'' for choosing justices who would overturn Roe v. Wade. Mr. Gore said he would consider using troops to prevent mass killings. Mr. Bush said he would not use force to promote ''nation building.'' Questioned about what he would do about Slobodan Milosevic's refusal to step down as president of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Gore said of the elections there last week, ''We should support the people of Serbia and Yugoslavia -- as they call Serbia plus Montenegro.'' That support, he said, should include the prospect of lifted sanctions, which would be ''a very strong incentive that we have given them to do the right thing.'' Mr. Bush said it was ''time for the man to leave.'' But when he suggested that the Russians should ''step up and lead,'' playing a prominent role in mediating the outcome of the elections, Mr. Gore demurred, saying, ''We might not like the result that comes out of that.'' The candidates clashed at length about their rival plans to offer prescription drug insurance for older Americans and about who would stand up to special interests. Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush's remedies were too tied to corporations. ''Big drug companies support Governor Bush's prescription drug proposal,'' he said. ''They oppose mine.'' Mr. Bush then grimaced, and offered a swift rebuttal, mentioning two groups that have contributed generously to the vice president. ''I've been standing up to big Hollywood and big trial lawyers,'' he said. Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush approached tonight's event with somewhat opposite objectives: Mr. Gore, who already is viewed by many Americans as having more command of the issues, sought to display a sunnier side and not portray himself as a slashing, even mean-spirited candidate, as sometimes happened in his debates in the Democratic primaries. Mr. Bush, by contrast, tried to underscore his command of the issues and his comfort in policy. At first blush, he did not seem to commit any blunders, although he was at times less facile than Mr. Gore in his responses. The event was unusual in that in many presidential debates in recent years, the two candidates knew each other or had at least been photographed together. The candidates of four years ago, for example, President Clinton and Bob Dole, had appeared dozens of times together to hammer out legislation. But both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have said they do not know each other. Mr. Bush said recently that he met his opponent eight years ago. Tonight's debate was the most traditional of the three. On Tuesday, in Winston-Salem, N.C., the two men will sit at a table with Mr. Lehrer. On Oct. 17, the format will be a town meeting, where citizens can pose questions to Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. As recently as a month ago, it appeared that the first presidential debate would not even take place in Boston. Advisers to Mr. Bush balked at the notion of having the event in such a Democratic state, and at a site that is nearby the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library. But faced with criticism that he was trying to avoid debates, Mr. Bush relented on his objections about the sites. Outside the library complex, though, there was nary a sign of a Bush supporter. Several thousand protesters amassed, mostly union supporters in work boots but with a strong contingent of pierced young supporters of Mr. Nader. With no Republicans to argue with, some of the Nader supporters and Gore supporters took to arguing with each other. The most common chant was, ''Let Ralph debate!'' THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW  Correction:  October 6, 2000, Friday  Because of an editing error, a phrase was omitted in some editions on Wednesday, altering the meaning, in a front-page article about the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. As written, the article said the confrontation took on greater significance because the contest was ''disturbingly close FOR BOTH CANDIDATES.'' Because of an editing error, a phrase was omitted in some editions on Wednesday, altering the meaning, in a front-page article about the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. As written, the article said the confrontation took on greater significance because the contest was ''disturbingly close FOR BOTH CANDIDATES.''
 Bush and Gore Face Off In First Campaign Debate  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush met in Boston for their first presidential debate, arguing over issues that included taxes, health care and foreign policy.
 Analysis of first presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and George W Bush holds neither could resist reverting to type; holds Gore showed preference for showing off his knowledge and Bush for emotional pronouncements over policy details (M) It was not enough for Vice President Al Gore to venture a crisp pronunciation of Milosevic, as in Slobodan, the Yugoslav president who refuses to be pried from power. Mr. Gore had to go a step further, volunteering the name of Mr. Milosevic's challenger, Vojislav Kostunica. It was not enough for Vice President Al Gore to venture a crisp pronunciation of Milosevic, as in Slobodan, the Yugoslav president who refuses to be pried from power. Mr. Gore had to go a step further, volunteering the name of Mr. Milosevic's challenger, Vojislav Kostunica. And as Mr. Gore loped effortlessly through the Balkans, barely able to suppress his self-satisfied grin, it became ever clearer that the point of all the thickets of consonants and proper nouns was not a geopolitical lesson. The conventional wisdom held that in tonight's presidential debate, the first, and perhaps most important, of three encounters between Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, Mr. Gore should show voters a warm and fuzzy side while Mr. Bush should seize a tough, commanding tone. But neither man could resist reverting to type: in Mr. Gore's case, the man who loves to show off how much he knows; in Mr. Bush's case, the man who would rather sidestep the bogs of detailed policy to get to the meadows of emotional pronouncements. Mr. Bush even told a story about a flood-devastated family in Texas with whom he had cried. Despite Mr. Gore's efforts at laughter and all his references to the middle-class people who had become his chums, he was above all a reference book of foreign names and domestic facts and figures. And despite Mr. Bush's frequent stabs at specificity, he just as often clung to broad statements of good intent, using questions as springboards for practiced assertions that he would be a good leader, bring people together and care. Mr. Gore lunged for his speaking time, and quickly crammed it with words. Mr. Bush ambled up to his, shaking his head at the behavior of his opponent, which he clearly wanted voters to deem overbearing. Mr. Bush has always presented himself as the more affable man, and he pulled off a small victory at the start of the debate to buttress that claim. Walking onto the stage, he strode past his own lectern and right up to Mr. Gore's, which was where they shook hands. It made Mr. Bush seem more eager to exchange good wishes. Mr. Gore had long endured criticism for his readiness to score points with sad stories about his relatives, but here he was, bringing yet another family member into the fray. Mr. Bush had long endured criticism for his vagueness, but here he was, using an all-purpose sound bite to rebut a charge by Mr. Gore that he would not provide elderly people with a prescription-drug benefit quickly enough. ''I guess my answer to that is, the man's running on 'Mediscare,' trying to frighten people in the in the voting booth,'' Mr. Bush said. That stutter crept into many of his answers. True to form, Mr. Bush mixed up some words, saying that elderly people dependent on Social Security should rest assured that their promises would be ''made,'' not kept. True to form, Mr. Gore adopted the lexicon of a teacher. Mr. Gore attacked, firing the same bullet over and over: that the ''wealthiest 1 percent'' of Americans would get more money in tax cuts from Mr. Bush than Mr. Bush would spend on social programs for less privileged Americans. Mr. Bush played the nice guy taken aback by such aggression, wondering again and again why Mr. Gore would indulge in so much ''fuzzy math.'' Mr. Gore kept digressing to explain things, as if Mr. Bush needed the tutorials. Mr. Bush kept telling voters to listen to his own words and not Mr. Gore's characterizations of them, as if nothing Mr. Gore said could be trusted. Mr. Gore recalled little encounters from his past. Mr. Bush either got a little confused or pretended that he did, displaying a softness of focus and good humor in response to a question about how, as president, he might deal with emergencies. ''I've been standing up to big Hollywood, to big trial lawyers,'' Mr. Bush began, then stopped himself, breaking into a grin. ''What was the question? It was about emergencies, wasn't it?'' Well, that depended on whether a reporter sought the answer under the big placard that read ''Alexis Herman,'' the secretary of labor, who was on hand to sing Mr. Gore's praises, or under the one that read ''Congresswoman Jennifer Dunn,''  Republican of Washington, on hand to talk up Mr. Bush. It was the ultimate illustration of just how much importance both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush placed on this event. But while the stakes were bigger than ever, the candidates, to some extent, were the same as always.
 Even before Al Gore and George W. Bush opened their mouths, Kevin Wiland formed an impression of them. He thought Governor Bush looked stiff and formal as he walked onto the stage, ''with broad shoulders and chin up,'' Mr. Wiland said. ''Gore seems a little more relaxed, which is different than they usually are.'' Even before Al Gore and George W. Bush opened their mouths, Kevin Wiland formed an impression of them. He thought Governor Bush looked stiff and formal as he walked onto the stage, ''with broad shoulders and chin up,'' Mr. Wiland said. ''Gore seems a little more relaxed, which is different than they usually are.'' Stylistically, he quickly seemed to side with Mr. Gore. On the issues, he was less sure. From the first question to Mr. Gore about Mr. Bush's fitness to be president, Mr. Wiland said he liked the way the vice president passed up an opportunity to ''slash his opponent,'' adding, ''He was more positive.'' By contrast, Mr. Wiland did not like what he called ''those little jabs'' that Mr. Bush was making, his repeated accusation that Mr. Gore was using ''fuzzy numbers'' and his comment that Mr. Gore had not only invented the Internet, but had also invented the calculator. Mr. Wiland was impressed with the way Governor Bush handled the question about whether he would overturn the Food and Drug Administration's approval of the abortion pill, RU-486. ''I liked his answer a lot,'' Mr. Wiland said. ''He said that a president couldn't overrule it. He's not looking to make radical changes on the issue. I am also against partial-birth abortions,'' as Mr. Bush said he was. But Mr. Wiland felt Governor Bush dodged the question on whether he would appoint Supreme Court justices who opposed legalized abortion. On the questions about the military, Mr. Wiland liked that Mr. Bush said he would be careful about using the military to intervene in foreign countries. ''Good,'' Mr. Wiland said, while Mr. Bush was talking. ''I agree with everything he just said.'' But later he said, ''I'm comfortable with both of them as my commander in chief. They're both going to get top advisers to help them make decisions. Gore was in the military. Bush has got a good vice president and a good father. They're both going to be reluctant to put forces out.'' Mr. Wiland, who teaches in a public school, is generally against school vouchers, like Mr. Gore, but also takes a more Republican view that the federal government should not take a strong hand in education. In the debate he liked aspects of what both men said. And on Social Security, he said, ''they both seemed intelligent in what they were saying and seemed like they had responsible ideas and responsible plans.'' Mr. Wiland liked Mr. Gore's ''Social Security lockbox'' idea and the fact that ''Bush said 'I want the people to be able to make their choices.' '' But he added, ''then I think to myself, what if they make the wrong choices?'' He thought Mr. Gore's anecdotes about people in the audience were effective. And he thought that Mr. Bush was ''playing on the strongest card he has, which is to take an incumbent party and say you haven't done enough. But I don't know if I buy it.''
 In the end though, script prevailed. Vice President Al Gore, for one, seized on the ''lockbox,'' which led Mr. Milstein to wonder aloud, ''What's in the lockbox?'' And so it went, over sangria and cider. Mostly, they were Democrats and supporters of the vice president. Still, Mr. Gore's speech held a discomfiting surprise or two for Jonathan Marcus, an unequivocal Gore backer, such as when the vice president volunteered his opposition to late-term abortion. ''It seemed like he reached out of discussion a little bit as a grab for the middle,'' he observed. Neither that comment, nor the rest of Mr. Gore's performance tonight weakened his support for the vice president. But if there were no George W. Bush enthusiasts here, there were also plenty of people who, like Mr. Milstein, were not sold on Mr. Gore either. ''This is definitely an election of the lesser of two evils,'' Mr. Milstein said. ''Clinton, he had a vision in a way,'' he added. ''Gore doesn't have that. Bush doesn't have that. In the end, either of them are probably capable. But this is the product of not developing leaders in the last 30 years. So you get these kinds of options.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush clash on education and Social Security at presidential debate; Bush stresses his plan to have students tested annually and to hold public schools accountable if students score poorly; Gore stresses money he would spend on teachers; accuses Bush of favoring vouchers, holding money should not be taken away from public schools; neither candidate accepts idea that tax increase or benefit cut is needed to preserve Social Security; Bush calls for partial privatization of system (M) On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. On education, Mr. Bush stressed his plan to have students tested annually and to hold the public schools accountable if the students did not score well. Mr. Gore emphasized the money he would spend to hire teachers, raise teachers' salaries and give parents tax breaks to help offset the cost of college tuition. The governor talked more about local control of schools; Mr. Gore talked about how he would use federal funds to help reduce class size. Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of favoring vouchers -- money to parents for private school tuition -- and said money should never be taken away from public schools. Mr. Bush did not rise to the bait and avoided using the term vouchers. But he said would give parents money for private schools if testing showed over several years that the public schools were not serving the children adequately. Neither candidate accepted the idea that the only way to preserve Social Security is to raise taxes or cut benefits. Mr. Gore said he would continue the current benefit levels and provide government matching funds to help workers set up retirement accounts above and beyond Social Security. Mr. Bush would turn to a partial privatization of the system. Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of having no strategy for saving Social Security when the present funds expire. Mr. Bush would use about 15 percent of Social Security taxes to let workers set up private retirement accounts. The problem with the Bush plan, in Mr. Gore's view, is that insufficient money would be available for current benefit levels.
 In an important new book, ''Left Back: A Century of Failed School Reforms'' (Simon & Schuster), Diane Ravitch, a historian and former education official in the Bush administration, suggests that, at least in the United States, this lack of mobility was not inevitable. A choice was made to deny immigrant and working-class children education to rise above their parents' stations. They were taught only vocational skills, with academic instruction reserved for the middle class.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush clash in presidential debate over America's foreign policy role, particularly over use of American troops; both agree troops should be committed only where American interests and security are at stake (M) On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. ''The vice president and I have a disagreement about the use of  troops,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He believes in nation-building.'' Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore started their discussion from a point of agreement: They said troops should be committed only to those places where American interests and security were at stake. But they defined those interests differently. Mr. Gore seemed to indicate that sometimes the United States would need to put itself at risk to prevent a humanitarian disaster. Both agreed that they would not send troops to Serbia to oust President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia. Mr. Bush said that he would use diplomacy, and get Russia to tell Mr. Milosevic that the time has come for him to surrender his office in the wake of his defeat in an election last week. Mr. Gore shot back that Russia has not yet agreed that Mr. Milosevic should leave office without a runoff election.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush clash in presidential debate on how to apportion budget surplus; Gore repeatedly attacks Bush for proposing tax cut he holds would provide more money for wealthiest Americans than for other key programs; Bush holds his tax plan would require wealthiest taxpayers to shoulder bigger portion of tax burden; charges Gore's tax cut would provide no benefits to 50 million people (M) On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. Mr. Gore repeatedly attacked Mr. Bush for proposing a tax cut, amounting to $1.3 trillion over nine years starting in 2002, that would provide more money to the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans than Mr. Bush has proposed to spend on education, health care, prescription drug coverage for the elderly and national defense combined. Mr. Gore's numbers were basically correct. According to Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal research group, 42.6 percent of Mr. Bush's tax cuts, when they are fully phased in, would go to the top 1 percent of households by income, those making $319,000 a year or more. If that percentage were applied to the $1.3 trillion pricetag that Mr. Bush put on his tax plan, it would mean that $554 billion would go to the wealthiest 1 percent. Mr. Bush's proposal calls for $475 billion in additional spending over 10 years on the areas cited by Mr. Gore and others. Mr. Bush responded that his tax plan would actually result in the wealthiest taxpayers shouldering a bigger portion of the tax burden. His assertion was based on an analysis done by his economic advisers that showed that people at lower income levels would get a larger tax income tax cut in percentage terms, though not in dollar terms, than people at higher income levels. The analysis showed that people earning $200,000 or more would pay 40.9 percent of all income taxes under the Bush plan, compared to 39.1 percent under current law. The analysis covered only income taxes, and therefore excluded the effects of Mr. Bush's proposal to repeal the federal tax on large estates, those valued at $675,000 or more. Mr. Bush said 50 million people, including anyone who is single and people above certain income thresholds, would receive no benefits from Mr. Gore's $480 billion tax cut plan.  The Gore campaign disputed Mr. Bush's figure but could not provide an estimate of its own. Mr. Bush said his plan would split the projected surplus among additional spending, tax cuts and shoring up Social Security. He said he would use half the surplus for Social Security. Mr. Bush said he would use a quarter of the surplus for ''important projects.'' The remaining quarter, he said, would go to his tax cut. At $1.3 trillion, his tax cut actually would use up 28.5 percent of the surplus.
 The couple, Robert Montemayor, senior vice president for BPI Communications, and his wife, Virginia Lujano, director of new media sales and marketing for Contentville.com, an Internet company, said they were leaning toward Mr. Gore before the debate. They were not swayed by the end. The couple, Robert Montemayor, senior vice president for BPI Communications, and his wife, Virginia Lujano, director of new media sales and marketing for Contentville.com, an Internet company, said they were leaning toward Mr. Gore before the debate. They were not swayed by the end. But after less than 30 minutes, they said that Mr. Bush seemed more tense than his opponent. When the governor said ''it seems like the vice president is not right too many times tonight,'' the three looked at one another. ''He's too nervous,'' Ms. Lujano said. At one point, she said Mr. Bush was being ''snappy.'' Ms. Lujano gasped when Mr. Bush said, ''I believe abortions ought to be more rare in America.'' And when Mr. Gore said ''I support a woman's right to choose,'' Mr. Montemayor nodded. ''That's the best thing he's said all night,'' he said, and Mr. Salvato agreed that the statement would win him a lot of votes with women. The trio thought both candidates were getting bogged down in too much detail about their opposing plans, but Mr. Montemayor thought Mr. Gore had more of a tendency to drone on. ''You've got to give old Bush something, he sure is more brief and to the point in his answers,'' he said. The three were a bit bemused with the way the candidates tiptoed over the issue of President Clinton's relationship with a White House intern and whether it should be a factor in this election, especially Mr. Gore. ''Bush gave a bland delivery,'' Ms. Lujano said. ''It wasn't from the heart.'' To Mr. Salvato, ''Al Gore was a better speaker, his delivery was better. I just wouldn't want people to base it on that, because to hear them, you don't know who to believe.''
 It was not a tough pick for MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI last night. The game between the Yankees and the Oakland Athletics easily beat the Bush-Gore face-off, the mayor said.
 Najee Ali, undecided black voter from Los Angeles, says after watching presidential debate that he will vote for Gore, interview; photo (M) As the debate began tonight, Mr. Ali had not yet decided whether he would follow family tradition and vote for the Democrat, Vice President Al Gore, or break his grandmother's heart and vote for the Republican governor of Texas, George W. Bush. But Mr. Ali admitted that this ''new generation'' of his could fit into a phone booth or two. The vast majority of people he knows, he said, are voting for Mr. Gore. ''Bush doesn't look comfortable at all,'' he said. ''Look, he's the first one to take a drink of water. This reminds me of the Nixon-Kennedy debate. Gore looks like his own man and Bush looks a little lost.'' Mr. Ali said he supported Mr. Bush on abortion issues and he felt that Mr. Bush scored points with his ''clear articulation on education issues.'' But over, Mr. Ali said, Mr. Bush ''struggled'' throughout the night.'' An hour into the debate, Mr. Ali declared,  ''Gore is killing Bush, from foreign policy to financial matters.'' ''Gore is much smarter,'' Mr. Ali said. ''I walked in on the fence. After the debate, I jumped off.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush clash in presidential debate over how to provide prescription drug coverage to older Americans; Gore charges Bush plan offers little help to most Medicare beneficiaries and is too reliant on private insurance; Bush advocates giving elderly fixed amount of money each year to purchase plan of their choice; Gore presses for adding voluntary drug benefit to Medicare (M) On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. On several issues in the debate, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stood on principles that have divided their parties for decades. Mr. Bush favored large tax cuts, Mr. Gore more federal spending. Mr. Gore stood for abortion rights, Mr. Bush did not. Mr. Gore advocated expanding Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush pressed for partial privatization of the programs. The candidates clashed early and fiercely over how to provide prescription drug coverage to older Americans. Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of using ''Medi-scare tactics,'' while Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of advancing a plan that offered little or no help to most Medicare beneficiaries and was far too reliant on private insurance. Mr. Bush advocated transforming the government health insurance program into a largely private marketplace in which the elderly are given a fixed amount of money each year and can purchase the plan of their choice. He noted that the traditional Medicare program would be preserved and that the elderly could stay with the program if they chose. But Mr. Gore's plan, like Mr. Bush's, would make it substantially more expensive for those who want to stay with traditional Medicare. Under Mr. Bush's proposal, health plans would be required to offer drug coverage. Low-income seniors would get immediate help, he argued, under a four-year, $48 billion program of grants to the states. Mr. Gore said that this plan would be limited to the low-income elderly, and that 95 percent of older Americans would ''get no help whatsoever under my opponent's plan for the  first four or five years.'' Mr. Gore advocated adding a standard drug benefit to the Medicare program: it would be voluntary, available for a monthly premium beginning at $25 and gradually doubling over a decade. It would cover about half the costs of drugs up to a cap that gradually rises to $5,000. He proposed a 50 percent federal subsidy of the premiums; Mr. Bush proposed 25 percent.
 Editorial on first presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; holds Gore came across as candidate with ambitious government solutions who looked more confident and knowledgeable on attack, and Bush as Washington outsider who hopes to stir public resistance to big-government approach; holds Bush failed to make compelling case for radical policy change; holds debate was free of major gaffes or knockout punches After sparring for months from a safe distance, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush confronted each other last night in an intense, sometimes barely polite televised debate over health care, tax cuts, defense spending, campaign finance and other issues at the center of their presidential race. At times viewers may have felt lost in a blizzard of details, but certain overriding impressions came through. Mr. Gore came across as a candidate with ambitious government solutions who looked more confident and knowledgeable on the attack, and Mr. Bush as a Washington outsider who hopes to stir public resistance to what he said was the vice president's partisan, big-government approach. There had been talk before the encounter, at the University of Massachusetts at Boston, that Mr. Gore would temper his famously confrontational debating style. But after an initially flat recitation of his health care ideas, the vice president fired volley after volley of attacks on Mr. Bush's proposals, throwing his opponent on the defensive and forcing him to rely on canned attack lines about Mr. Gore's ''fuzzy numbers'' and ''Medi-scare tactics.'' The Texas governor countered not by answering in kind, but by presenting himself as a practical and reform-minded Washington outsider who could solve problems instead of exploiting them. After sparring for months from a safe distance, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush confronted each other last night in an intense, sometimes barely polite televised debate over health care, tax cuts, defense spending, campaign finance and other issues at the center of their presidential race. At times viewers may have felt lost in a blizzard of details, but certain overriding impressions came through. Mr. Gore came across as a candidate with ambitious government solutions who looked more confident and knowledgeable on the attack, and Mr. Bush as a Washington outsider who hopes to stir public resistance to what he said was the vice president's partisan, big-government approach. There had been talk before the encounter, at the University of Massachusetts at Boston, that Mr. Gore would temper his famously confrontational debating style. But after an initially flat recitation of his health care ideas, the vice president fired volley after volley of attacks on Mr. Bush's proposals, throwing his opponent on the defensive and forcing him to rely on canned attack lines about Mr. Gore's ''fuzzy numbers'' and ''Medi-scare tactics.'' The Texas governor countered not by answering in kind, but by presenting himself as a practical and reform-minded Washington outsider who could solve problems instead of exploiting them. On protecting the environment and abortion rights, the vice president also kept up his attacks, while Mr. Bush sought to transcend the policy exchanges by emphasizing his personal leadership abilities. He spoke in a clipped, folksy manner, but whether he overcame what some polls show to be doubts about his abilities may not be clear for a while. In any event, he fell short of making a compelling case for a radical change in policy in Washington despite repeated assertions that the current administration had failed to govern effectively. The debate gave viewers a chance to step beyond polls and media analysis and assess the knowledge and presentational skills of the two candidates on their own before making up their minds. The television accounts are sure to repeat selected lively passages, but there were surprisingly few of the usual memorable lines or zingers that the public often remembers from debates. Instead the powerful impression was of two advocates of different views of government. On taxes, for example, they repeated their campaign formulas, with Mr. Bush charging that Mr. Gore's tax cut program awarded its benefits selectively only to the ''right'' Americans willing to take advantage of its narrowly crafted incentives. The vice president hammered tellingly on a favorite theme -- that the governor's tax program awarded more money to the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans than it set aside for health, education and defense spending. As they toured a range of issues, Mr. Gore seemed most at home and Mr. Bush most tentative on subjects that required deep Washington experience. On foreign policy and the national security responsibilities of the president, Mr. Gore offered more nuanced answers, while Mr. Bush fell back on generalities about principles of decision making. The same pattern prevailed in a discussion of managing international financial crises, while Mr. Bush seemed more sure of his footing on subjects like domestic education. Mr. Gore dodged serious damage on one of his key vulnerabilities. The Republican nominee assailed him for the Democrats' 1996 campaign finance abuses and repeatedly rebuffed the vice president's responses by saying he had no credibility on the issue. But Mr. Gore spoke passionately on behalf of campaign finance reform, declaring that all other legislative initiatives would be hobbled if the system for financing Congressional and presidential campaigns was not cleaned up to eliminate the power of special interests. This was a debate free of major gaffes or knockout punches. Both men head to the next two encounters without disabling wounds. The biggest gain for Mr. Bush last night was that he did not crumble under the pressure of the sternest test to date of his presidential potential, even though questions will persist about his depth of knowledge. Mr. Gore displayed his command of issues and his steadiness in the arena, although he sometimes seemed drawn back to the hectoring style that bothers some voters. It was, on substance, a more impressive night for Mr. Gore, but the final scorecard still belongs to the voters.
 Dr Jonathan Gallen, Boston-area independent voter, says he saw little difference between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush in presidential debate, interview; Diane Gallen, Democrat, holds neither candidate won (M) Dr. Jonathan Gallen thought there was so little difference between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in their debate tonight that he said the two candidates were like two identical cans of tuna, with different brand names. Dr. Jonathan Gallen thought there was so little difference between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in their debate tonight that he said the two candidates were like two identical cans of tuna, with different brand names. His wife, Diane Gallen, 44, a lifelong Democrat and former intensive-care unit nurse, also said, ''I don't think there was a winner.'' Ms. Gallen said she would probably  vote for Mr. Gore, and what criticisms she did have of the candidates' performances were mostly reserved for Mr. Bush. When Mr. Bush attacked Mr. Gore for his fund-raising practices in an effort to question his character, Mrs. Gallen said, ''That's a little hypocritical of him,'' given Mr. Bush's own huge fund-raising operation. She also mocked Mr. Bush when he promised that he would protect Social Security, saying, ''Hear me loud and clear.'' Mrs. Gallen said it reminded her of the ''Read my lips, no new taxes,'' pledge by Mr. Bush's father, former President George Bush, Likewise, Tom Coveney, a 42-year-old banker who normally voted Republican, did not feel either man changed his mind, though he expressed resentment at Mr. Gore's repeated claims that Mr. Bush was trying to cut the taxes of the richest 1 percent of Americans. ''They're the people who earn the money,'' Mr. Coveney said. To Mr. Coveney, Mr. Gore had more facts and was a master ''policy wonk,'' but he also tired of the vice president's constant use of complex policy answers. ''He's like the kid in school you wanted to beat up because he knows all the answers,'' Mr. Coveney said. Dr. Gallen and his wife were more impressed with Mr. Gore's answers on national security, saying the vice president sounded more like a leader. And Mrs. Gallen was scornful of Mr. Bush's guarded answers about the abortion-inducing drug, mifepristone, and about what judges he would appoint to the Supreme Court. The governor was giving ''a coached answer,'' she said. Dr. Gallen was more critical: ''Bush got a black eye on that. Gore beat him up, because he can't tell the truth.'' But Mr. Coveney thought Mr. Bush's answers on abortion were wisely calculated.
 Transcript of presidential debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, moderated by Jim Lehrer (L) Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night in Boston between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS. MR. LEHRER -- Good evening from the Clark Athletic Center at the University of Massachusetts in Boston. I'm Jim Lehrer of ''The News Hour'' on PBS and I welcome you to the first of three 90-minute debates between the Democratic candidate for president, Vice President Al Gore, and the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night in Boston between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS. MR. LEHRER -- Good evening from the Clark Athletic Center at the University of Massachusetts in Boston. I'm Jim Lehrer of ''The News Hour'' on PBS and I welcome you to the first of three 90-minute debates between the Democratic candidate for president, Vice President Al Gore, and the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. The candidates under their rules may not question each other directly. There will be no opening statements but each candidate may have up to two minutes for a closing statement. The questions and the subjects were chosen by me alone. I have told no one from the two campaigns or the commission or anyone else involved what they are. There's a small audience in the hall tonight. They are not here to participate, only to listen. I have asked and they have agreed to remain silent for the next 90 minutes except for right now when they will applaud as we welcome the two candidates, Governor Bush and Vice President Gore. And now the first question. As determined by a flip of a coin it goes to Vice President Gore. Vice President Gore, you have questioned whether Governor Bush has the experience to be president of the United States. What exactly do you mean? MR. GORE  Well, Jim, first of all, I would like to thank the sponsors of this debate and the people of Boston for hosting the debate. I'd like to thank Governor Bush for participating and I'd like to say that I'm happy to be with Tipper and our family. I have actually not questioned Governor Bush's experience. I have questioned his proposals and here's why. I think this is a very important moment for our country. We have achieved extraordinary prosperity and in this election America has to make an important choice: will we use our prosperity to enrich not just the few, but all of our families? I believe we have to make the right and responsible choices. MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush, one-minute rebuttal. MR. LEHRER  So I take it by your answer then, Mr. Vice President, that in your interview recently with The New York Times when you said that you question whether or not Governor Bush was experienced enough to be president, you were talking about strictly policy differences. Under Governor Bush's tax cut proposal, he would spend more money on tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new spending that he proposes for education, health care, prescription drugs and national defense all combined. Now I think those are the wrong priorities. MR. LEHRER  Let me just follow up. One quick question. When you hear Vice President Gore question your experience, do you read it the same way? That he's talking about policy differences only? MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush, you have questioned -- this is a companion question to the question I asked Vice President Gore. You have questioned whether Vice President Gore has demonstrated the leadership qualities necessary to be president of the United States. What do you mean by that? MR. LEHRER  One minute rebuttal, Vice President Gore. Under Governor Bush's plan, they would get not one penny for four to five years and then they would be forced to go into an H.M.O. or to an insurance company and ask them for coverage. But there'd be no limit on the premiums or the deductibles or any of the terms and conditions. MR. GORE  Yeah. I mean, it's just clear, you can go to the Web site and look, if you make more than $25,000 a year, you don't get a penny of help under the Bush prescription drug proposal for at least four to five years and then you're pushed into a Medicare, into an H.M.O. or an insurance company plan and there's no limit on the premiums or the deductibles or any of the conditions. And the insurance companies say it won't work and they won't offer these plans. New question. Vice President Gore, how would you contrast your approach to preventing future, future oil price and supply problems like we have now to the approach of Governor Bush? Now another big difference is Governor Bush is proposing to open up our, some of our most precious environmental treasures, like the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, to the big oil companies to go in and start producing oil there. I think that is the wrong choice. It would only give us a few months worth of oil and the oil wouldn't start flowing for many years into the future. And I don't think it's a fair price to pay to destroy precious parts of America's environment. MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush, one minute. MR. LEHRER  So if somebody is watching tonight, listening to what the two of you just said, is it fair to say, O.K., the differences between Vice President Gore and George W. Bush -- Governor Bush -- are the following. You are for doing something on the consumption end, you're for doing something on the production and drilling -- MR. GORE  I -- I'm, let me clarify. I'm for doing something both on the supply side and production side, and on the consumption side. And let me say that I found one thing in Governor Bush's answer that we certainly agree on and that's the Low Income Heating Assistance Program, and I commend you for supporting that. I worked to -- to -- to get $400 million just a couple of weeks ago and to establish a permanent home heating oil reserve here in the Northeast. MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush, if elected president, would you try to overturn the F.D.A.'s approval last week of the abortion pill RU-486? MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore? And that's not the main issue. The main issue is whether or not the Roe v. Wade decision's going to be overturned. I support a woman's right to choose. My opponent does not. It is important because the next president is going to appoint three, maybe even four justices of the Supreme Court. And Governor Bush has declared to the antichoice groups that he will appoint justices in the mold of Scalia and Clarence Thomas who are known for being the most vigorous opponents of a woman's right to choose. MR. LEHRER  What kind of appointments should they expect from you, Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER  New subject, new question. Vice President Gore, if President Milosevic of Yugoslavia refuses to accept the election results and leave office, what action, if any, should the United States take to get him out of there? MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush, one minute. MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore, one minute. I -- if you entrust me with the presidency, I will do whatever is necessary in order to make sure our forces stay the strongest in the world. In fact, in my 10-year budget proposal I have set aside more than twice as much for this purpose as Governor Bush has in his proposal. MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore, how should the voters go about deciding which one of you is better suited to make the kinds of decisions we've been -- whether it's Milosevic or whether it's whatever, in the military and foreign policy area? MR. GORE  I think one of the key points in foreign policy and national security policy is the need to re-establish the old-fashioned principle that politics ought to stop at the water's edge. When I was in the United States Congress, I worked with former President Reagan to modernize our strategic weaponry and to pursue arms control in a responsible way. When I was in the United States Senate, I worked with former President Bush, your father, and was one of only a few Democrats in the Senate to support the Persian Gulf War. I think bipartisanship is a national asset and we have to find ways to re-establish it in foreign policy and national security policy. MR. LEHRER  New subject, new question. Should the voters of this election, Vice President Gore, see this on domestic -- in the domestic area as a major choice between competing political philosophies? Almost half of all the tax cut benefits, as I said, under Governor Bush's plan go to the wealthiest 1 percent. I think we have to make the right and responsible choices. I think we have to invest in education, protecting the environment, health care, a prescription drug benefit that goes to all seniors, not just to the poor, under Medicare, not relying on H.M.O.s and insurance companies. Now the priorities are just very different. I'll give you a couple of examples. For every new dollar that I propose for spending on health care, Governor Bush spends three dollars for a tax cut for the wealthiest 1  percent. Now for every dollar that I propose to spend on education, he's spends five dollars on a tax cut for the wealthiest 1 percent. Those are very clear differences. MR. BUSH  Man's practicing fuzzy math again. There's differences. Under Vice President Gore's plan he's going to grow the federal government in the largest increase since Lyndon Baines Johnson in 1965. We're talking about a massive government, folks. We're talking about adding to or -- or increasing 200 new programs, 200 programs, 20,000 new bureaucrats. Imagine how many I.R.S. agents it's going to take to be able to figure out his targeted tax cut for the middle class that excludes 50 million Americans. Secondly, if you're a family of four making $50,000 in Massachusetts, you get a 50-percent tax cut. Let me give you one example: the Strunk family in Allentown, Pa.; I campaigned with them the other day. They make $51,000 combined income. They pay about $3,800 in taxes -- or $3,500 in taxes. Under my plan they get $1,800 of tax relief. Under Vice President Gore's plan they get $145 of tax relief. Now you tell me who stands on the side of the rich. MR. LEHRER  You see it that way, Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER  All right, having cleared that up, we're going to a new question: education. Governor Bush, both of you have promised dramatically -- to change dramatically public education in this country. But of the public money spent on education, only 6 percent of it is federal money. You want to change 100 percent of public education with 6 percent of the money. Is that possible? MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore. MR. GORE  Look, we agreed on a couple of things on education. I strongly support new accountability; so does Governor Bush. I strongly support local control; so does Governor Bush. I'm in favor of testing as a way of measuring performance, every school, every school district, have every state test the -- the children. I've also proposed voluntary national tests from the fourth grade and eighth grade, and a form of testing that the governor has not endorsed. I think that all new teachers ought to be tested, including in the subjects that they teach. We've got to recruit 100,000 new teachers and I have budgeted for that. We've got to reduce the class size so that the student who walks in has more one-on-one time with the teacher. We ought to have universal preschool. And we ought to make college tuition tax deductible up to $10,000 a year. MR. BUSH  Well the first -- first is, the difference is there is no new accountability measures in Vice President Gore's plan. He says he's for voluntary testing. You can't have voluntary testing. You must have mandatory testing. You must say that if you receive money, you must show us whether or not children are learning to read and write and add and subtract. That's the difference. MR. GORE  Well first of all, I do have mandatory testing. I think the governor may not have heard what I said clearly. The voluntary national test is in addition to the mandatory testing that we will require of states -- all schools, all school districts, students themselves and required teacher testing, which goes a step farther than Governor Bush has been willing to go. Here are a couple of differences, though, Jim. Governor Bush is in favor of vouchers, which take taxpayer money away from public schools and give them to private schools that are not accountable for how the money is used and don't have to take all applicants. MR. LEHRER  New question. We've been talking about a lot of specific issues. It's often said that in the final analysis, about 90 percent of being the president of the United States is dealing with the unexpected, not with issues that came up in the campaign. Vice President Gore, can you point to a decision, an action you have taken that illustrates your ability to handle the unexpected, the crisis under fire, etc.? I cast my lot with the people, even when it means that you have to stand up to some powerful interests who are trying to turn the policies and the laws to their advantage. That's -- you can see it in this campaign. The big drug companies support Governor Bush's prescription drug proposal. They oppose mine because they don't want to get Medicare involved because they're afraid that Medicare will negotiate lower prices for seniors, who currently pay the highest prices of all. MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush? MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore. MR. BUSH  No, there's no difference on that. There is a difference, though, as to what the economy has meant. I think the economy has meant more for the Gore and Clinton folks than the Gore and Clinton folks have meant for the economy. I think most of the economic growth that has taken place is a result of ingenuity and hard work and entrepreneurship. And that's the role of government, it's to encourage that. But in terms of the response to the question, no. Now, as for 20,000 new bureaucrats, as you call them, you know, the size of the federal government will go down in a Gore administration. In the reinventing government program you just look at the numbers, it is 300,000 people smaller today than it was eight years ago. Now, the -- the fact is you're going to have a hard time convincing folks that we were a whole lot better off eight years ago than we are today. MR. LEHRER  -- going to do that. But, many experts, including Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan, Vice President Gore, say that it will be impossible for either of you, essentially, to keep the system viable on its own during the coming baby boomer retirement onslaught without either reducing benefits or increasing taxes. Do you disagree? MR. BUSH  This is a government that thinks a 2 percent rate of return on your money is satisfactory. It's not. This is a government that says younger workers can't possibly have their own asset. We need to think differently about the issue. We need to make sure our seniors get the promise made. But I want to tell you, if we don't trust younger workers to manage some of their own money, with the Social Security surplus, to grow from one trillion to three trillion, it's going to be impossible to bridge the gap without what Mr. Gore's plan will do, causing huge payroll taxes or major benefit reductions. MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush, are there issues of character that distinguish you from Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER  So, governor, what are you saying when you mention the -- the fund-raising scandals or this fund-raising charges that involved Vice President Gore? What are you saying that the voters should take from that that's relevant to this election? MR. LEHRER  Are you saying all of this is irrelevant, Vice President Gore, to the -- And incidentally, one of them is this. This current campaign financing system has not reflected credit on anybody in either party. And that's one of the reasons I've said before, and I'll pledge here tonight, if I'm president, the very first bill that Joe Lieberman and I will send to the United States Congress is the McCain-Feingold campaign finance reform bill. And the reason it's that important is that all of the other issues, whether prescription drugs for all seniors that are opposed by the drug companies or the patients bill of rights to take the decisions away from the H.M.O.'s and give them to the doctors and nurses opposed by the H.M.O.'s and insurance companies, all of these other proposals are going to be a lot easier to get passed for the American people if we limit the influence of special interest money and give democracy back to the American people. And I wish Governor Bush would join me this evening in -- in endorsing the McCain-Feingold campaign finance reform bill. MR. LEHRER  Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER . Excuse me one sec, Vice President Gore. MR. GORE  Look, Governor Bush, you have attacked my character and credibility. And I am not going to respond in kind. I think we ought to focus on the problems and not attack each other. And one of the serious problems -- hear me well -- is that our system of government is being undermined by too much influence coming from special interest money. We have to get a handle on it. And, like John McCain, I have learned from experience. And it's not a new position for me. Twenty-four years ago, I supported full public financing of all federal elections. And anybody who thinks I'm just saying it'll be the first bill I send to the Congress, I want you to know -- MR. LEHRER  I would just say on that wonderful note of disagreement, we have to stop here. And we want to go now to your closing statements. Governor Bush is first. You have two minutes. MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore, two minutes. MR. LEHRER  Vice President Gore, two minutes. Thank you, Governor Bush, Vice President Gore. See you next week.
 Caryn James Critic's Notebook column on Gore-Bush presidential debate; notes debate was most rigidly formatted of their three planned meetings, approach that worked to neighter candidate's advantage (M) In a campaign that has been wallowing in soft-focus talk-show television, the first face-to-face debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush was the most rigidly formatted of their three planned meetings, and as a result the candidates' demeanors were often as stiff as the lecterns they stood behind. Though they flung tough accusations at each other, their cautious styles suggested that they were getting this most stiffly presidential (and least Oprah-like) of the debates out of the way. It was the Bush campaign that tried to replace this traditional format with more freewheeling alternatives, but as it turned out, the staid approach worked to neither candidate's advantage. The pre-debate spin was that Mr. Gore had to avoid going on a harsh attack that might alienate viewers. He went after Mr. Bush's ideas, but his restraint meant he could not capitalize on the more dynamic image he had been building since the conventions. Mr. Bush had to avoid fumbling his words and stretching his answers to fill the time, weaknesses he displayed in the Republican primary debates. The shadow of those early debates only threatened seriously when he seemed to struggle pronouncing Slobodan Milosevic's last name, and to vamp to fill his time when asked how the United States should respond to Mr. Milosevic's refusal to concede the Yugoslav election. The Russians should use their influence, he said at the start and at the end of his answer. At times the candidates appeared on a split screen so viewers could see the opponent's reactions, but how and when the two were displayed side by side differed among networks. A pool camera fed several images to the networks, and the individual directors chose how to use them. This had the subtle effect of interrupting the candidates' sincerest looks into the camera (Mr. Bush seemed especially conscious of doing this). Throughout the debate, Mr. Bush had more canned lines (he accused Mr. Gore of having ''fuzzy math'' several times), drank more water, sniffed and twisted up his mouth. Mr. Gore sighed, shook his head, was less physically active and came equipped with his own stock phrases (he would put ''Social Security in a lockbox,'' he said). As soon as the debate ended, the campaign's soft focus returned. The trappings around the event (including Mr. Gore's much publicized use of ordinary voters as advisers) threatened to turn the debate into the latest in reality television. The candidates may have been on stage in Boston, but several networks decided that the postgame action was in Tampa, Fla. ''Why am I not surprised to hear you say that?'' Tom Brokaw of NBC asked Mr. Lieberman after he said something wonderful about Mr. Gore's performance. Even the network commentators, usually so ready to declare a winner in the presidential horse race, were skittish after this one. ''Gore did better in the debate; Bush got a bigger boost,'' said Bill Schneider of CNN. Instant polls by CNN and ABC, among others, suggested little movement in voters' opinions after the debate. After days of shouting that this might be the decisive moment in the campaign, the commentators seemed like the little boy who cried wolf. Next time they'll say, this is the decisive moment, we mean it.
 American lawmakers and policy makers are taking hands-off approach to energy crisis and OPEC's moves instead of fighting market forces as they did in 1970's; in 1973, US Government responded to oil embargo by taking its already draconian system of price limits and other government controls on oil and gasoline and expanding it; much of that system was still in place six years later, during nation's second big oil crisis, which followed fall of shah of Iran; policy makers today are striving to work with market forces; in debate over Pres Clinton's decision to release 30 million barrels of oil from nation's Stratetgic Petroleum Reserve, critics--led by Gov George W Bush--derided move as improper intrusion of politics into marketplace; many policy makers have embraced idea that markets left to their own devices work better than government controls; graph; photos (M) Today, policy makers are striving to work with market forces instead of fighting them. In the debate over President Clinton's decision last month to release 30 million barrels of oil from the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve, for example, critics -- led by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- derided the move as an improper intrusion of politics into the marketplace. And compared to Nixon-  and Carter-era controls, it was a tame step. The energy proposals that Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, brought out last week -- including opening part of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to exploration and incentives to promote coal and nuclear power -- could test the willingness of Americans to rebalance environmental and energy priorities in the face of higher prices. For his part, Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, favors investments in mass transit and incentives to encourage the use of more fuel-efficient vehicles and alternative energy sources. The current structure of the market still allows for collusive practices; the whole purpose of OPEC is to control supply and, as a result, prices. In the United States, the F.T.C. is investigating complaints by Mr. Gore and other politicians that refiners this summer may have fixed prices in the Midwest -- accusations the industry has hotly denied.
