 Helping elderly people pay for their medicine is a hot topic in presidential politics; in the debate on Tuesday, the candidates clashed repeatedly over how to accomplish that. The companies, fearing that a government-run plan would lead to price controls, are siding squarely with Gov. George Bush of Texas and other Republicans who want to keep the government out of the drug insurance business.
 Vice Pres Al Gore takes part in interview with New York Times on foreign policy; Gov George W Bush aides say he still weighs invitation; Gore says his proposal, opposed by Bush, to use American military to build new democracies after peace is won has roots in Marshall Plan that rebuilt Western Europe after World War II; says he would refuse to lift most sanctions against Cuba until Fidel Castro died or was ousted; photo of Gore and wife, Tipper, campaigning in Youngstown, Ohio; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore today intensified a foreign policy argument with George W. Bush that began during their debate on Tuesday, arguing that his vision of using the American military to build new democracies after peace is won has its roots in the Marshall Plan that rebuilt Western Europe after World War II. Mr. Bush's argument that using the military in that role was endangering its essential function, Mr. Gore suggested, ignored the lessons of a postwar policy that he credited not only with saving a war-ravaged continent but also with building prosperity and, ultimately, reuniting Germany under democracy after the collapse of Communism. Vice President Al Gore today intensified a foreign policy argument with George W. Bush that began during their debate on Tuesday, arguing that his vision of using the American military to build new democracies after peace is won has its roots in the Marshall Plan that rebuilt Western Europe after World War II. Mr. Bush's argument that using the military in that role was endangering its essential function, Mr. Gore suggested, ignored the lessons of a postwar policy that he credited not only with saving a war-ravaged continent but also with building prosperity and, ultimately, reuniting Germany under democracy after the collapse of Communism. ''It's not a new mission,'' Mr. Gore insisted, when asked about Mr. Bush's criticism that American military preparedness has suffered because troops are overdeployed around the world, often for nonmilitary tasks. ''The generation that won World War II, having seen the catastrophe of the interwar period of the '20s and '30s, wisely decided that nation-building was a preferable alternative to World War III.'' The Marshall Plan, announced shortly after the war by Secretary of State George C. Marshall, was an economic reconstruction effort for Western Europe and involved aid, not troops. But in Japan and to some extent in Germany, the American occupation forces helped build a court and legislative system, drafting laws and running local governments, as well as providing security. Mr. Gore was suggesting that that was an appropriate model, on a smaller scale, for American troops in Bosnia and Kosovo. The vice president spoke today in an hourlong interview on foreign policy in response to a request sent several weeks ago to both major party candidates to talk about how the United States should use its military, financial and diplomatic power abroad. Mr. Bush's aides have said they are considering the request, but have not set a date. In his interview, Mr. Gore also said that if he was elected, he would refuse to lift most sanctions on Cuba until Fidel Castro died or was removed from office. When it was suggested that the next president might have to deal with a change of regime in Havana, Mr. Gore shot back, ''I hope so.'' He described himself as a ''hard-liner on Cuba.'' Opposition to Castro's government is a major political issue in Florida, a state that Mr. Gore's aides say they now believe he can win. A victory there would be crucial in Mr. Gore's efforts to put together enough electoral college votes to win the presidency five weeks from now. In a survey of world trouble spots, Mr. Gore also said that as president he would step up efforts to help the Iraqi opposition to President Saddam Hussein -- though he declined to say if the aid would be overt or covert -- and he was sharply critical of Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, for efforts to harass the country's newspapers and crack down in Chechnya. He also spoke at length about his growing concern that Indonesia, the world's fourth most populous nation, was on the brink of chaos, but conceded that he had yet to explore options about how the United States could stabilize the country. Mr. Gore's position on Cuba was in sharp contrast to his views on how to deal with another hard-line but economically failing Communist nation, North Korea, whose leaders also go to extraordinary lengths to repress dissent. There, he insisted, a slow but steady lifting of American sanctions has ''yielded some tentative positive results,'' including recent reunions between North and South Korean families that have been separated for half a century. But he added that while North Korea has ''been moving haltingly in the right direction, Cuba has been moving headlong in the wrong direction.'' Historically, foreign policy plays a major role in presidential elections only during times of crisis, most notably in the 1968 contest at the height of the Vietnam War and in the 1980 election, during the Iran hostage crisis. In today's interview, Mr. Gore noted that ''even in our increasingly interdependent world,'' where foreign economic crises affect agricultural markets, and when oil supplies are once again a major issue, ''foreign policy is still not usually on the front burner for most people.'' Indeed, at a rally here in Ohio today just before his interview, he never mentioned international issues, and he rarely does from the stump. ''The cliche that you often hear is that it can't help you but it can hurt you,'' he said. ''I'm not sure that's true.'' His advisers, when speaking on background, often describe Mr. Gore's knowledge of the world in an effort to make the case that he is more suited for the presidency than is Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore himself, earlier this year, described Mr. Bush as ''noticeably blank'' on issues of foreign policy. Mr. Gore avoided such criticisms today. But, looking relaxed as he settled into a wingback chair next to a fireplace at a hotel here, he used every opportunity to display the fruits of seven years of daily intelligence briefings. He talked about the nature of the rebellions in Aceh, an Indonesian province, differentiated among the Iraqi groups opposing Mr. Hussein, and discussed at length his conversations with Jiang Zemin, China's president, about Beijing's efforts to control Internet traffic. Mr. Gore used the discussion of when he would deploy the military to draw sharp contrasts with Mr. Bush, saying it was ''one area where Governor Bush and I part ways.'' He suggested, as he did on Tuesday night in Boston, that sometimes American troops might be sent to prevent humanitarian crises even if any direct threat to American security was remote. And he drew attention to Bosnia, where he was an earlier advocate of intervention than was President Clinton. Mr. Bush's top foreign policy adviser, Condoleeza Rice, said on Tuesday night in Boston that the governor's concern about ''nation building'' centered on a fear that American troops were being used for ''civil administration, taking kids to kindergarten,'' and that they are unwisely ''sent to intervene in civil wars, as in Haiti.'' Mr. Gore acknowledged that there was ''a legitimate concern about how far we go,'' but argued that part of what he called forward engagement in the world was the use of American troops to build courts, administrative agencies and schools. His father, later a senator, had such a role in Germany after World War II, he said. When the discussion turned away from the Balkans and toward Indonesia -- where the United States has been deeply involved since the Asian economic crisis of 1997 and the forced resignation of President Suharto a year later -- Mr. Gore was clearly less comfortable describing how the United States might make use of ''forward engagement.'' Mr. Gore's comments about Mr. Castro reflected both seven years of White House frustration in dealing with Cuba and election-year politics at a time that Florida's 25 electoral votes are being desperately fought over by the two candidates. Mr. Gore also had harsh words for Mr. Putin, saying that ''I'm very troubled by his apparent backtracking'' on the advances in press freedom, and on ''his conduct in Chechnya.'' But he said he would not favor withholding American aid as a lever to change Russia's actions, noting that most of the money goes toward dismantling Russia's nuclear arsenal. Nevertheless, he added, ''there is all kinds of leverage'' in Washington's other dealings with Moscow.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on presidential debate holds Vice Pres Al Gore showed himself to be qualified, but annoying, while Gov George W Bush seemed to have difficulty focusing on issues (M) Max knows how to handle the Unexpected, and it's not by distributing hugs and tears to the dispossessed or even by inviting Russian ex-prime ministers over to her crib. She is not just a Reformer With Results. She's a Reformer With Lips. And unlike Al Gore, she knows how to apply makeup so that she doesn't look like a big, orange, waxy, wickless candle. I wanted to strangle Gore and slap Bush. I wanted the Dark Angel to hang both these weenies out of a window by their ankles, as she did some pushy, tattooed blonde. A Max observation summed up my feelings about the Oedipal one-upmanship of Bush and Gore: ''I actually feel sorry for guys sometimes. They're prisoners of their genes.'' (''So are dogs,'' her lesbian pal retorted.) Al Gore senior was a famous Southern orator who taught his son to get used to settings where he had to talk. George Bush senior was a famous New England non-orator who taught his son to be wary of settings where he had to talk. Al Gore learned from his father the value of old-fashioned populism, making a case to the people. W. learned from his father the value of old-fashioned elitism, not having to make a case to the people. W. did not check his watch, as dad did. But he was just as eager to see the clock run out. He acted annoyed, in a genial way, when Al Gore filibustered and threw in brain-twisters. But W. did not try very hard to wrest back the microphone. The microphone is not his friend. Months of study had given W. a fragile grip on the issues, but the tension about whether he would know an answer evoked the scene in Hitchcock's ''North by Northwest'' when Cary Grant (W.) is hanging on to the Mount Rushmore precipice by his fingertips and Martin Landau (Gore) is grinding his foot into Cary's hand. Al Gore was taught formal intellectual policy discourse at his father's knee. W. was taught informal bull sessions with the inner circle at his father's knee. Al Gore was never a natural performer, like his father, so he concentrated harder on his homework. If he could not be charming, he would be dogged. So now, in debates, he is doomed to be Annoying Boy, apple-polishing and doing that smug-mugging. Asked on CNN about his unvocalized but audible condescension, Mr. Gore explained that he thought his sighing was off the record: ''Under the debate rules we were told there was going to be no coverage of our reactions when the other guy was talking,'' he said fastidiously.
 The league, unlike most environmental groups, has a history of supporting both Democratic and Republican candidates for political office. The group endorsed Vice President Al Gore in February, when he was still locked in a battle for the Democratic nomination. And in 1998, it endorsed Gov. George E. Pataki for re-election. The league, unlike most environmental groups, has a history of supporting both Democratic and Republican candidates for political office. The group endorsed Vice President Al Gore in February, when he was still locked in a battle for the Democratic nomination. And in 1998, it endorsed Gov. George E. Pataki for re-election. Earlier in the day, Mrs. Clinton spoke to students at Brooklyn Law School and, in keeping with Mr. Gore's comments during Tuesday's debate, said voters should place great weight on the Supreme Court appointments the next president is likely to make and the next Senate will decide whether to confirm.
 CLINTON TOURS FOR GORE -- President Clinton's travel schedule at the tail end of his second term has begun, not surprisingly, to overlap a lot with the states Vice President Al Gore needs to win. Yesterday found him in Florida, where, also not surprisingly, he was high in praise of Mr. Gore's performance in Tuesday's debate. Mr. Clinton told an enthusiastic crowd in Jacksonville that Mr. Gore had done ''a great job'' of laying out his differences with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. CLINTON TOURS FOR GORE -- President Clinton's travel schedule at the tail end of his second term has begun, not surprisingly, to overlap a lot with the states Vice President Al Gore needs to win. Yesterday found him in Florida, where, also not surprisingly, he was high in praise of Mr. Gore's performance in Tuesday's debate. Mr. Clinton told an enthusiastic crowd in Jacksonville that Mr. Gore had done ''a great job'' of laying out his differences with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. After putting up with quite a few, well, less than five-star establishments, the Republican vice-presidential candidate Dick Cheney beamed a videotaped message to the Bush campaign headquarters in Austin, Tex., about 10 days ago, threatening in his deadest dead pan to send the Bush campaign manager, Joe Allbaugh, ''on an all-expense paid trip to every lousy hotel we stayed in during the course of the campaign.'' Mr. Cheney recalled hotels with ''green used hospital sheets and nonworking shower heads,'' one that ''offered exposed wiring and bed bugs,'' another so dire that ''the advance staff asked to be transferred to the local KOA campground.'' He told of how one hotel lost all power, ''probably because of Al Gore's energy policies,'' and how he and and his wife, Lynne, transferred to another where ''the snoring that woke Lynne up wasn't coming from me, but from the guy in the next room.'' BY THE NUMBERS -- During Tuesday's presidential debate in Boston, Vice President Al Gore interrupted, went over his time limits, asked for more time, even petitioned Jim Lehrer, the moderator, for more chances to respond. He was, in short, the over-eager beaver, trying to monopolize the evening, doing most of the talking. It just seemed that way at times because of his relentless recitation of facts and figures. In fact, however, a look at the debate transcript shows that Gov. George W. Bush talked more. He managed to get out 7,900 words in the 90 minutes, give or take a mouthful. Mr. Gore got out 7,400. A footnote: The ABC News political unit put a stopwatch on the debaters: Mr. Gore talked for 43 minutes and 15 seconds; Mr. Bush talked for 42 minutes and 30 seconds.
 Some political analysts contend that the Colorado initiative could draw many Democrats to the polls, thus helping Vice President Al Gore win the state from Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican. But Mr. McCain, who finished behind Mr. Bush in the Republican primaries this year, said he did not think that would happen. Asked if he had heard from the Bush campaign about the new commercials, Mr. McCain replied, ''No. But I'm sure I will tomorrow.''
 In an extraordinary outpouring of bipartisan support, 49 of the nation's governors -- including George W. Bush of Texas and his brother Jeb Bush of Florida -- sent a joint letter to Congress last month calling on lawmakers to approve a five-year reauthorization of Americorps, President Clinton's signature national service program. The letter was a well-deserved tribute to the program's approximately 40,000 volunteers, who receive a $4,725 educational stipend in exchange for an intensive year performing valuable work like cleaning up dilapidated parks, tutoring at-risk children and helping communities to recover from natural disasters. In an extraordinary outpouring of bipartisan support, 49 of the nation's governors -- including George W. Bush of Texas and his brother Jeb Bush of Florida -- sent a joint letter to Congress last month calling on lawmakers to approve a five-year reauthorization of Americorps, President Clinton's signature national service program. The letter was a well-deserved tribute to the program's approximately 40,000 volunteers, who receive a $4,725 educational stipend in exchange for an intensive year performing valuable work like cleaning up dilapidated parks, tutoring at-risk children and helping communities to recover from natural disasters.
 Gov George W Bush, in Boston to accept State Police Association of Massachusetts endorsement and later at West Chester, Pa, campaign rally, accuses Vice Pres Al Gore of being bigger spender and defends his own tax cut proposal against Gore's charge that it favors very wealthy; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush rode out of the first presidential debate today accusing Vice President Al Gore of being ''the biggest spender we've seen in decades'' while defending his own $1.3 trillion tax cut against Mr. Gore's assertion that it favors the very wealthy. Mr. Bush drew pointed contrasts between his view of government and those of his opponent, first in Boston, where he accepted the endorsement of the State Police Association of Massachusetts, and then at a boisterous rally at West Chester University here outside of Philadelphia. He accused Mr. Gore of turning his back on President Clinton's own pronouncement in 1996 that the ''era of big government'' had ended. Gov. George W. Bush rode out of the first presidential debate today accusing Vice President Al Gore of being ''the biggest spender we've seen in decades'' while defending his own $1.3 trillion tax cut against Mr. Gore's assertion that it favors the very wealthy. Mr. Bush drew pointed contrasts between his view of government and those of his opponent, first in Boston, where he accepted the endorsement of the State Police Association of Massachusetts, and then at a boisterous rally at West Chester University here outside of Philadelphia. He accused Mr. Gore of turning his back on President Clinton's own pronouncement in 1996 that the ''era of big government'' had ended. ''Believe it or not, he's proposed three times more spending in this campaign than President Bill Clinton did,'' Mr. Bush proclaimed to a pompom waving crowd that filled the university's field house. ''That's an amazing achievement.'' ''It's the biggest proposal for the biggest expansion of the federal government since Lyndon Baines Johnson came along,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's going to expand and or increase 200 government programs that require thousands of new bureaucrats.'' With the presidential race considered a dead heat, both campaigns jockeyed hard for advantage the day after the 90-minute nationally televised debate. Mr. Bush's aides raised new questions about Mr. Gore's character, while the Gore campaign drew Mr. Bush into a sparring match over just how much his tax plan would favor the rich. First thing this morning, Mr. Bush's aides disputed the vice president's assertion during the debate that he had toured Texas fire scenes with James Lee Witt, the head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Mr. Gore was forced to backtrack in an appearance on ABC's ''Good Morning America.'' Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, said Mr. Gore had a shown a pattern of ''embellishment'' that could haunt him in the White House. ''In a meeting with a foreign leader, the president of the United States is representing our country,'' she said. ''The credibility of our country is on the line and the president of the United States in front of a world leader can't just make things up.'' Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the vice president said that Mr. Gore had  been with Buddy Young, the regional head of FEMA in 1998, not Mr. Witt. She said that Mr. Bush and his aides were making ''personal attacks'' instead of ''talking about how to explain his tax cut.'' Time and again Tuesday night, Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of a fiscal plan that ''spends more money for tax cuts for the wealthiest one percent'' than he does in new proposals for ''health care, prescription drugs, education and national defense all combined.'' Mr. Bush, with increasing detail as the day went on, acknowledged today that the wealthy did benefit under his plan, just like other Americans, but said it was not as much as Mr. Gore had asserted. Mr. Bush said that his tax cut would drop the top income tax rate from 39.6 percent to 33 percent because ''we don't believe the federal government should take more than a third of anybody's check in federal income taxes.'' He said that rate cut accounted for $149 billion or 11 percent of his tax-relief package. That figure, Mr. Bush said, was  ''far less than the claims'' Mr. Gore made on television. As the college crowd chanted ''No fuzzy math,'' turning one of Mr. Bush's debate lines into a new political slogan, Mr. Bush reminded the audience of Mr. Gore's often mocked statement about the Internet. ''He's invented a new calculator,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's a calculator where you put real numbers in and it comes out with political numbers.'' Ms. Hughes said the campaign calculated that the top one percent of income taxpayers would get about 20 percent of the portion of Mr. Bush's tax cut that results from a reduction in income tax rates, or $223 billion in tax reductions across 10 years. The Gore campaign shot back with conflicting figures of its own based on calculations by Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal research group, that 42.6 percent of Mr. Bush's tax cuts, when fully phased in, would go to the wealthiest one percent of households. That would amount to  about $561 billion of the tax cut, Mr. Gore's aides said, and exceed the $474.6 billion in additional spending Mr. Bush calls for in the areas of national defense, health care, education, Medicare and other domestic programs in his fiscal plan. One of the reasons for the different numbers lies in the repeal of the tax on large estates valued at $675,000 or more, which Mr. Bush has also proposed as part of his tax cut plan. Bush aides, citing Congress's Joint Committees on Taxation, argue that the estate tax repeal would help an array of taxpayers, like those who inherit small family businesses, and does not just benefit the wealthiest. Mr. Gore's aides pointed to a report by a liberal study group, the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, that said the repeal would apply to the wealthiest 2 percent of people who died and left behind large estates. Mr. Bush also sought to frame his tax proposals as emblematic of the different views he and his opponent have of government. ''He wants the federal government in our lives,'' Mr. Bush said in Boston. ''He wants the federal government making decisions on behalf of ordinary citizens. What I want to do is have a limited federal government.''
 William Safire Op-Ed column holds Gov George W Bush won first presidential debate by surprising undecided by fighting Vice Pres Al Gore to draw; reviews their stands on variety of issues; drawing (M) Because he surprised the undecideds by fighting his more experienced debate opponent to a draw, George W. Bush won Round One. To those few of us who are human-rights interventionists, Al Gore was not only more sure-footed in demeanor but more sensible about the need for the U.S. to apply pressure to remove Slobodan Milosevic after the Yugoslav election. Whichever of Bush's policy advisers suggested that we turn to Russia's Vladimir Putin as a mediator did the G.O.P. candidate a disservice. Gore, who should be on the defensive about his trust-Russia record, deftly took advantage of the opening. Because he surprised the undecideds by fighting his more experienced debate opponent to a draw, George W. Bush won Round One. To those few of us who are human-rights interventionists, Al Gore was not only more sure-footed in demeanor but more sensible about the need for the U.S. to apply pressure to remove Slobodan Milosevic after the Yugoslav election. Whichever of Bush's policy advisers suggested that we turn to Russia's Vladimir Putin as a mediator did the G.O.P. candidate a disservice. Gore, who should be on the defensive about his trust-Russia record, deftly took advantage of the opening. Contrariwise, Bush belted Gore all over the ring on accountability in  education. The Texas governor was both well versed and passionate; his sincerity was in contrast to the vice president's cornball use of a letter from a Florida parent complaining that a daughter had no desk to sit at  in class. (A local radio reporter then found out that the Sarasota classroom was crowded that day because $100,000 in new lab equipment had just been moved in. Live by folksy anecdotes, die by folksy anecdotes.) Gore again put on display his compulsion to exaggerate. Republicans call it ''the flaming whopper'': after Bush complimented the Federal Emergency Management Agency for its response to fires raging in Texas in 1998, Gore blurted, ''I accompanied [FEMA Director] James Lee Witt down to Texas when those fires broke out.'' Not true; Gore went without Witt, said a few words about the fires at the Houston airport, and continued on to a trial lawyer's fund-raiser, one of those events he likes to call ''donor-related community outreach.'' Abortion should have been Gore's strongest suit, but Bush put him on the defensive by raising its most extreme form. Gore responded, ''On the issue of partial birth or so-called late-term abortion'' (he meant to say ''late-term or so-called partial birth abortion''), ''I would sign a law banning that procedure, provided that doctors have the ability to save a woman's life or to act if her health is severely at risk.'' Note that insertion of severely. The loophole that pro-choicers want is ''health,'' which would allow a woman late in pregnancy to say that birth would cause her stress. By adding ''severely,'' Gore may upset some of his absolutist followers, but he shrewdly moves closer to the majority of voters who disapprove of the late-term procedure. An unremarked zinger was Bush's ''I don't know where the vice president stands'' on tearing down hydroelectric dams in the Northwest, as fish-protectors want and job-protectors oppose. Gore ignored that and continues to straddle, but the heat is now on for him to decide, which will cost him crucial votes in the swing states of Washington and Oregon. Bush missed a chance to counterpunch when Gore, with his lifelong pipeline to Occidental Petroleum, went into his populist riff blaming ''the big oil companies'' for oil prices. Bush failed to nail Gore for his election-time flip-flop on dipping into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Gore programmed himself not to appear programmed, but the relentless robot showed through. Not thrice but 10 times on this Rialto did he repeat ''the wealthiest 1 percent,'' his rallying cry of class warfare. Bush's riposte was to point out that his across-the-board tax cuts would benefit the lower middle class more than Gore's more modest tax plan, but that appeal to the already-decideds failed to register. What did come across was a certain amiable niceness, or even gentlemanliness, in Bush's demeanor even as he imputed phoniness to Gore's numbers, lack of credibility to his character and ''totally false!'' to his attacks. Bush proved he is not the caricature drawn of him. Gore was undeniably a commanding presence, interrupting, demanding more time, reciting a series of hot-button points, to the brink of bullying both opponent and moderator (though Jim Lehrer kept equal-time discipline). That impulse to domineer probably helped the vice president with men, hurt him with women. Offstage, Gore is a serious man of parts, but the part I didn't like in this debate was his mugging as his opponent was speaking. The eye-rolling, snorting, head-shaking, moaning, derisive displays of disbelief struck me as puerile and disrespectful. In all, two men with profound differences stood toe to toe, and Bush stunned detractors by holding his own. By not losing, he ''won.'' In Rounds Two and Three, he will have to win to win.
 Editorial backs charge by Vice Pres Al Gore that Gov George W Bush's tax cut plan would award more money to wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers than amounts Bush would set aside for major programs; opposes giving wealthiest, who pay 20.1 percent of taxes, 42.6 percent of tax break Of all the contentious issues in their debate Tuesday night, none underscored the differences between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush more than taxes. Repeating himself relentlessly, Mr. Gore asserted that the Texas governor's proposed tax cuts would award more money to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers than the amounts Mr. Bush would set aside for education, health and defense combined. Mr. Bush accused the vice president of using ''fuzzy numbers,'' but never refuted the basic charge. In fact, Mr. Gore's formula was on target, illustrating a stark choice between the two candidates' approaches on the tax issue. Mr. Bush likes to defend his proposals as lowering tax rates for everyone, not just those who seize the narrowly crafted incentives offered by Mr. Gore. He has a point. In order to take advantage of the Gore tax cuts, taxpayers would have to tap into credits or deductions for child care, health insurance, college tuition, care of disabled relatives and other needs. A working-class family without these expenses might get little or no tax relief. It is legitimate to raise a question whether Mr. Gore's approach would further complicate an already complex tax code. Of all the contentious issues in their debate Tuesday night, none underscored the differences between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush more than taxes. Repeating himself relentlessly, Mr. Gore asserted that the Texas governor's proposed tax cuts would award more money to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers than the amounts Mr. Bush would set aside for education, health and defense combined. Mr. Bush accused the vice president of using ''fuzzy numbers,'' but never refuted the basic charge. In fact, Mr. Gore's formula was on target, illustrating a stark choice between the two candidates' approaches on the tax issue. Mr. Bush likes to defend his proposals as lowering tax rates for everyone, not just those who seize the narrowly crafted incentives offered by Mr. Gore. He has a point. In order to take advantage of the Gore tax cuts, taxpayers would have to tap into credits or deductions for child care, health insurance, college tuition, care of disabled relatives and other needs. A working-class family without these expenses might get little or no tax relief. It is legitimate to raise a question whether Mr. Gore's approach would further complicate an already complex tax code. But there are issues beyond simplicity. Among other steps, the Bush tax proposals would lower the marginal tax rates in all brackets, double the child tax credit and repeal the so-called ''death tax'' on estates -- a change that would benefit primarily the richest American families. Taken together, the Bush tax proposals would award 42.6 percent of the tax reductions to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers, according to Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal-leaning research group that bases its projections on figures from the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee on Taxation. Bush supporters emphasize the middle-class beneficiaries of the tax cut. They also argue that since the wealthiest pay most of the taxes, it is not unjust for them to get most of the benefit. But according to the Treasury Department, the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers account for 14.8 percent of total income and 20.1 percent of tax revenues. To give them 42.6 percent of a $1.3 trillion tax cut over 10 years makes no sense -- unless the goal is to comfort the already comfortable. To oppose that idea is not just populism. It is common sense. Contrary to Mr. Bush's claims, these are not ''fuzzy'' numbers. They illuminate the desire by most Americans for a fair-minded tax code that taxes those most able to pay at higher rates, without reducing the incentive for the rich to increase their wealth. That principle of progressivity has been around since the income tax was first enacted during the Civil War. It is a precept that lies at the core of a just society, as most of its members would understand it. Mr. Gore may continue to hammer at this point, and be accused of waging class warfare. But he has astutely sensed that public fervor for tax cuts, so prevalent in the 1980's, has given way to broader concerns with equity and fiscal responsibility. There can be no more important goal for a society than to reward its burdens and benefits in a recognizably fair way. Mr. Bush's tax proposals do not meet that test.
 Byron Lee letter disputes assertions about education made by Gov George W Bush in October 3 debate with Vice Pres Al Gore George W. Bush singled out a school in Texas during the debate. He referred to the KIP Academy and said that it was for ''at risk'' children and that at-risk ''means basically they can't learn'' (transcript, Oct. 4). In fact, ''at risk'' generally means children who have learning impediments that are due to physical, emotional, socioeconomic or cultural factors. George W. Bush singled out a school in Texas during the debate. He referred to the KIP Academy and said that it was for ''at risk'' children and that at-risk ''means basically they can't learn'' (transcript, Oct. 4). In fact, ''at risk'' generally means children who have learning impediments that are due to physical, emotional, socioeconomic or cultural factors.
 Tuesday night's mediocre effort on the part of Al Gore and George W. Bush to engage in meaningful dialogue was exactly what America was hoping not to hear (front page, Oct. 4). Tuesday night's mediocre effort on the part of Al Gore and George W. Bush to engage in meaningful dialogue was exactly what America was hoping not to hear (front page, Oct. 4).
 Nielsen Media Research data show 46.6 million people watched presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, far less than 67 million average audience for all debates shown on networks from 1976 to 1992; good-government groups blame decisions of Fox and NBC networks not to show debate live and to offer other programming instead; graph (M) The debate on Tuesday night between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush was watched by at least 46.6 million people, a fairly meager audience for a presidential debate, data from Nielsen Media Research shows. The debate on Tuesday night between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush was watched by at least 46.6 million people, a fairly meager audience for a presidential debate, data from Nielsen Media Research shows. Still, the audience for the first debate between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush was far smaller than the average audience for all the debates that were shown on the networks from 1976 to 1992: 67 million. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE RATINGS  Correction:  October 6, 2000, Friday  An article yesterday about the number of people who watched the televised debate on Tuesday between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas referred incorrectly in some copies to Ronald Reagan's opponent in 1980, when the largest audience for a presidential debate was recorded. He was Jimmy Carter; Walter F. Mondale ran for vice president that year, and for president four years later. An article yesterday about the number of people who watched the televised debate on Tuesday between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas referred incorrectly in some copies to Ronald Reagan's opponent in 1980, when the largest audience for a presidential debate was recorded. He was Jimmy Carter; Walter F. Mondale ran for vice president that year, and for president four years later.
 Presidential debate underscored degree to which Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush are standing fast on principles and policies that have divided their parties for generations; candidates not only took tried and true stands of their predecessors over many elections past, but even often used same words and phrases (M) The debate Tuesday night underscored the degree to which Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are standing fast on the principles and policies that have divided their parties for generations. The debate Tuesday night underscored the degree to which Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are standing fast on the principles and policies that have divided their parties for generations. When, for instance, Mr. Gore repeated over and over that the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers would be the main beneficiaries of the tax cuts Mr. Bush has proposed, he sounded just like his Democratic forefathers. And this was Michael S. Dukakis addressing George Bush's tax plan in their first debate on Sept. 25, 1988: ''What he's proposing is a tax cut for the wealthiest 1 percent of people in this country.'' When the younger Mr. Bush said on Tuesday that ''the vice president thinks it's the government's money; the payroll taxes are your money,'' he could have been quoting Ronald Reagan. In 1992 and 1996, Bill Clinton advocated a ''third way,'' something between the historical positions of Democrats and Republicans, and his opponents, George Bush and Bob Dole, were forced to defend political compromises they had struck as president and Senate majority leader, respectively. But it is much more than the matter of taxes and spending -- with Mr. Bush advocating deep, across-the-board tax cuts and Mr. Gore proposing heavy new spending for social programs -- where this year's campaign reflects long-held party positions. On the question of the proper role of the federal government, Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of wanting to ''increase the size of government dramatically,'' a plan that Mr. Bush said, ''empowers Washington.'' For his part, Mr. Bush went on, ''My passion and my vision is to empower Americans to be able to make decisions for themselves and their own lives.'' By the same token, Mr. Gore's insistence that social insurance -- Social Security and Medicare -- should be universal, available to the same degree to all Americans, rich and poor, has been the operating principle of the Democratic party since the New Deal. Republicans, for the most part, voted against Social Security in the 1930's and against Medicare in the 1960's and have never fully accepted the doctrine of social insurance. Mr. Bush's advocacy of partial privatization of the two programs fits that mold. On energy, Mr. Bush's solution to high oil prices is more domestic production, Mr. Gore's is conservation. This is the same dispute Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan had in 1980. When Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of threatening to ''destroy precious parts of America's environment'' by drilling for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, he was taking a cue from Mr. Dukakis, who in his second debate with Vice President George Bush called him ''the charter member of the environmental wrecking crew.'' In the debate, Mr. Gore succinctly stated the Democratic principle: ''I think a woman's right to choose ought to be protected and defended.'' Though Mr. Bush has mostly adopted the usual Republican stand against legalized abortion, he did some bobbing and weaving on Tuesday night. He spoke generally about ''promoting a culture of life'' and protecting ''every child born and unborn.'' Polls show public disdain for vouchers, so Mr. Bush avoids the word, but his position is little different from that of his father, who was a strong advocate of vouchers. In the debate, Mr. Bush said, ''I believe that if we find poor children trapped in schools that won't teach, we need to free the parents.'' Mr. Gore replied in time-tested Democratic fashion: ''I don't think private schools should have a right to take taxpayer money away from public schools.'' The arguments over qualifications for the Supreme Court have hardly changed since Earl Warren was chief justice in the 1950's and 1960's. On Tuesday night, Mr. Bush said, ''I believe in strict constructionists, and those are the kind of judges I will appoint.'' And Mr. Gore's response was the same one Democrats were making then: ''In my view, the Constitution ought to be interpreted as a document that grows with our country and our history.''
 This Congressional district, Ohio's 12th, has been visited and singled out as a ''must win'' by Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House minority leader. Outside advertisements and other aid are being funneled in by pro-Democratic groups. Party workers say the Gore campaign is pouring resources into the district, making Columbus second only to Scranton, Pa., in the swing-state investment strategy of the national Democrats. Her trust is rooted in the fact that 55 percent of the district's voters call themselves independents. But many of these traditionally vote Republican, in a state where recent polls show the Bush campaign maintaining a slender lead, perhaps five percentage points.
 Margaret Brandwein letter, commenting on October 4 article on debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, says Gore marred presentation by relentless redundancy while Bush's obvious deficit in experimental seasoning was offset by poise and aplomb; drawing Loyalists for each contender will find reason to reinforce their pre-formed preferences. Over all, the much-touted debater, Al Gore, marred his presentation by relentless redundancy. And George W. Bush's obvious deficit in experiential seasoning was largely offset by poise and aplomb. Loyalists for each contender will find reason to reinforce their pre-formed preferences. Over all, the much-touted debater, Al Gore, marred his presentation by relentless redundancy. And George W. Bush's obvious deficit in experiential seasoning was largely offset by poise and aplomb.
 A news analysis article yesterday about the performances of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in their first debate referred imprecisely in some copies to a criticism of the candidates. The observation that they took ''too much time niggling over details'' was a paraphrase of comments by former Mayor Pete Flaherty of Pittsburgh, not a quotation. In some copies the article misstated the location of West Chester, Pa., where Mr. Bush campaigned yesterday. It is in Chester County, not Montgomery. A news analysis article yesterday about the performances of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in their first debate referred imprecisely in some copies to a criticism of the candidates. The observation that they took ''too much time niggling over details'' was a paraphrase of comments by former Mayor Pete Flaherty of Pittsburgh, not a quotation. In some copies the article misstated the location of West Chester, Pa., where Mr. Bush campaigned yesterday. It is in Chester County, not Montgomery.
 Voters in Albuquerque seem unimpressed by presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush despite heavy pre-debate buildup; both campaigns have devoted large amount of time and money to New Mexico, state unaccustomed to such attention; photo (M) Ms. Laflin's reporting was a contrast to the buildup the debate received in the local and national news media, which promoted the showdown between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore as a kind of political gunfight at the O.K. Corral. ''The debate could be a turning point, and I think both of them know it,'' Bob Schieffer told Dan Rather on the CBS Evening News. The local media picked up the theme, reinforcing the idea that the debate was more than a discussion of issues. On the national stage, what the people of New Mexico took away from the debate appeared to count for a lot, and certainly, a lot more than news people and their readers and viewers here are accustomed to. The Bush and Gore campaigns have devoted large amounts of time and money to the state; recent newspaper polls here show the race to be a dead heat. Adam Vance, a KOAT cameraman, counted seven visits to the state by Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush and their running mates since June. ''We've never had anything like this, and I grew up here,'' said Ms. Laflin, who, unlike some of the reporters assigned full time to cover the nominees, has snared one-on-one interviews over the last month with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. The local contributions often consisted of polls: KOAT, the ABC affiliate and the market's dominant news station, ran an informal one on its Web site and the New Mexican published the results today of a Mason-Dixon poll it commissioned that gave Mr. Bush an edge of 44 percent to 41 percent, a difference within the survey's margin of error. And of course, the experiences of Joseph Austin, an Albuquerque construction worker who was tapped by the Gore campaign to be one its 13 ''real people'' advisers were faithfully related. Still, some voters here said they had been able to make judgments about the candidates based on highlights of the debate on local television. Ruben Martinez, a student at the University of New Mexico, said he had been inclined to vote for Mr. Bush until he watched reports on the debate this morning on KOAT. What caught his eye, he said, was an excerpt in which Mr. Gore declared himself to be his own man, a statement Mr. Martinez took to mean the vice president ''was positioning himself away from the Clinton scandals.'' The declaration struck him as so genuine, he said, that as a result, ''I'm up in the air.'' ''We were already getting calls today asking us, 'What can you do to help us sort out the 'fuzzy arithmetic,' '' Mr. Robertson said, invoking a word Mr. Bush used repeatedly in the debate. But even if ''civic-style analysis'' is not the most glamorous kind of journalism, Mr. Robertson said, the Journal will try to stick to the issues until Election Day.
 Tom Croarkin letter, commenting on Oct 4 article on debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, says Gore exceeded expectations without sullying discourse while Bush met minimal standards for success In the first presidential debate there were two clearly different and unfair standards for success (''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate,'' front page, Oct. 4). Al  Gore had to be articulate without being too confrontational and ''policy wonkish.'' George W. Bush had to show up and speak articulately. In the first presidential debate there were two clearly different and unfair standards for success (''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate,'' front page, Oct. 4). Al  Gore had to be articulate without being too confrontational and ''policy wonkish.'' George W. Bush had to show up and speak articulately. Al Gore put on a bravura performance on Tuesday night by providing specific, easily understood descriptions of his proposals and pointed contrasts to Mr. Bush's plans. He was superlative on taxes, deficit reduction, Social Security, reproductive rights and Medicare and provided contrast without resorting to personal attacks. Mr. Bush did show up, and he spoke articulately. But he paled in comparison to Mr. Gore. He never responded to Mr. Gore's point that his tax cut would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of the population. He was also weak on foreign policy, military leadership, handling a financial crisis, and on abortion. Mr. Gore exceeded expectations by being specific without sullying the debate. Mr. Bush met his minimal standard for success, but do we really want a president who is held to such low standards of competence?
 Joanne White letter, commenting on Oct 4 article on debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, says candidates' body language provided better glimpse of their true character than anything they were saying Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4):
 George Solovay letter comments on remarks about role of military made by Gov George W Bush during debate with Vice Pres Al Gore on October 3 I wonder if Yogi Berra helped George W. Bush prepare for the debate. Answering a question about the military, Mr. Bush said, ''I believe the role of the military is to fight and win war and therefore prevent war from happening in the first place'' (transcript, Oct. 4). I wonder if Yogi Berra helped George W. Bush prepare for the debate. Answering a question about the military, Mr. Bush said, ''I believe the role of the military is to fight and win war and therefore prevent war from happening in the first place'' (transcript, Oct. 4).
 Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader demands Commission on Presidential Debates apologize for barring him from using ticket from supporter to attend presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush at secondary hall separate from actual debate and contribute to electoral reform project or face suit, phone interview; commission holds tickets are nontransferable; photo (M)
 Matt C Abbott letter comments on October 4 article on presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): Who won Tuesday night's debate? It should be rather obvious: if you are a Republican, George W. Bush won. If you are a Democrat, Al Gore won.
 Charles McNulty letter disputes Oct 4 article on ebate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush Vice President Al Gore may love ''to show off'' his ''encyclopedic'' command of the facts. But given the extent of our continuing military investment in the Balkans, one would expect the candidates to know at least the names of Slobodan Milosevic, the Yugoslav president, and his current democratic challenger, Vojislav Kostunica, as well as something about the political makeup of a country we recently bombed. This information should be a prerequisite for both candidates, not a reason to conclude that Mr. Gore is acting once again like a know-it-all.
 Jeff Brink letter, commenting on October 4 article, accuses Vice Pres Al Gore of being rude and disrespectful toward Gov George W Bush during first presidential debate After watching the first presidential debate, I learned one thing about Al Gore: he is impatient (front page, Oct. 4). Mr. Gore's sighing and dismissal of George W. Bush's responses were rude, disrespectful and distracting. After watching the first presidential debate, I learned one thing about Al Gore: he is impatient (front page, Oct. 4). Mr. Gore's sighing and dismissal of George W. Bush's responses were rude, disrespectful and distracting. Though I did not agree with everything that the Texas governor had to say, I respected the fact that he had the decency to allow Mr. Gore to finish his responses.
 Sen Tim Hutchinson and Rep Tom Coburn, who oppose abortion, offer bill to restrict access to abortion pill RU-486, or mifepristone, by requiring doctors who prescribe it to know how to perform surgical abortions and handle abortion complications; bill coincides with debate over whether Gov George W Bush, if elected president, could force FDA to reverse its approval of drug (M) The day after Gov. George W. Bush said he thought he would have no authority as president to overturn the Food and Drug Administration's approval of the abortion pill, two anti-abortion lawmakers today introduced legislation restricting access to it. The day after Gov. George W. Bush said he thought he would have no authority as president to overturn the Food and Drug Administration's approval of the abortion pill, two anti-abortion lawmakers today introduced legislation restricting access to it. The bill coincides with another political question about the future of the drug: whether as president Mr. Bush, who opposes abortion, could force the F.D.A. to reverse its decision. The answer, experts say, is that while his doing so might be theoretically possible, it would be highly unlikely. Still, the president can ask the F.D.A. to reconsider approval. In an interview last week, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, Ray Sullivan, said that if elected, the governor would order a ''careful review'' of the decision. But in the presidential debate on Tuesday night, Mr. Bush said only that he would ''make sure that women would be safe who used the drug.'' A spokesman for the Bush campaign said the governor had not taken a position on the bill.
 Both Sides Say Debate Probably Changed Little  Republicans and Democrats alike conceded that the overall dynamics of the presidential race did not seem to have been changed by the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Top officials on both sides said their candidates had met their basic objectives during the televised encounter, which was watched by 46 million people. Mr. Gore asserted that his vision of using the American military to build new democracies after peace is won is rooted in the Marshall Plan. Gore aides accused Mr. Bush of making several misstatements in the debate while admitting that Mr. Gore had made some slips himself. Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of being ''the biggest spender we've seen in decades'' and defended his own $1.3 trillion tax cut proposal.
 Your Oct. 4 coverage of the first presidential debate would seem to suggest that it ended in a draw. Does this mean that because George W. Bush did not fall off the stage that he held his own with Al Gore? To cite one example, Mr. Bush has no foreign policy background, and he seemed befuddled and impatient with these questions. Your Oct. 4 coverage of the first presidential debate would seem to suggest that it ended in a draw. Does this mean that because George W. Bush did not fall off the stage that he held his own with Al Gore? To cite one example, Mr. Bush has no foreign policy background, and he seemed befuddled and impatient with these questions. Mr. Gore demonstrated a complex grasp of multiple subjects, seemed eager to get his point across and to debate on any and all subjects, while Mr. Bush appeared scripted and ''handled.'' At work this morning, the discussion was all about the debate, and Democrats and Republicans alike agreed that Mr. Gore presented a far higher intelligence, depth of experience and fuller grasp of the issues.
 Harold Schnabel letter, commenting on October 4 article on first presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, says neither emerged winner Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): Al Gore, with his smirk and raised hand, reminded me of a used-car salesman who blunts every argument and question with, ''Don't worry, she's a beaut and in perfect condition.'' But he did finish strong. George W. Bush seemed to have considerable knowledge of the issues, and his statements were more logical.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, campaigning in Ohio, shows little interest in rehashing debate with Gov George W Bush; his campaign cites alleged Bush misstatements and admits Gore also erred (M) A day after his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush, Vice President Al Gore seemed far removed from the thrust and parry of forensics. At a rally in the courthouse square here, Mr. Gore mentioned the debate only in passing. ''Did you see the debate last night?'' he asked the  crowd. ''I don't know about you, but I think, even though Governor Bush and I have a lot of differences, personally, I think it's better to spend time attacking America's problems than attacking people personally.'' The audience cheered. A day after his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush, Vice President Al Gore seemed far removed from the thrust and parry of forensics. At a rally in the courthouse square here, Mr. Gore mentioned the debate only in passing. ''Did you see the debate last night?'' he asked the  crowd. ''I don't know about you, but I think, even though Governor Bush and I have a lot of differences, personally, I think it's better to spend time attacking America's problems than attacking people personally.'' The audience cheered. Offstage, Mr. Gore's campaign aides accused Mr. Bush of making several misstatements in the 90-minute exchange in Boston on Tuesday night and acknowledged that Mr. Gore had made a couple of slips himself. Mr. Gore conceded that he did not examine fires in Texas in 1998 with the director of the federal disaster agency, as he had said in the debate. It was the deputy director. But today, Mr. Gore focused on education, health care and preserving retirement security. Similarly, at a rally on Tuesday night in Boston after the debate, Mr. Gore did not mention the big event either, dwelling instead on his fond recollections of Boston from his days at Harvard. This morning, Mr. Gore was queried on several television talk shows about his debate performance. But he showed little interest in rehashing the event, even though many talk-show hosts suggested he had won. Christopher Lehane, a Gore campaign spokesman, said Mr. Bush had made at least four misstatements: *That Mr. Gore had outspent him in the presidential campaign. ''Bush has spent $93 million, we spent $46 million,'' Mr. Lehane said. *His response when Mr. Gore asked where he would find the trillion dollars to privatize Social Security: ''The trillion dollars comes from the surplus.'' Mr. Lehane pounced on this answer, saying, ''A trillion dollars on top of his budget numbers already? That would be economically disastrous for our country -- there's absolutely no way that that money exists.'' In a second debate misstatement cited by the Bush campaign, Mr. Gore said Sarasota High School in Florida was overcrowded. He had based this on a letter from the father of a student at the school and an enclosed newspaper clipping. But the school principal, Daniel Kennedy, said today that the student's classroom had been overcrowded on one particular day because it was being refurbished. The performance by Jon Bon Jovi at his New Jersey home last night may have been unusually decorous for a rock concert. But security for the guest of honor, Vice President Al Gore, turned parts of the state into a veritable mosh pit. State police closed off miles of road for Mr. Gore, who flew in and out of Newark International Airport for a Democratic fund-raiser on Mr. Bon Jovi's 18-acre riverside estate in Middletown Township in Monmouth County. Jon S. Corzine, the party's candidate for the seat being vacated by Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, also attended the event, which raised $850,000 for Mr. Gore's campaign.
 Joanne Licato letter disputes October 4 article on presidential debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): The problem with Al Gore is that on one side of his mouth he has said the economy is great, and on the other side he suggests that the gap between rich and poor is widening.  Hasn't it widened further over the last eight years? Re ''Bush and Gore Stake Out Differences in First Debate'' (front page, Oct. 4): The problem with Al Gore is that on one side of his mouth he has said the economy is great, and on the other side he suggests that the gap between rich and poor is widening.  Hasn't it widened further over the last eight years? Why hasn't this administration closed the gap over the last eight years with the same skill it used to guide this great economy? How can Mr. Gore take credit for the good parts of the economy and separate himself from the bad? The vice president seems to imply that Mr. Bush's tax-cut proposals, which will disproportionately benefit the rich, would cause this gap to grow. Although it's unknown what the effects of such a proposal would be, I know for sure that under this vice president's watch, the poor and a large part of the middle class have been left behind economically. If Al Gore wants to take credit for the great economy, he must accept the positives as well as the negatives. He can't have it both ways.
 Geoffrey W Bramhall letter, commenting on October 4 article on debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, says it was reminiscent of 1960 debate between John F Kennedy and Richard M Nixon; gives Bush edge While trying to sum up my reactions to Tuesday's debate, I couldn't help but come away with a feeling of deja vu (front page, Oct. 4). Just as in 1960, a sitting vice president spouted facts and figures while looking ill at ease. Mr. Bush, on the other hand,  was as pleasing to listen to as to watch, much as it was with John F. Kennedy. While trying to sum up my reactions to Tuesday's debate, I couldn't help but come away with a feeling of deja vu (front page, Oct. 4). Just as in 1960, a sitting vice president spouted facts and figures while looking ill at ease. Mr. Bush, on the other hand,  was as pleasing to listen to as to watch, much as it was with John F. Kennedy. The issues discussed were covered adequately by both. Obviously, Mr. Gore thinks Washington knows best when it comes to what to do with our money, and Mr. Bush feels the people do. Mr. Gore likes to take credit for our prosperity, yet he rails against the companies and entrepreneurs that brought us to where we are today.
 Rosary Uzzolino Lescohier letter disputes October 4 article on debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore What is the problem with Al Gore's ''digressing to explain things'' or with his being knowledgeable about foreign affairs? I fail to see this as a disqualifier for the job of the leader of our country.
 Paul Bilsky letter, commenting on October 4 debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, compares Bush's opposition to abortion with fact that he has presided over more than 100 executions since becoming governor of Texas I was astonished to hear George W. Bush, in answer to a question about the recently approved abortion drug, RU-486, say, ''What the next president ought to do is to promote a cultural life in America, a life of the elderly and life of those living all across the country, life of the unborn'' (transcript, Oct. 4). Yet in Texas, Mr. Bush has presided over more than 100 executions since he  became governor. Isn't this a contradiction? I was astonished to hear George W. Bush, in answer to a question about the recently approved abortion drug, RU-486, say, ''What the next president ought to do is to promote a cultural life in America, a life of the elderly and life of those living all across the country, life of the unborn'' (transcript, Oct. 4). Yet in Texas, Mr. Bush has presided over more than 100 executions since he  became governor. Isn't this a contradiction?
 Paul Bloustein letter, commenting on October 4 editorial assessing debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, says conceptual differences between candidates, especially regarding role of government, are stark and critically important and should be addressed by all voters
 Energy Department sells 30 million barrels of crude oil from country's Strategic Petroleum Reserve to 11 companies, defying predictions that refiners might boycott the sale and buoying Clinton administration campaign to replenish low stocks of heating fuel in Northeast; news of sale drives price of crude oil for November delivery down 64 cents, to $31.43 a barrel, just as announcement of plans to tap reserve sent prices tumbling earlier; Energy Sec Bill Richardson says we are on the road to averting home heating oil disruption on the East Coast; Gov George W Bush, who has criticized administration's plan as political opportunism, has no comment after successful sale; some analysts warn that uncertainties remain as to whether sale will bring more heating oil to consumers soon because refineries are already at capacity; graph (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who had criticized the administration's plan as political opportunism, had no comment after the successful sale. But some analysts warned that uncertainties remained as to whether the sale would bring more heating oil to consumers soon, because refineries were already running at capacity. Nonetheless, critics of the decision to release the government oil have argued that the 570-million-barrel reserve was created after the Arab oil embargo in the 1970's to protect against serious disruptions in oil supply, not to soften the blow of lagging inventories or high prices. Many detractors, including Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, saw in the administration's move a pre-election populist gesture to buoy the campaign of Vice President Al Gore.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column holds Vice Pres Al Gore easily won presidential debate if judged by which candidate was better prepared, more knowledgeable, had greater command of facts and grasp of issues; sees him hurt by inability to keep supercilliousness in check; sees Gov George W Bush aided by his more conversational tone, but by little else (M) If he can somehow force himself to stop sighing and interrupting and behaving condescendingly in front of the television cameras, Al Gore may yet get elected president. Most of America understands that the competence bar is set so low for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas that it's practically lying on the ground. It was pretty much acknowledged going into the debate that as long as he didn't misspell potato or mispronounce some three-syllable word or misstate the name of a world leader, he would be judged to have done O.K. If he can somehow force himself to stop sighing and interrupting and behaving condescendingly in front of the television cameras, Al Gore may yet get elected president. Most of America understands that the competence bar is set so low for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas that it's practically lying on the ground. It was pretty much acknowledged going into the debate that as long as he didn't misspell potato or mispronounce some three-syllable word or misstate the name of a world leader, he would be judged to have done O.K. Woody Allen is supposed to have said that 80 percent of success is just showing up. That was proved Tuesday night. Governor Bush showed up -- albeit reluctantly -- at the Clark Athletic Center at the University of Massachusetts. And he did fine. If you paid attention to the content, and used it as a gauge to determine which candidate was better prepared, was more knowledgeable, had a greater command of the facts and grasp of the issues, then Vice President Gore won easily. He asserted, for example, that Governor Bush ''would spend more money on tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new spending that he proposes for education, health care, prescription drugs and national defense all combined.'' That happens to be true. And Mr. Bush never attempted to explain why this peculiar configuration of priorities -- this re-direction of national resources from the bottom and the middle to the top -- is a good idea. The vice president clobbered Mr. Bush on the issue of prescription drugs for the elderly. And he scored well, I thought, when discussing potential appointments to the Supreme Court, saying, ''Governor Bush has declared to the anti-choice groups that he will appoint justices in the mold of [Antonin] Scalia and Clarence Thomas, who are known for being the most vigorous opponents of a woman's right to choose.'' But Vice President Gore never wins easily. He may have the experience and most of the issues on his side, but he can't keep his superciliousness in check. He just can't do it. So there he was on Tuesday night sighing loudly with disdain, or smiling contemptuously, or smugly, as Governor Bush did the best he could with this answer or that. Earth to Al Gore: This turns people off. There's an old saying: You don't shoot a man who's committing suicide. There were times during the debate when Governor Bush seemed not to understand the finer points of his own tax cut and Social Security proposals. And he seemed lost on matters of foreign policy. It would have been quite sufficient for Mr. Gore to give his own views on these matters and to correct any misstatements by his opponent. But Mr. Gore seems to feel the need to pour it on -- to offer not just his answer to a given question, but to show us everything he knows about the topic. He doesn't seem to realize that in the real world, people hate Eddie Haskell. The vice president's boorishness gets in the way of his message and almost certainly pushes some voters into a more favorable view of Mr. Bush, who benefits from a more conversational tone and the demeanor of an ordinary guy. The bad news for Bush supporters is that there are not many other reasons for undecided voters to shift to their man. Mr. Gore has got a good thing going with, among other things, his health care issues, his strong defense of a woman's right to choose, and the continued strong economy. Republican campaign operatives are very worried. Key swing states are moving toward the vice president. Some crucial states for the G.O.P. -- Florida and Ohio -- remain up for grabs. And despite Tuesday's debate, the belief that Mr. Bush may not be up to the rigors of the presidency is widespread and in danger of becoming entrenched. Issues count in a presidential election, but so does style. Mr. Gore, as he closes in on his dream of winning the White House, might consider tempering his fighting style with a touch of modesty and grace.
 Excerpt from interview with Vice Pres Al Gore on foreign policy issues (M) Following are excerpts from an interview today with Vice President Al Gore on foreign policy issues, as recorded by The New York Times: Following are excerpts from an interview today with Vice President Al Gore on foreign policy issues, as recorded by The New York Times: Q.  Mr. Bush made nation-building a point of difference with you.
 Mr. Lazio, her Republican opponent, has not been not particularly vocal about education issues for most of his eight years in Congress, although he recently sponsored bills to expand alternative certification and teacher mentoring programs. On the campaign trail, Mr. Lazio stresses the importance of local control over education policy and spending -- a theme he shares with Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Lazio has called for $98 billion in new federal spending on education over the next decade -- compared with the roughly $125 billion in education spending that Mrs. Clinton has proposed. The amount is striking, considering that Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential candidate, has proposed spending a mere $25 billion over five years.
 Repubicans and Democrats alike concede presidential debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore apparently has not changed overall dynamics of race; top campaign officials on both sides claim their candidates met their basic debate goals; photos (M) For all the buildup of the first presidential debate as a make-or-break moment for Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, Republicans and Democrats alike conceded today that the overall dynamics of the race did not seem to have changed. For all the buildup of the first presidential debate as a make-or-break moment for Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, Republicans and Democrats alike conceded today that the overall dynamics of the race did not seem to have changed. Today, it was hard to find an abiding sense of enthusiasm in the Gore or Bush camps -- in some cases it was more a sense of relief -- even as top officials on both sides said their candidates had met their basic objectives in the 90-minute encounter. Even the Democratic Party's chief cheerleader, Edward G. Rendell, the general chairman, declined to give his candidate the most stellar marks, saying, ''I think Al Gore gets a B plus and George Bush gets a C plus.'' Mr. Rendell said his party's nominee, for all his fine qualities, lacked the demeanor to close the deal with the American public in a single evening. ''Had Al Gore gone up there and convinced people that he was Bob Newhart, maybe he would have scored a knockout,'' he said. ''But Al Gore's not a Bob Newhart. That's not going to happen.'' ''The worst George Bush did was tie,'' said Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin. ''But even a tie is good for George Bush.'' Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director and one of his top advisers, said: ''My feeling is it will take some time. People know that other debates are coming, so they may be reluctant to seal their decision yet.'' William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, put it this way: ''One of these is not going to be determinative. These are not knockout punches.'' Operatives in both camps said that today they began recalculating some of their decisions about priorities and resources in the wake of the debate. Advisers to Mr. Bush, for instance, said they were comfortable enough with the outcome of the debate that they had decided to funnel additional resources into more states, like California, that are leaning toward Mr. Gore. Had Mr. Bush's performance been a disaster, they said, the campaign might have been more targeted in spending money only in the most crucial battlegrounds. Even as neither side claimed a triumph, Democrats and Republicans asserted that they had accomplished many objectives in the debate. Advisers to Mr. Bush said they believed that by standing side-by-side with Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush had put to rest nagging questions about whether he had a sufficient grasp of issues so he could hold his own against the vice president, a seasoned debater. ''People wanted reassurance,'' said Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's top strategist. He added, ''The first and most important thing was for Bush to share with people a substantive agenda that was bold and optimistic. The second was to demonstrate that he understood the leadership requirements of the office. And there was a need to show that he had substance and detail in his plans.'' Backers of Mr. Gore, meanwhile, said they believed he had succeeded in resisting falling into bitter denunciations of Mr. Bush's record. They also said he had demonstrated that his stands on major issues, from health care to taxes, were more in line with those of most Americans. Mr. Daley said Mr. Gore had conveyed this image to the public: ''I'm a serious guy who takes this stuff seriously. And I know what I'm talking about.'' He said he might have hoped -- but never expected -- Mr. Bush would have performed so badly that the race would essentially have ended on Tuesday night. ''You can hope that the guy would fall off the podium,'' Mr. Daley said of Mr. Bush, ''but that's not going to happen.'' Before the debate, Mr. Daley said, he had reminded Mr. Gore to stay upbeat. He said his worst-case scenario would have been if Mr. Bush had goaded the vice president into sounding mean and struggling to defend the administration's ethics. ''I told him, 'Stay positive, don't take the bait of a negative attack,' '' Mr. Daley said. ''He clearly didn't and that helps him with the independents. They don't buy that.'' He said he had feared that Mr. Bush would ''really try to trash and bait Gore into going back at him on the political stuff and Clinton.'' Senator Sam Brownback, a Kansas Republican, said Mr. Bush's performance halted ''the questions about the stature'' of the governor compared with Mr. Gore. He acknowledged he had worried that Mr. Bush could have stumbled or done something to damage his prospects. Many Democrats, and even some Republicans, said Mr. Gore held a slight advantage because several polls showed him a few points ahead, though in most cases the lead was statistically insignificant. He also enjoys the benefits of being the incumbent vice president, and having issue positions that, polls show, are generally more popular than Mr. Bush's. ''I really believe that with the economy -- which obviously isn't going to suffer enough to change this election -- it's a very tough race for Governor Bush to face,'' said former Senator Warren B. Rudman, a New Hampshire Republican who backed Senator John McCain in the primaries. ''I don't know what he can do. He's a naturally friendly guy, but he's not a person who lifts people like a John Kennedy or a Ronald Reagan or, on occasion, a Bill Clinton.''
 He fails to mention that the procedure is a legally mandated way of dealing with unforeseen developments such as his selection for the national ticket by Al Gore. Moreover, if Mr. Lieberman is elected vice president and has to resign from the Senate, Connecticut's Republican governor, John Rowland, would choose his replacement. That choice would surely be a Republican, an even greater distortion of fairness if a majority of Connecticut voters want a Democrat to represent them. For their own partisan reasons, Mr. Lieberman's Democratic colleagues are privately steaming about his decision to place job security above the party's interests. Not only does his approach raise questions about his confidence in the Gore-Lieberman ticket, it also muddies the national party's argument about the importance of putting the Senate back in Democratic hands. There is now at least a long-shot chance that the party could capture the four Senate seats it needs to break the G.O.P.'s Senate majority, but it would give one of them away if Mr. Lieberman won the vice presidency. Voters have a right to ask Mr. Lieberman and the national Democratic leadership this question: If you believe that Democratic control of the Senate is really important to the welfare of the working families Mr. Gore is always talking about, why are you treating that control so casually?
