 Approximately one year of e-mail records from the office of Vice President Al Gore are ''lost forever,'' the report says. It attributes that loss to ''affirmative steps'' taken by Mr. Gore's office to store its e-mail messages in a computer system that made it impossible to retrieve them. Jim Kennedy, a spokesman for Mr. Gore's office, referred questions today to the White House, where Jake Siewert, the presidential press secretary, said: ''It looks like Mr. Burton stapled together some old news releases and released it the day before the first presidential debate. We have not been given a copy of it, but it looks as though everything in it has been discussed and widely publicized before now.'' As an example of the importance of lost e-mail messages, the Republicans cite the White House's first release, on Sept. 22, of those messages that have been recovered. Among them are communications showing  that Mr. Gore's senior aides routinely characterized White House coffee sessions as fund-raising events, seemingly contradicting his remarks about the coffees to federal investigators earlier this year.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in West Virginia, Democratic stronghold, where he projects image of strength by drawing attention to recent polls showing him neck-and-neck with Vice Pres Gore; hones attack against Gore over rising fuel prices, in state where mountains are home to coal and its miners; says coal is opportunity to make US less dependent on foreign oil; photo (M) Confetti swirled, fireworks thundered and men with parachutes floated down from the clouds. The rally on the banks of the Ohio River here this afternoon was bolder and louder than a typical campaign event, but then it was Gov. George W. Bush's send-off for one of the most important appointments of his political career. Mr. Bush used his sole public event on the day before his first debate with Vice President Al Gore to make a statement, and not merely with all the aerial pageantry. Confetti swirled, fireworks thundered and men with parachutes floated down from the clouds. The rally on the banks of the Ohio River here this afternoon was bolder and louder than a typical campaign event, but then it was Gov. George W. Bush's send-off for one of the most important appointments of his political career. Mr. Bush used his sole public event on the day before his first debate with Vice President Al Gore to make a statement, and not merely with all the aerial pageantry. His visit to West Virginia, which has voted Democratic in most presidential elections over the last several decades, allowed him to project an image of strength by drawing attention to recent polls that showed him neck and neck with Mr. Gore. It also allowed him to hone his attack against Mr. Gore on an issue -- rising fuel prices -- that he would like to hang around Mr. Gore's neck. The mountains of West Virginia are home to coal and its miners. And Mr. Bush has called for significantly more federal spending on ''clean coal'' technologies, asserting that he would expand the country's energy supply, while President Clinton and Mr. Gore had choked it with excessive regulation. ''This is an administration that fears coal,'' Mr. Bush said as he stood among coal miners on a riverside barge that was serving as the stage of an outdoor theater. ''They see it as a threat,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I see it as an opportunity to make us less dependent on foreign oil.'' To get ready, Mr. Bush was traveling with a larger entourage than usual, including his chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, and his campaign's policy director, Josh Bolten. Mr. Gore was sequestered in Sarasota, Fla., which suggested that the candidates were playing geographic head games with each other. Florida is a state where Mr. Bush should prevail but where Mr. Gore seems to be relatively even with him. At a marine research center there, Mr. Gore conducted mock debates with the help of his own policy advisers, other campaign officials and even two of his children, Karenna Gore Schiff and Sarah Gore. Mr. Gore also met with the 13 people from across the country whom he had invited to Florida and incorporated into his practice for the debates. With the Gore campaign footing the bill, the group is staying at a beach-front hotel in Longboat Key on the Gulf of Mexico where rooms go for $250 a night. Many in the group went shopping this afternoon. On Tuesday they will fly to Boston for the debate on a plane chartered by the Gore campaign for the vice president's political advisers. Like Mr. Bush, the vice president seemed intent on an image of relaxed confidence and strength. Mr. Gore also had a good-luck charm on hand: a mule harness from the barn where he had prepared for his vice-presidential debate against Vice President Dan Quayle in 1992. Mr. Gore's aides had looped the harness over a stuffed shark in the research center. Mr. Gore is a much more experienced debater than Mr. Bush, and Mr. Bush's aides mentioned that several times today, clearly trying to lower expectations for the Texas governor to the point where he was certain to exceed them. In an appearance this morning on the NBC-TV program ''Today,'' Mr. Evans even seemed to cast Mr. Gore's forensic prowess as a negative attribute -- proof that he had been a political insider too long. Mr. Bush, by contrast, ''has been leading,'' Mr. Evans said. ''He's been leading in the private sector, building his own company, leading in his own community, running the United Way, leading the Texas Rangers, leading his own state.'' On Mr. Bush's campaign plane today, Karen P. Hughes, his communications director, initially called Mr. Gore the best debater in modern politics but then said he was principally a geyser of memorized lines. ''His debate style is almost robotic,'' Ms. Hughes said, trying to create an unflattering prism through which observers could evaluate Mr. Gore's performance on Tuesday night. Mr. Bush's aides said that a coin toss had already determined that Mr. Gore would field the first question, while Mr. Bush would be the first to deliver his closing remarks. During Mr. Bush's remarks at the rally, he seemed to be previewing sharpened language for the debate, disparaging Mr. Gore's claim that he was for the people, not the powerful. ''The vice president,'' Mr. Bush said, ''is the powerful.''
 FOX OFFERS A FORUM -- The Fox television network announced yesterday that it would offer Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush a shared hour of free time in which to tell viewers why they think they should be president. A spokesman for Mr. Gore, Jano Cabrera, said the campaign's focus at this point was completing the debates already scheduled. And, Mr. Cabrera said, ''our understanding, from having held debate negotiations with the Bush campaign, is that we're leaving it at that.'' The Bush campaign had no immediate response. GORE STILL LEADS IN NEW JERSEY -- Vice President Al Gore holds a double-digit lead over Gov. George W. Bush in New Jersey even though most voters favor Mr. Bush's plan for a partially privatized Social Security, a poll released yesterday shows. Mr. Gore led 49 percent to 35 percent among 820 likely voters surveyed from Sept. 26 to Oct. 1 by Quinnipiac University. The poll, which has a three percentage point margin of error, gave Ralph Nader, the Green Party presidential candidate, 6 percent and Patrick J. Buchanan of the Reform Party 1 percent. BUCHANAN WINS A ROUND -- Patrick J. Buchanan, the Reform Party candidate, won a spot on the ballot yesterday in Florida, a hotly contested state where polls show Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush about even. Polls among likely Florida voters have shown only 1 percent to 3 percent supporting Mr. Buchanan. But with Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush tied in the race for Florida's 25 electoral votes, Mr. Buchanan could affect the outcome if he draws more heavily from one of the main parties than the other.
 Tax proposals of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush compared; analysis by Deloitte & Touche finds Bush plan would be much more generous to wealthy; maintains Gore plan would also give no relief to single people and childless couples, but would give much larger rebate than Bush to low-income single-parent families; chart (M) For months now, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have been arguing on the campaign trail over whose tax plan would help particular families more. Often the candidates actually introduce families they say would do better under their plan. Mr. Bush would give almost everyone a tax cut, while Mr. Gore would give tax relief only to low-income families and those with modest incomes and special expenses like children in day care or college or those with elderly dependents. For months now, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have been arguing on the campaign trail over whose tax plan would help particular families more. Often the candidates actually introduce families they say would do better under their plan. Mr. Bush would give almost everyone a tax cut, while Mr. Gore would give tax relief only to low-income families and those with modest incomes and special expenses like children in day care or college or those with elderly dependents. The examination found that the Bush plan would be much more generous to the wealthy. For example, a couple earning $450,000 would have their income taxes reduced by more than $12,000 a year. The Gore plan would be of no benefit to this family. The Gore proposal would also give no tax relief to single people and childless couples, including retirees, even those with modest incomes who would save some taxes under the Bush plan. On the other hand, Mr. Gore would give a much larger rebate than Mr. Bush to low-income single-parent families, like a mother with two or three children and an income of $29,000. Since Mr. Bush's plan is twice as costly as Mr. Gore's -- slightly more than $1 trillion over 10 years, not counting his proposed repeal of the estate tax, as against about $500 billion for the Gore plan -- it is not surprising that Mr. Bush would give bigger tax savings to more families than Mr. Gore would. Mr. Gore would spend the difference on the national debt and on popular government programs like education, universal health insurance for children and prescription drug coverage for those on Medicare. Mr. Bush holds that the tax cut would allow people and not the government to decide the best way to allocate resources. The main element in the Bush plan is an across-the-board reduction in tax rates that would be enjoyed by all taxpayers. In addition, he would double the existing tax credit for each child to $1,000 from $500, and for two-earner couples, he would give an additional deduction of up to $3,000. The principal aspects of the Gore plan are an expansion of the existing earned-income tax credit for low-income workers, an increase in the maximum child-care credit to $2,400 from $960, an additional credit for after-school expenses for children 13 through 16, a higher standard deduction for working couples who do not itemize deductions, a $3,000 credit to families who care for ill or disabled relatives, a tax credit to people without employer-paid health insurance to help offset the cost of buying insurance and a tax break of up to $2,800 to help offset the cost of college tuition. For example, a couple with three children in day care and an income of $39,000 would be better off in terms of taxes under the Bush proposals. The doubling of the tax credit for children under the Bush plan would save more in taxes at that income level than Mr. Gore's child credit. And a rather affluent self-employed couple with an income of $78,000 and a child in college would save more under the Gore plan because of Mr. Gore's tax break to help offset the cost of tuition. The Bush plan was treated as if it were fully in effect, although that would not be the case until 2006. The Gore plan would all go into effect at once. The accountants did not count Mr. Gore's proposal to give a tax credit of up to $3,000 to taxpayers with incomes below $170,000 who pay more than half the cost of care of an elderly relative. The accountants decided that to include it would have skewed the results in a study that examined so few families. But it is worth noting, for example, that under the Gore plan, the working couple in the study with an income of $78,000 would have had almost its entire tax liability eliminated if it had an ill grandparent living in the house. For the purposes of the study, the accountants at Deloitte & Touche did not consider Mr. Bush's proposal to abolish the estate tax, since it would not affect anyone's annual income tax. Nor did they include proposals by both candidates for tax-free retirement and savings accounts. The computer model used by the accountants in examining the Bush proposals did not make adjustments for the effect of the alternative minimum tax. This is a provision of the existing law originally intended to make sure wealthy people paid taxes even if they had large deductions and exemptions. Increasingly in recent years, taxpayers with more modest incomes and smaller deductions have found they owed additional taxes under the provision. Mr. Bush's economic advisers have acknowledged that the alternative minimum tax would mean somewhat smaller tax savings under his plan than would otherwise be the case for many affluent taxpayers. There would be little if any effect on taxpayers under the Gore plan. Citizens for Tax Justice, a labor-backed research organization, included the alternative minimum tax in its model and found that under the Bush plan, the tax savings would be reduced by 44 percent for a family earning $125,000, by 79 percent for a family with an income of $185,000 and by 41 percent for a family with an income of $400,000. The effect on most families with incomes below $80,000 would be inconsequential. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TAX PLANS  Correction:  October 4, 2000, Wednesday  A chart yesterday showing the effect of the presidential candidates' tax plans on 12 hypothetical individuals and families misstated the taxes for one case -- a single parent with three children and an annual income of $29,000. That family would be due a rebate of $1,210 under current law, $2,218 under the Bush plan and $3,462 under the Gore plan; it would not owe those amounts. The chart also labeled one case incorrectly. The family that would save $2,322 under the Bush plan and $1,038 under the Gore plan was a working couple with three children and an annual income of $39,000 -- not two children and an income of $39,000. A chart yesterday showing the effect of the presidential candidates' tax plans on 12 hypothetical individuals and families misstated the taxes for one case -- a single parent with three children and an annual income of $29,000. That family would be due a rebate of $1,210 under current law, $2,218 under the Bush plan and $3,462 under the Gore plan; it would not owe those amounts. The chart also labeled one case incorrectly. The family that would save $2,322 under the Bush plan and $1,038 under the Gore plan was a working couple with three children and an annual income of $39,000 -- not two children and an income of $39,000.
 With Indonesia, Russia and Pakistan, the world's fourth, sixth and seventh largest countries, already messy states, and with China likely to become one when Communism collapses, four of the world's seven most populated countries will be messy states. Only America, Brazil and India don't qualify. One wonders how Al Gore or George W. Bush proposes to deal with messy states, because this is not a phase. This is the future. Or as President Wahid himself joked: the Suharto era here was known as the ''New Order,'' the post-Suharto era led by B. J. Habibie was known for being ''Out of Order,'' and the Wahid period is known as ''No Order.''
 The execution of Stacey Lawton, convicted of murdering a man on Christmas Eve 1992 and scheduled to die on Wednesday, was reset for Nov. 14. In an afternoon hearing in Tyler, Tex., Judge Cynthia Stevens Kent of Circuit Court ordered the new execution date so that Mr. Lawton's lawyer, Jeff Haas, could file a new petition seeking clemency before the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles and, ultimately, Gov. George W. Bush. The execution of Stacey Lawton, convicted of murdering a man on Christmas Eve 1992 and scheduled to die on Wednesday, was reset for Nov. 14. In an afternoon hearing in Tyler, Tex., Judge Cynthia Stevens Kent of Circuit Court ordered the new execution date so that Mr. Lawton's lawyer, Jeff Haas, could file a new petition seeking clemency before the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles and, ultimately, Gov. George W. Bush. Judge Kent's ruling defused another potential capital punishment controversy in Texas, which leads the nation in executions, at a time when Mr. Bush is entering the final weeks of the presidential race. The state has come under criticism for its death penalty system, including what critics regard as inadequate representation for many indigent defendants. Mr. Haas, who said he had handled capital cases but never a clemency appeal, said he had sought a 30-day reprieve from Mr. Bush after the parole board informed him that it would not consider the late clemency petition. Mr. Haas said he had not received an answer from the governor's office by this afternoon's hearing. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, said the governor did not decide on requests for reprieves until an inmate had exhausted all legal appeals.
 ''There's no room for politics in this important criminal justice issue,'' Mr. Miner commented to the accusation by Peter Neufeld, co-director of the Innocence Project, that Governor Gilmore, a Republican, had tempered his decision in the hope of being chosen United States attorney general if Gov. George W. Bush is elected president.
 Article on 13 everyday people, such as Albuquerque, NM, construction worker Joe Austin who campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore is using in makeshift advisory roles in preparing for debate with Gov George W Bush; photo (M) Who, you ask, is Joseph Austin? Why, just a plain-spoken Albuquerque construction worker who has been drawn into the vortex of one of the most significant political news stories of the year. Tapped last week by the Gore campaign with 12 other  people from across the country to accompany the Democratic nominee to Florida for debate preparations, Mr. Austin suddenly found himself in meetings with the candidate, offering his views on national issues and posing for the cameras. Lots and lots of cameras. Who, you ask, is Joseph Austin? Why, just a plain-spoken Albuquerque construction worker who has been drawn into the vortex of one of the most significant political news stories of the year. Tapped last week by the Gore campaign with 12 other  people from across the country to accompany the Democratic nominee to Florida for debate preparations, Mr. Austin suddenly found himself in meetings with the candidate, offering his views on national issues and posing for the cameras. Lots and lots of cameras. ''Gore seeks N.M. Worker's Advice,'' was how The Albuquerque Journal headlined its 25-paragraph article on Mr. Austin. The article was pretty much replicated in each of the metropolitan areas from which Al Gore's helpers hailed. ''Belleville Girl Advises Gore on Debates, Likes What He Had to Say,'' declared The St. Louis Post-Dispatch. ''Local Teacher Picked to Help Gore Cram for Boston Debate,'' announced The Columbus Dispatch in Ohio. It seemed no accident, of course, that the 13 everyday people the campaign selected for these makeshift advisory roles were from some of the most hotly contested states of the election. Illinois, Florida, Michigan and Pennsylvania were among the places represented. And in the days leading up to the Tuesday showdown with Gov. George W. Bush in Boston, Mr. Gore's aides, seeking to put a local human face on an event of national importance, pitched their stories relentlessly to the news media in those places. The Bush campaign dismissed the effort as shopworn posturing. ''Governor Bush takes these debates very seriously,'' said Andrew Malcolm, a Bush spokesman, ''and he did not poll-test to see who should 'help' him to prepare.'' The coverage of Mr. Gore's everyday people did, at times, verge on political comedy, as in the case of the progress of Winnifred Skinner, a 79-year-old retiree from Des Moines. Mrs. Skinner bypassed the trip to Florida and instead was driven by the Gore campaign to Boston in a motor home with her poodle, Bridget. Mrs. Skinner had come to the campaign's attention when she spoke up at a rally in Altoona, Iowa, last week, telling Mr. Gore that she collected empty cans and bottles for money to pay for her prescription drugs. The Gore campaign managed to virtually guarantee favorable publicity in the cities and markets it had singled out through its band of real people. The selections, in fact, were often described in language reserved for lottery winners. ''We are absolutely having a blast,'' Miss Conner is quoted as saying. She also reports that the group gave Mr. Gore ''feedback on what he needs to do to improve his demeanor or the way he spoke,'' although she herself was effusive in her praise. ''I liked everything he had to say,'' she told the paper. In Oregon, a television news crew  showed up at the airport in Medford to tape the departure of Katherine Cowan, a homemaker from Lake Oswego who had met Mr. Gore in August at a campaign appearance at Portland State University. She had spoken to him about her concerns about health care for her daughter Lindsay, who has diabetes. The Oregonian, the state's largest newspaper, wrote a comparatively restrained piece about Ms. Cowan's selection, pointing out in the lead of the article, which was displayed inside the paper's main news section, that both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore ''have been relentless about featuring real folks in their campaign appearances.'' Jeff Mapes, who wrote the article, said the Gore campaign's Oregon representatives had been on the phone repeatedly, providing updates and inquiring about possible follow-ups. Celebrity, of course, has its price.  One of the Mr. Gore's guests in Florida said privately that some of the other real people were trying to get in their 15 minutes of fame before the Gore campaign arrived in Boston for fear that ''the tin-can lady'' would grab the headlines.
 Op-Ed article by William E Kennard, chairman of Federal Communications Commission, deplores NBC and Fox networks for decision not to televise first presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; says decision is particularly galling in light of fact that Congress gave television industry space on broadcast spectrum needed to offer digital television, with caveat that they must also serve public interest while reaping billions from use of airwaves; drawing (M) To their credit, the networks have usually delivered on their responsibility. From 1960 until this year, they all reserved programming slots for every debate with both major-party candidates. But in 1992 CBS refused to break away from a baseball game that had gone into extra innings to the first Clinton-Bush-Perot debate. Like NBC and Fox this year, CBS cited its contract with Major League Baseball.
 Flint Jason Wainess letter on upcoming Presidential debates suggests that Gov George W Bush's and Vice Pres Al Gore's 'nonverbal language' might be the most important behavioral cue we hae regarding their character; recalls negative impression made by Richard M Nixon on television in 1960 debates In an era in which every word uttered by a candidate is parsed and subject to focus-group scrutiny, George W. Bush's and Al Gore's nonverbal language might be the most important behavioral cue we have.
 Amanda Lewis letter on negotiations between Bush and Gore camps over conditions of Presidential debates Your article about the negotiating between the Bush and Gore camps over microphones, the height of the lecterns and the timing of questions made me wonder: if each voter could get these two in a room minus the makeup, costumes, campaign teams and sound bites, would either George W. Bush or Al Gore prove worthy of election to office?
 New York Times/CBS News Poll finds most Americans, on eve of first debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and rival Gov George W Bush, believe both are strong leaders, but consider Gore far more prepared for White House and better qualified to deal with world leaders and Congress; even those who say they intend to back Bush have reservastions about his preparedness; both receive high marks on potential to be effective president; poll finds Bush's personal popularity has eroded slightly while Gore's has continued to improve; finds race is so competitive that difference in support between Gore and Bush is statistically insignificant; other findings discussed; charts (M) On the eve of the first presidential debate here, most Americans say Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are strong leaders, but they consider Mr. Gore far more prepared for the White House and better qualified to deal with world leaders and members of both parties in Congress, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. The survey found that as voters start to form detailed impressions of the candidates, even those who say they intend to back Mr. Bush express reservations about his preparedness. On the eve of the first presidential debate here, most Americans say Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are strong leaders, but they consider Mr. Gore far more prepared for the White House and better qualified to deal with world leaders and members of both parties in Congress, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. The survey found that as voters start to form detailed impressions of the candidates, even those who say they intend to back Mr. Bush express reservations about his preparedness. The lingering questions about Mr. Bush's preparedness do not seem to have affected his overall standing in the head-to-head competition as reflected in the poll. Not since 1960 has a presidential contest been this close on the eve of a first debate. Still, Mr. Bush, the Texas governor, has been struggling with the issue of his readiness to be president since the campaign began, and it is a matter that his advisers say he will try to put to rest in the first of three encounters with Mr. Gore. The first debate will be on Tuesday night at 9 Eastern time at the Boston campus of the University of Massachusetts. Taken as a whole, the survey had much encouraging news for Mr. Gore and very little for Mr. Bush. Beyond the findings about Mr. Bush's preparedness, the poll found that the governor's personal popularity has eroded slightly as Mr. Gore's has continued to improve. The race is so competitive, the survey found, that the difference in support between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush is statistically insignificant. That said, no matter how the support is defined -- whether in terms of voters who have made up their minds or voters who are only now leaning toward one candidate but are still undecided -- Mr. Gore usually emerges a few points ahead. In a four-way contest, Mr. Gore was backed by 45 percent of registered voters, Mr. Bush by 39 percent, and Patrick J. Buchanan and Ralph Nader were each below 5 percent. When voters' awareness of the race and their past voting are taken into account, Mr. Gore draws 45 percent and Mr. Bush 41 percent. If the possibility of a low turnout is added to the mix, Mr. Gore's advantage would be  even more insignificant: one percentage point. The state of the contest is all the more unpredictable because voters do not seem whole-heartedly loyal to their favored candidate. More than 4 of 10 Bush or Gore supporters said they were not enthusiastic about their candidate -- and have some misgivings about voting for him. The most striking finding in the survey is the extent to which voters have reservations about Mr. Bush's preparedness. Their concerns may reflect their knowledge that Mr. Gore has served as vice president for eight years and, before that, was in the House and Senate for 16 years. By contrast, Mr. Bush did not hold public office until he was elected governor of Texas in 1994. Lynn Eagleeye, a poll respondent from Bay Village, Ohio, said in a follow-up interview today that she was an independent but leaning toward Mr. Gore. ''Gore has had more experience in the arena, but I think they would both make good presidents,'' said Mrs. Eagleeye, 57, a real estate agent. ''Experience comes with the job and comes with time. It's not just the president running the country, it's his team of advisers. I liked the job Bush's father did with foreign policy, and I think George W. has a good adviser in that area.'' But others, especially Republicans, were not daunted by Mr. Gore's longer record of public service. ''Even though Gore has been vice president, I don't feel like he's done a lot,'' said Wanda Stucky, 63, a homemaker in Bolivar, Ohio. ''I liked Bush's father and I think some of that ability and knowledge has rubbed off on him. Gore just does not impress me as a leader.'' Thomas Reynolds, 64, a repairman from Somerset, Ky., said he was a Republican but was still torn between the candidates. ''Bush is probably not as prepared for the presidency as Gore,'' Mr. Reynolds said, ''but I think he could be an effective president. You learn as you go, and Bush as the experience of governing Texas.'' Still, in the poll, many voters gave Mr. Gore far higher marks for being ready to take over. When respondents were asked if each candidate had prepared himself well enough for the presidency or needed more time to do more, Mr. Gore was seen by 71 percent of voters as having prepared himself well enough, while 24 percent said he needed to do more. But Mr. Bush was seen as well prepared by just under half, 49 percent, while 43 percent of voters said he needed to prepare  more. On their capacity to negotiate with world leaders, 68 percent said Mr. Gore could do that effectively, while 48 percent said that of Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore was also viewed as more capable of dealing with Congress.  Seventy-one percent of registered voters said Mr. Gore had the skills needed to work with both Democrats and Republicans in Congress; 59 percent said the same of Mr. Bush. Yet for all the concerns about Mr. Bush's lack of preparedness, voters  thought that he had the potential to be an able leader. Of the poll respondents who favor Mr. Gore, for example, only 20 percent said Mr. Bush was adequately prepared for the presidency. Still, 40 percent of  Gore backers said Mr. Bush would make an effective leader. Despite the closeness of the race, there were underlying trends that appear to favor Mr. Gore. For the first time, the balance between Mr. Bush's favorable and unfavorable  ratings -- long one of his most potent advantages -- has begun to erode while Mr. Gore's has improved markedly. Mr. Bush is seen favorably by 43 percent of voters and unfavorably by 30 percent, a positive balance of 13 points. But just before the national convention, Mr. Bush was seen favorably by 44 percent and unfavorably by 26 percent, a positive balance of 18 points. In the latest poll, Mr. Gore is seen favorably by 49 percent of voters and unfavorably by 28 percent, a positive balance of 21 points. Before the conventions, Mr. Gore was seen favorably by 36 percent of voters and unfavorably by 35 percent, essentially a draw. Yet for all his gains in likability, Mr. Gore said he intended to emphasize issue differences in the debate, a reflection, perhaps, of the fact that on most issues, the poll found that Americans still side with Democrats. Voters say they like the direction the country has been moving and are not eager to change course. Their concerns continue to be health care, including Medicare, followed by education, Social Security and taxes. Mr. Gore holds sway with voters on health care, prescription drugs and caring about the average American, while Mr. Bush does better on strengthening the military and lowering taxes. A plurality of voters said the high price of heating oil affected them personally. But while the topic has consumed a significant amount of energy on the campaign trail, neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Gore was given an advantage by voters who were asked which one could bring about lower prices. In a finding that may be cause for concern among Republican candidates, the poll found that Mr. Bush's candidacy has not helped the overall image of his party. Forty-nine percent of voters say they hold a favorable view of the Republicans, while 44 percent hold an unfavorable view. By contrast, 58 percent of voters say they hold a favorable view of the Democratic Party, while 36 percent hold an unfavorable view. But on one important issue -- education -- Mr. Bush may have helped his party with his nonstop appearances at schools. As recently as July, voters were more likely to view the Democrats as better able than the Republicans to improve education, by a margin of 45 to 33, a 12-point Democratic advantage. In the current poll, that gap has closed to seven points. ''Bush hasn't been around that long in public office,'' said Mr. Marx, who lives in Tacoma, Wash., ''and Gore has been playing second fiddle to Clinton. Neither knows that much.''
 ''All those things he'd accumulated in his life,'' Ty thinks, ''all that detritus from his parents and his house and office'' was gone now, irrelevant, and now ''he was like one of the roving Bushmen of the Kalahari, blackened and bearded little men who accounted themselves prosperous if they had an empty ostrich shell to haul water in.''
 Even though Vice Pres Al Gore leads in public opinion polls in California, Gov George W Bush is outpacing him in contributions in Silicon Valley by 2-to-1 margin, raising $2.1 million to Gore's $1 million while remaining neck-and-neck in soft-dollar contributions; heated contest represents new twist on traditional politics in which both candidates are investing more time and energy in valley as area emerges as political factor in presidential race for first time; both seek not only votes and dollars, but also recognition as candidate of future linked with forward-thinking of high-technology world; charts (M) By many political calculations, Silicon Valley should be Al Gore country. After all, the vice president has championed high-technology issues, and eight years of a strong economy has created an unimaginable level of wealth here. Moreover, this academic region is a magnet for young college graduates who often gravitate to Democrats. While Mr. Gore leads the race in California, Gov. George W. Bush is giving him a run for his money in Silicon Valley. Mr. Bush is outpacing the vice president in contributions here by a 2-to-1 margin, raising $2.1 million to Mr. Gore's $1 million, while remaining neck and neck with him in soft-dollar contributions. And Mr. Bush's list of supporters in the computer-related industry is as gold-plated as Mr. Gore's. By many political calculations, Silicon Valley should be Al Gore country. After all, the vice president has championed high-technology issues, and eight years of a strong economy has created an unimaginable level of wealth here. Moreover, this academic region is a magnet for young college graduates who often gravitate to Democrats. While Mr. Gore leads the race in California, Gov. George W. Bush is giving him a run for his money in Silicon Valley. Mr. Bush is outpacing the vice president in contributions here by a 2-to-1 margin, raising $2.1 million to Mr. Gore's $1 million, while remaining neck and neck with him in soft-dollar contributions. And Mr. Bush's list of supporters in the computer-related industry is as gold-plated as Mr. Gore's. ''Silicon Valley represents the crosscurrent of money and cool,'' said Gregory W. Slayton, chief executive of ClickAction Inc., an Internet marketing firm, and chairman of Silicon Valley Bush-2000. ''And that's where all politicians want to be.'' And they are. Late last month, for instance, Mr. Bush came to Silicon Valley to campaign at a local school and attend a $1 million fund-raiser at the home of Carol A. Bartz, chief executive of Autodesk Inc., a software company. A week earlier, Mr. Gore was here for a $3 million fund-raiser at the house in Atherton of Eric Schmidt, chairman and chief executive of Novell Inc. Elton John flew in from London to entertain the 300 guests. The same day Mr. Gore was here, an advertisement in a local newspaper, The San Jose Mercury News, listed 300 high-technology executives backing Mr. Bush, including officials at Cisco Systems, Dell Computer, Texas Instruments, Microsoft, Intel -- many of whom also participated in a telephone conference call that day with reporters to extol Mr. Bush. What is remarkable about this flurry of activity is that it comes as polls show Mr. Gore comfortably ahead of Mr. Bush in California -- especially in the San Francisco area, including Silicon Valley. A poll in mid-September by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California had Mr. Gore leading by eight percentage points. It also showed Mr. Gore with 57 percent in the Bay Area, which combines heavily Democratic San Francisco and more-divided Silicon Valley, to Mr. Bush's 28 percent. The Bush camp agreed. ''Everyone wants to associate with the future,'' said Margita Thompson, the Bush campaign's adviser on high technology. ''Silicon Valley is a way of thinking, a way of challenging things and a forward-looking mentality. Governor Bush wants to capture that.'' While this effort may not be evident from Mr. Bush's national advertising, it is taking place in a more subtle effort. The Bush campaign set up a office in Redwood City, Calif., and has an e-mail campaign directed at high-technology leaders, especially chief executives. While Mr. Bush leads in direct donations, overall donations to both parties and candidates -- soft and hard dollars -- split evenly in the Bay Area. San Jose and San Francisco residents contributed $19.3 million overall, giving $10.5 million to Democrats and $8.6 million to Republicans. Moreover, executives of computer-related companies are writing six-digit campaign checks, and one Zip code alone, 94027 in Atherton, accounted for $2.1 million, $1 million to Republicans, $877,025 to Democrats and the rest to political action committees. ''For years we stuck our head in the sand,'' said Kim Polese, chairwoman of Marimba, a software company, and a Gore supporter. ''But we've changed. People in the Valley have clicked into politics.'' Silicon Valley is the bastion of fierce entrepreneurship -- a place where thousands of entrepreneurs have escaped the rigidities of big corporations and struck out alone. And this creates opportunities for Mr. Bush and obstacles for Mr. Gore. For all of his well-known forays into Silicon Valley through the years, Mr. Gore is seen by Republican executives as being close to two institutions despised by Silicon Valley, unions and trial lawyers, and as being emblematic of the type of big government involvement in business the valley abhors. Mr. Gore's troubles contrast with the success President Clinton had attracting Silicon Valley Republicans in 1996. ''The underlying interest in Silicon Valley is in leaving business alone,'' said Tom Riley, president of WebState Inc., an online training company, and a Bush supporter. ''For the most part,'' Mr. Riley said, ''the success of Silicon Valley has been because people are left on their own with a minimum of interference, red tape and bureaucracy. People here look at Gore and see a bureaucrat, a politician and someone from Washington.'' Gore supporters disagreed. Silicon Valley's boom, they said, relied heavily on government investment, policies and on federal research grants that helped many of today's best-known corporate names. They said Mr. Gore has a demonstrated record of backing issues important to Silicon Valley: From programs that helped to create Web browsers and the Internet to backing overhaul of the telecommunications industry, from supporting more government funds for education and research to aiding small businesses market new technologies. ''We live in a highly networked and connected global economy and public policy matters,'' Mr. Doerr said. ''Al Gore is really a leader in understanding how government should engage with technology.'' But in offices and coffee cafes here, when talk turns to presidential politics, it is rarely about such specifics but rather about government -- friend or foe. The Bush campaign's involvement in this talk came from early groundwork by executives here who felt Mr. Gore was getting too much attention and made pilgrimages to Austin, Tex. ''There was a tremendous amount of frustration among Republicans here that all the gold and glory was going to the Democrats and the area was being portrayed as locked up for Gore,'' said Lezlee Westine, head of TechNet's Republican politics section. As early as 1999, Ms. Westine took executives to Austin, set up a Bush advisory board on technology and put advertisements in California newspapers urging him to run. One refrain repeated by Bush supporters is government policies had little to do with eight years of economic well-being -- or even the creation of Silicon Valley. ''I've worked in the valley since 1963,'' Mr. Kvamme said, ''and I don't think government ever had a role in it.'' To Democrats and Gore supporters, this is all collective amnesia. ''It's easy to get caught up with being successful here,'' said Justin Kitch, chief executive of Homestead.com, an Internet content company, and Gore backer. ''It's hard to step back and say, 'Why am I so lucky?' Many don't want to attribute their success to any external factors. That's part of being an entrepreneur.''
 Poll Finds Both Candidates Faring Well on Leadership  A New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that most Americans regard Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore as strong leaders, but they consider Mr. Gore far more prepared for the White House and better qualified to deal with world leaders and members of both parties in Congress. But when voters are asked to assess each man on the broader question of his potential to be ''an effective president,'' both candidates receive high marks. The poll also found that Mr. Bush's personal popularity had eroded slightly as Mr. Gore's continued to improve. In terms of voter preferences, Mr. Gore held a narrow lead over Mr. Bush. While Mr. Gore is leading in California, Mr. Bush is far outpacing him in contributions in Silicon Valley. On the day before their first debate, Mr. Bush campaigned in West Virginia and Mr. Gore was sequestered with advisers in Florida. An independent analysis of the Bush and Gore tax proposals.
 Correction of October 2 article on Vice President Al Gore's performance in past debates Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's performance in past debates referred incorrectly to strategy for the coming ones. It is Mr. Gore, not Gov. George W. Bush, who is trying to bat down the impression that the vice president is the more accomplished debater. Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's performance in past debates referred incorrectly to strategy for the coming ones. It is Mr. Gore, not Gov. George W. Bush, who is trying to bat down the impression that the vice president is the more accomplished debater.
 Comparing Tax Cut Plans  An accounting firm compared how the Bush and Gore tax plans would affect 12 hypothetical individuals and families. Comparing Tax Cut Plans  An accounting firm compared how the Bush and Gore tax plans would affect 12 hypothetical individuals and families.
 And, some Republicans warn that if Mr. Clinton carries through with his veto threat, he might alienate enough Missouri voters to cost Vice President Al Gore that state in the presidential election. ''People in Missouri know about this,'' Mr. Bond said, ''and if the Gore campaign believes it is in their interest to have Clinton veto this, I guarantee you this will have political ramifications.''
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on preparation by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush for first presidential debate (M) George W. Bush is really psyched for tonight. ''I view this as a chance for people to get an impression of me on a stage debating my opponent,'' said the Republican nominee, summarizing the situation as only he can. His advisers have been very busy lowering expectations, and have pretty much convinced the nation that Mr. Bush will be the winner if he avoids referring to tariffs and barriers as ''terriers'' again. Al Gore spent the weekend at a shark research station in Florida, where he was holed up with a heroic firefighter, a spunky senior citizen, a sturdy steelworker and 10 other ordinary Americans. Debate prep was briefly interrupted when the group tried to vote Mr. Gore off the island. George W. Bush is really psyched for tonight. ''I view this as a chance for people to get an impression of me on a stage debating my opponent,'' said the Republican nominee, summarizing the situation as only he can. His advisers have been very busy lowering expectations, and have pretty much convinced the nation that Mr. Bush will be the winner if he avoids referring to tariffs and barriers as ''terriers'' again. Al Gore spent the weekend at a shark research station in Florida, where he was holed up with a heroic firefighter, a spunky senior citizen, a sturdy steelworker and 10 other ordinary Americans. Debate prep was briefly interrupted when the group tried to vote Mr. Gore off the island. The network has, however, decided to make amends by offering Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore an hour of free air time to respond to the question ''Why should Americans vote for you?'' Extra credit will be given for originality, creative use of props and any reference to the critical problems facing genetically enhanced prototypes. Aug. 19 -- The new, improved, populist Al Gore rockets out of the convention promising to fight for ''working families.'' Aug. 31 -- In an attempt to support Mr. Bush's assaults on the ''Washington one-size-fits-all mentality,'' Dick Cheney loyally begins decrying the mentality of ''Washington knows all, one size fits best.'' Sept. 6 -- Having done all he could for the working class, Mr. Gore announces he's fighting for ''middle class families.'' Sept. 7 -- Mr. Bush, the ex-Compassionate Conservative formerly known as the Reformer With Results, reintroduces himself as the man with ''Real Plans for Real People.'' Sept. 18 -- Arguing that Mr. Gore had gotten a ''pass'' from the media, Karen Hughes, a Bush spokeswoman, cites instances in which her man would have gotten criticized ''had the shoes been reversed.'' Sept. 27 -- In a TV interview, Bill Bradley is asked if Al Gore is ''trustworthy'' and responds, ''I think that there is no question that he would be a better president.'' Oct. 1 -- Goth rocker Marilyn Manson announces he is leaning toward supporting George W. Bush. Republicans attempt to determine if they can coax Eminem to come out for Mr. Gore.
 Facing off against Mr. Lieberman will be no easy task. Ever since the two men were picked as running mates, Mr. Cheney has been dogged by criticisms that he is not as good a campaigner as Mr. Lieberman, not as charismatic as Mr. Lieberman, not as funny as Mr. Lieberman. But Mr. Cheney's staff is predicting that the candidate will be able to show off a mastery of policy and politics that comes from his 25 years in government as a White House chief of staff,  congressman and President George Bush's secretary of defense during the Persian Gulf war. Playing defense, they said, Mr. Cheney steeled himself for an assault on his conservative voting record in Congress, where he voted against the Head Start program, banning plastic guns and a House resolution calling for the freeing of Nelson Mandela from a South African prison. On offense, they said, Mr. Cheney prepared to question Mr. Lieberman about why he abandoned some of the more conservative causes that he once supported -- like school voucher programs and the partial privatization of Social Security -- when he signed on as Vice President Al Gore's running mate. This weekend Mr. Cheney prepared extensively. Stuart Stevens, a media adviser with the Bush campaign, flew here to help. And Mr. Cheney called in many others from his 25 years in government and his five years heading the Halliburton Company, an energy services company based in Texas, for their advice.
 Mr. Lazio appeared yesterday at the Coyne Park Senior Center in Yonkers with promises to maintain Social Security and to find a way to enact a prescription drug plan for the elderly poor. He said he would support a transitional program to provide prescription drug benefits until a permanent one was in place, an idea endorsed by Gov. George W. Bush and Congressional Republicans, who have proposed such legislation.
 Gov George W Bush will make a return appearance on Late Show with David Letterman on Oct 19, but neither Bush nor Vice Pres Al Gore has taken Letterman up on his offer to hold debate on show (S) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas will make a return appearance on the ''Late Show with David Letterman,'' but it will not be for a debate with Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Bush's last appearance on the CBS Letterman program, in March via satellite, was widely considered a disaster. A split-second delay in the satellite feed threw the governor's timing off and his jokes were ill received by the studio audience, especially one about Mr. Letterman's recent heart surgery. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas will make a return appearance on the ''Late Show with David Letterman,'' but it will not be for a debate with Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Bush's last appearance on the CBS Letterman program, in March via satellite, was widely considered a disaster. A split-second delay in the satellite feed threw the governor's timing off and his jokes were ill received by the studio audience, especially one about Mr. Letterman's recent heart surgery. More recently, Mr. Letterman invited Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to a debate on his program. The Gore campaign quickly accepted, but the Bush campaign made no commitment, prompting a taunt from Mr. Letterman: ''If you turn it down, see, it makes you look like you're scared, like you're a little girl. Nobody wants a little girl in the White House.'' Mr. Bush's campaign said yesterday that Mr. Bush would appear on the program on Oct. 19.
 In this campaign, Mr. Lieberman has vowed not to say anything negative about Mr. Cheney or Gov. George W. Bush personally, but to limit his attacks to their records -- a promise he has kept so far. He draws an implicit contrast to Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney, who have criticized Vice President Al Gore personally, describing him as dishonest. ''In some ways it's therapeutic,'' Mr. Lieberman said of the preparations. ''This is the time to not only get ready for the debate, but to step back and think about the major messages that Al Gore and I are trying to convey, the differences between us and Bush and Cheney in terms of what matters to people.''
 Photo of staff members for Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush preparing stage for first presidential debate
