 Letter by retired Marine Corps commandant Charles C Krulak and former Repr G V Montgomery defends their endorsement in presidential race, as part of group Veterans for Bush-Cheney You say (Week in Review, Oct. 1) that to many current and retired military officers, the recent endorsement by our group, Veterans for Bush-Cheney, ''seemed to cross the apolitical line'' and ''is raising concerns inside and outside the Pentagon about the growing politicization of the ranks.'' You say (Week in Review, Oct. 1) that to many current and retired military officers, the recent endorsement by our group, Veterans for Bush-Cheney, ''seemed to cross the apolitical line'' and ''is raising concerns inside and outside the Pentagon about the growing politicization of the ranks.''
 Russell Bush  4 Park Avenue  New York, N.Y. 10016  (212) 686-9152 (Russell Bush bedroom)  Silk upholstery on Victorian chair:  Clarence House Inc. *
 But with polls showing double-digit leads for Mr. Corzine, other Republican strategists say it looks as though the national party has already tossed Mr. Franks overboard in a state that the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush, has all but conceded to Vice President Al Gore. ''You have Christie's campaign for the Senate, that's $2.25 million,'' Mr. Haytaian said. ''George Bush got over $3 million; John McCain, a million; the Senate candidates in the primary, close to $6 million or more; a million each for the Congressional candidates.
 People of Kaktovik, Alaska, within Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, find future of their homeland is major campaign issue, even popping up in first presidential debate; area is atop what may be largest untapped oil reserve in United States; Gov George W Bush wants oil drilling there, Vice Pres Al Gore does not; same line divides oil industry and environmental advocates; Inupiat Eskimos favor plans to drill, thinking it will bring them enormous economic benefits; Gwich'in Indians are viscerally opposed, fearing that rigs, roads and pipes will mar land and devastate caribou herd on which they rely for food; two native groups have become so alienated on issue that they barely speak to each other; photo; map (M) The dispute over this refuge could not be more clear. Drill it, says Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Leave it alone, says Vice President Al Gore. ''Oh, boy, another month of this,'' said 78-year-old Isaac Akootchook, a whaling captain and village elder, rolling his eyes when yet another news clip showing Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush popped up on the screen. Yet they are keenly aware of what the candidates are saying, at least about the Arctic refuge. Governor Bush, echoing a plan that his father, then President George Bush, unsuccessfully sought in Congress, strongly favors opening the refuge to exploration and drilling. While no one knows for sure how much oil is below the permafrost, Mr. Bush, citing oil experts, says that the fields could produce a million barrels a day -- roughly the same amount, as he put it in the debate, as the country imports daily from Saddam Hussein, with whom his father went to war over protecting Middle East oil supplies. Mr. Bush was speaking in rough terms, since the average this year for oil imported from Iraq is 585,000 barrels a day, says the Energy Department. Mr. Gore is just as staunchly opposed to opening what he calls ''this environmental treasure'' to drilling, arguing the country needs to focus on conservation and other ways of decreasing demand. Opponents like Mr. Gore, using the lower figure, often say it contains ''only 6 months'' of the nation's demand for oil; supporters, citing the higher figure, say it could be enough to represent 30 years' worth of what the country imports from Middle Eastern countries like Iraq. ''Who is Al Gore to say what to do here?'' said Carla Sims Kayotuk, an Eskimo who runs the local store here. ''He wants to keep this a rich man's playground.''
 For years there has been a de facto moratorium on drilling off the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, in much of the Rocky Mountain region and in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. George W. Bush states that he will open up drilling, while Al Gore pledges to ban it forever. For years there has been a de facto moratorium on drilling off the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, in much of the Rocky Mountain region and in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. George W. Bush states that he will open up drilling, while Al Gore pledges to ban it forever.
 Al Gore and George W. Bush play it pathologically safe. The archive pictures of Trudeau reprinted after his death are a rogue's gallery of sartorial bravado. Half the time he looks more like a pimp than a prime minister. A fedora and cape for a football game. A full-length fur to go ice-skating. A white jacket with the collar spread way outside the lapel for a photo op with Ronald Reagan. Ascots, buckskin fringe jackets, striped sailor shirts, berets, Eskimo garb -- he pulled it all off. In the worst fashion excesses of the 70's, he still looks hip. Televised coverage of the Liberal Party convention at which Trudeau won the leadership was playing in the background of my sixth-birthday party. It must have had what Mr. Bush might call a ''subliminable'' effect, because 10 years later I had a big red Trudeau poster on the wall next to my bed, no doubt hoping that some of his legendary mojo would rub off.
 Gov George W Bush, who has accused Vice Pres Al Gore of using 'fuzzy math' to rebut Gore's charges about his tax cut proposals, campaigns around Florida trying to explain how tax code works; Bush utters meaningless array of numbers and addition, then laughts at himself; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas started strong at a rollicking town hall meeting this morning where the crowd at a community college gym was pounding the bleachers as if at a basketball game. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas started strong at a rollicking town hall meeting this morning where the crowd at a community college gym was pounding the bleachers as if at a basketball game. Tieless, in a blue shirt, and roaming the floor with a handheld microphone, Mr. Bush accused his opponent, Vice President Al Gore, of favoring ''Gore-gantuan government.'' He thundered that Mr. Gore ''likes Hillary-Care. He wants to nationalize the health care system of America.'' But Mr. Bush then perplexingly added, speaking of Mr. Gore, ''He wants the doctors making every decision on behalf of every patient in the country.'' (He usually says bureaucrats, not doctors.) Undaunted, Mr. Bush, campaigning in this west-central Florida city near Tampa, held a baby. He greeted a 102-year-old. And he did not miss a beat when a man yelled from the crowd and pre-empted his usual riff about the need for strong military. ''He took my punch line,'' Mr. Bush said. ''We need a speechwriter.'' It came out as a meaningless array of numbers and addition. ''She starts to lose her earned income tax credit,'' Mr. Bush said. ''For the first time she's in the 15 percent bracket. When you add another 15 percent, or 16.2 percent, payroll tax on top of that, plus the 2.9, I mean the payroll tax and the Medicare tax, 16.4 percent, you end up with a high marginal rate. And that's not right, and that's not fair. And we're going to do something about it. We're going to drop the rate and lower the . . .'' Then trying again, Mr. Bush began spitting out numbers like a computer gone haywire, saying, ''15.3 percent, 12.4 and 2.9.'' (Only the real cognoscenti would know that he had just corrected his addition, putting together the 12.4 percent Social Security payroll tax and the 2.9 percent Medicare tax to get 15.3 percent.) ''I was trying to do some fuzzy math,'' Mr. Bush said, using the phrase he had repeated often during Tuesday's debate as a way of rebutting Mr. Gore's charges that Mr. Bush's tax cut disproportionately favors the wealthy. ''Yeah, I used his calculator. Then I used the real one.'' Mr. Bush did better a little later when a man in the audience proposed eliminating hundred dollar bills as a way to make it more difficult for drug dealers to stash their cash. ''Well I really hadn't thought about it,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's an interesting idea.'' A few seconds later he added, ''What I'm trying to do is get some more people to have $100 bills.'' Some politicians might get defensive about such tangles. Mr. Bush laughs at himself. At another town hall meeting, earlier this week, he brought up his propensity for scrambling words. ''Sometimes, you know, I might mangle a syl-LA-ble occasionally. Get it?'' he said breezily, deliberately putting the emphasis in the wrong place. When Mr. Bush unexpectedly held a news conference on an airport tarmac in Florida on Friday night, it was his first one since mid-September, when he was pummeled with questions about a Republican commercial attacking Mr. Gore's health care proposals in which the word ''rats'' flashes on the screen. Never mind that Republicans had been sending out regular e-mail messages counting how many days the reporters on Mr. Gore's campaign plane had been held ''hostage'' without a news conference. (He held his first one in 67 days on Sept. 22.) To keep from stepping on his campaign message of the day, Mr. Bush adopted the same technique. Efforts to question him failed. When Mr. Bush appeared the day after the presidential debate with a police group to receive its endorsement, he waved off questions, saying ''I got questioned out last night.'' Each day this week, aides to Mr. Bush have come back to the press section of the plane like a scouting party to see if the governor could come back for some unrecorded chatter. Each day reporters said no. Sometimes Mr. Bush took to standing in the alcove between the staff section of the plane and the press section, only to be rebuffed.
 George W. Bush and Al Gore? Try Jon S. Corzine and Bob Franks. George W. Bush and Al Gore? Try Jon S. Corzine and Bob Franks. As if last Tuesday's 90-minute, marathon microphone hogfest between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore weren't enough, or Thursday night's tete-a-tete between Dick Cheney and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the vice presidential nominees, the state's Senate candidates are facing off this Sunday morning. Stop them before they kill again? Or bore you to death? Too late, they'll debate again on Thursday. Mr. Rebovich compared Mr. Corzine to Governor Bush, saying both lacked the ability to explain their policy positions in detail. ''With both, we're voting for kind of an image and a promise,'' he said. ''The assumption we make about Corzine is the same -- he doesn't know much, but he'll find good people to work for him.''
 Relations with Mr. Milosevic at  that period were never warm, but were at the height of a roller-coaster ride that coursed over a decade from a lack of attention during a Bush presidency distracted first by the fall of Communism elsewhere, and then by fighting Saddam Hussein, to outright war last year under President Clinton. Now, finally, Washington is celebrating the downfall of a man who for years delighted in defying, befuddling and belittling his far more powerful foes. From the beginning, these kinds of diplomatic differences marked Washington's relations with Yugoslavia. In 1990 and 1991, the ambassador to Yugoslavia, Warren Zimmerman, felt that the Bush administration, distracted by the Persian Gulf war, made too little effort, too late, to stop the brewing conflict in Yugoslavia. At the time, there were arguments within the administration about whether sanctions against Mr. Milosevic should be eased. As ambassador to the United Nations, Dr. Albright was strongly opposed, as was Vice President Al Gore's top foreign policy adviser, Leon Fuerth.
 gore admits being mistaken but denies he exaggerates**Vice Pres Al Gore, responding to intensifying Republican attacks on his credibility, says he does not have problem with embellishment that should cause concern about his character; accuses Gov George W Bush of waging personal attacks rather than focusing on issues (M) Vice President Al Gore, responding to intensifying Republican attacks on his credibility, said today that he did not have a problem with embellishment that should cause concern about his character, and he accused Gov. George W. Bush of waging personal attacks rather than focusing on issues. In a 30-minute conference call with reporters, which was intended to highlight education issues that he will emphasize next week, Mr. Gore took several questions about what Republicans are portraying as a pattern of exaggeration about often incidental matters. Vice President Al Gore, responding to intensifying Republican attacks on his credibility, said today that he did not have a problem with embellishment that should cause concern about his character, and he accused Gov. George W. Bush of waging personal attacks rather than focusing on issues. In a 30-minute conference call with reporters, which was intended to highlight education issues that he will emphasize next week, Mr. Gore took several questions about what Republicans are portraying as a pattern of exaggeration about often incidental matters. On Friday, Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, said Mr. Gore ''seems to have a compulsion to embellish,'' and Republican strategists have made it clear that they will continue to press the issue. Mr. Gore acknowledged today that he has made occasional factual mistakes, as when he said in Tuesday's debate that he had accompanied James Lee Witt, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to inspect fire and flooding damage in Texas in 1998. Mr. Gore did visit Texas, but with one of Mr. Witt's deputies, not with Mr. Witt. Mr. Gore has said that he made the mistake because he has frequently made trips of that sort with Mr. Witt. In response to questions, Mr. Gore said that he did not have a tendency to embellish his resume and that his misstatements did not point to a deeper character flaw. He then tried to turn the tables, asserting that he does not make personal attacks against Mr. Bush when the governor misstates the facts. He went on to describe two such comments. Mr. Gore said it ''could be characterized as an exaggeration'' when Mr. Bush said in the debate that the Gore campaign was outspending the Bush campaign. ''But,'' Mr. Gore said, ''I didn't seize on that as anything other than a mistake that he made. When he said that there were 20,000 new bureaucrats called for in my budget plan, similarly I don't describe that as fictitious or an exaggeration. It's just a mistake on his part.'' Even as he pointed out Mr. Bush's ''mistakes,'' Mr. Gore said he was not denigrating his rival's character. ''These are negative personal attacks of the kind I simply do not engage in,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The Republican ticket announced a few weeks ago that they were going to adopt a new strategy of focusing on the issues, but they have completely abandoned that strategy and they are focused almost entirely on personal attacks.'' Mr. Gore stood by his decision in the debate to illustrate the problem of school crowding by speaking of a 15-year-old girl in Sarasota, Fla., who had to stand in class. In fact, school officials have said, the girl was without a desk for only one day. ''They tried to make that out to be an exaggeration,'' Mr. Gore said of the Republicans. ''Well, excuse me, her father wrote me a handwritten letter, enclosing a picture on the front page of The Sarasota Herald Tribune of his daughter standing in class on the ninth day of school.'' He also stood by his rebuff of Mr. Bush's suggestion that Russia should have tried to use its influence to persuade Slobodan Milosevic to leave office in Yugoslavia. Mr. Gore said that he was ''not sure it's right for us to invite the president of Russia to mediate this dispute there because we might not like the result.'' ''I stand by exactly what I said,'' Mr. Gore said today, ''that the instinct to involve them is not wrong but we did not want to invite them to be the mediator if they did not agree to the right outcome.'' Mr. Gore will leave on Sunday for Sarasota, Fla., where he planned to prepare for Wednesday's debate in Winston-Salem, N.C. He also planned to speak each day about his education plan.
 More than that, though, he has vigorously begun to distance himself from his party's presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, contending that the positions Mr. Bush has taken on issues like gun control and abortion are not only unpopular in his district but also at odds with Mr. Spano's beliefs. Mr. Spano made it clear in an interview that he is seeking not only to draw distinctions between himself and Mr. Bush but also between himself and the Republican Party. ''My intention is to ask voters to look for Nick Spano on the ballot,'' he said. ''The only link I will have in this campaign is with my own record, not with any other candidate.'' ''A vote for Nick Spano maintains a philosophy in the state Senate that is inconsistent with the Gore-Lieberman agenda,'' said Mr. Abinanti, who represents Greenburgh in the County Legislature. ''The changes we have seen from Nick Spano and the Senate have been more about image than substance.''
 US business is awaiting results of presidential election to find out who will be nation's chief regulator; Democratic and Republican campaign advisers say that on wide range of issues a Bush administration would be far friendlier to business than a Gore administration; some advisers say differences between Gore and Bush in regulating businesses are as much product of their careers as anything else; Greg Simon, telecommunications adviser to Gore, and Lawrence B Lindsey, economic advisor to Bush, comment; chart (M) For all of the populist rhetoric of Vice President Al Gore, who has recently taken on big businesses in his speeches and compared himself to the trust-busting Teddy Roosevelt, no sharp policy shifts are expected if he should move to the larger office down the hall at the West Wing. Mr. Gore has played a more prominent role than any other vice president in memory on a wide array of regulatory matters.  He has installed friends and former staff members to be top officials at the Federal Communications Commission and the Environmental Protection Agency, for example, and has directed the administration's response to a variety of legislative proposals that have been adopted or killed over the last eight years. Mr. Gore has surrounded himself with campaign aides who had been top lobbyists for many major telecommunications businesses, including regional telephone companies, Internet service providers and software giants like Microsoft. But campaign officials say that if any of them ever joined a Gore administration, they would leave their associations with their former clients behind -- and that such relationships would not translate into policy changes. ''The differences would be dramatic,'' said Floyd Kvamme, a partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the venture capital firm, who has been advising Gov. George W. Bush on technology issues as a member of the Information Technology Advisory Council, a group of about 250 companies from Silicon Valley and elsewhere. To no one's surprise, Democratic and Republican campaign advisers said that on a wide range of issues -- from easing restrictions on computer technology exports to reshaping the nation's tort laws and making corporations more difficult to sue in product liability cases -- a Bush administration would be far friendlier to business than a Gore administration. Some advisers say the differences between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush in regulating businesses are as much a product of their careers as anything else. ''The place to start is Bush's background as a businessman,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, a former Federal Reserve governor appointed by Mr. Bush's father who is now Mr. Bush's top economic adviser. ''Gore has never been a businessman. Bush knows what it is to try to run a company and how frustrating regulation can be. The frustration comes not so much from complying with any particular rule, but from meeting the rules and yet still facing hurdles.'' ''To Gore, cost-benefit analysis is a dirty word, and in fact, he once likened such analysis to being a license to pollute,'' said Mr. Lindsey, himself an economist. ''Bush's view is that cost-benefit analysis should play an important role.'' MR. GORE'S advisers respond that Mr. Bush is too close to business interests, that in looking at issues through the lens of cost-benefit analysis he ignores greater public policy concerns, and that he would tend to favor corporate over consumer interests. ''It's inconceivable that a Bush administration's Environmental Protection Agency would in any meaningful way resemble the current E.P.A., which has been headed by a woman, Carol Browner, who had been on Al's staff and was Al's choice,'' said Reed E. Hundt, a close friend of Mr. Gore who was selected by the vice president to be the administration's first chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. ''Or turn instead to the Food and Drug Administration,'' Mr. Hundt added. ''It's inconceivable that a Bush F.D.A. would mount the kind of attack on tobacco that the Gore F.D.A. had done, trying as it has to regulate the addictive content of cigarettes.'' Greg Simon, a top Gore adviser on regulatory and telecommunications issues, said it was naive for the Bush campaign to say the governor understands business issues simply because he was a businessman. ''George Bush failed in more businesses than he succeeded in,'' Mr. Simon said, a reference to Mr. Bush's time in the oil business. ''And Al Gore has probably spent more time with the leading businessmen than anyone I know. And our economic policies have created the greatest prosperity this nation has seen. The fact that Gore never ran a general store doesn't mean a whole lot. ''The biggest difference between these two men is that Gore has a long and deep history and that he has done a lot of thinking on these issues, particularly telecommunications,'' he added. ''In a Bush administration, these issues are going to be delegated. No one really thinks that George W. Bush is going to be sitting around the Oval Office thinking about what our nation's telecommunications policy should be.'' Consumer advocates agree that there would be many differences between the two administrations, although they also say they have been disappointed that Mr. Gore has been less of an ally in recent years than he was earlier in his career. ''Bush isn't as extreme as the ideologues in his party and wouldn't throw out all antitrust laws, although he would clearly be less aggressive than a Gore administration,'' said Gene Kimmelman, co-director of the Washington office of Consumers Union. ''But the fact is in the last four years, we've had the most enormous consolidation of telephone monopolies, cable monopolies and media companies despite the administration's attack on Republican deregulation efforts that would allow even greater concentration of ownership. It's hard to understand why, in the last four years, Al Gore, who had such a strong history of fighting for consumer pocketbook issues, has suddenly come down with laryngitis on these issues.'' Some of the firms are hoping that, even if Mr. Gore wins, they can run the clock until after Arthur Levitt, the chairman of the S.E.C., steps down. Mr. Levitt has said that the firms' consulting work poses a potential conflict of interest for their audit work. IN the broadcasting industry, the major television networks and media companies say they have received word from the Bush campaign that a Republican in the White House would mean scaling back -- and possibly eliminating -- ownership limits that have made it impossible for companies like Viacom's CBS and General Electric's NBC to grow any larger. The changes being floated by the Republicans would also repeal the rules that have made it difficult for a broadcaster to own a newspaper in the same city. Telephone companies, too, are gearing up for new battles, particularly among the regional Bell companies, the long-distance carriers and the competitive local companies. There is a widespread view at the F.C.C. that a Republican leading that agency would make it significantly easier for the regional Bells to finally offer long-distance service in many states where they have so far failed to gain regulatory approval. The 1996 Telecommunications Act, which Mr. Gore played a large role in shaping, requires the regional Bell companies to open their local markets to competition before the federal government permits them to enter the $80 billion long-distance market. Antitrust enforcement, more vigorous under the Clinton administration than at any time since the 1960's, is also expected to undergo fundamental changes, but only if Mr. Bush wins. Both Democrats and Republicans say that the ideological divide between the parties in this area is narrower than at any time in decades, but that there would nonetheless be some major differences. ''If there is a Gore administration, we're talking about more of the same,'' said Robert Pitofsky, the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, who in a Democratic administration would likely continue to head the agency at least through next summer. ''We've tried to carve out a middle ground which departs from the ideological warfare of the past. We are vastly more active than the Reagan years and somewhat more active than the Bush years.'' For most mergers, there will almost certainly be no difference between a Gore administration and a Bush administration. But for some of the larger ones, particularly in the transportation and telecommunications industries, the differences may be stark. Moreover, top advisers to Mr. Bush's campaign have been critical of several antitrust enforcement suits brought by the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission under the Clinton administration. At a recent antitrust panel discussion in New York, Timothy J. Muris, a top Bush adviser on economic and competition issues, said the Clinton administration had opened too many cases involving accusations of monopolization. A BUSH administration would have powerful allies on the issue in Congress. Republicans lawmakers have vowed to strip the F.C.C. of authority to review corporate mergers, a position also supported by some in the Bush campaign; such a change would make consolidation far simpler among telephone companies, broadcasters and technology concerns. ''The biggest changes that the F.C.C. would see would be in merger reviews, where there has been so much lobbying to get the agency out of that business,'' said Andrew Jay Schwartzman, president of the Media Access Project, which promotes diversity on the airwaves. ''Bush can be expected to resume the pattern established earlier, in the Reagan and Bush years, of looking at only competitive issues posed by these mergers, and not at the broader public interest questions, as the current administration has.'' And that says nothing of what might happen in the Microsoft case, which is now on the docket of a Federal appeals court. Experts expect that a Gore administration would approach the case in the same way as the Clinton administration has. Advisers to Mr. Bush's campaign said they do not expect that his administration would do anything before the appeals court makes its decision, which could provide a wide range of opportunities to approach the case. Microsoft executives are hoping that a Bush administration  would dispose of the suit on terms far more favorable to the company than those proposed by the Clinton administration. It is relatively easy to imagine what those agencies may be like if Mr. Gore wins, because he has already played the primary role in selecting many top regulators. In his book, ''You Say You Want a Revolution'' (Yale University Press, 2000), Mr. Hundt, the former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, wrote that he viewed himself as an agent for realizing Mr. Gore's telecommunications vision. Four of Mr. Gore's top campaign advisers -- Thomas Downey, Peter Knight, Roy Neel and Mr. Simon -- all have significant experience working for large telecommunications clients, and one or more of them could play a major role in the next administration, either at the White House or one of the agencies if they are interested in joining the government. In a Bush administration, the top contenders for senior regulatory jobs include a handful of Washington officials like Michael K. Powell, a widely respected Republican member of the F.C.C., and Texas regulators like Pat Wood III, chosen by Mr. Bush to run the state's Public Utilities Commission. Neither is viewed as an ideologue. And both have described their roles as reducing regulation while trying to promote competition in markets that have traditionally been controlled by monopolies. Mr. Wood has been Mr. Bush's top regulator in Texas for more than five years, and he has put into effect state and Federal laws aimed at deregulating both the telephone and utilities industries. Staking out pragmatic and moderate positions on regulatory issues, he has enjoyed good relations with both Democrats and Republicans on the F.C.C. IN a recent interview, Mr. Wood said he and Mr. Bush shared the view that there is a need for some regulation in markets that have historically been dominated by a handful of companies, until those markets open up.
 This week, the Lucinda Childs Dance Company is appearing in New York for only the second time in 11 years. Having spent the summer performing across Europe, Ms. Childs and her 12 dancers are presenting ''Parcours'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Harvey Theater for four performances starting on Wednesday. The 75-minute program, without intermission, comprises four United States premieres along with ''Radial Courses'' (1976), performed in silence, and ''Concerto'' (1993), with music by Henryk Gorecki, which was seen at the Joyce Theater in 1994 during the company's previous New York season.
 I am 97 and have seen a lot of politics in my lifetime. I watched the first presidential debate between Al Gore and George W. Bush with interest. And I read your Oct. 5 news reports about opinions of individuals and small groups from around the country who had seen the debate. I am 97 and have seen a lot of politics in my lifetime. I watched the first presidential debate between Al Gore and George W. Bush with interest. And I read your Oct. 5 news reports about opinions of individuals and small groups from around the country who had seen the debate.
 Editorial reports that first presidential debate was testy and confusing; also comments on vice presidential debate in which Republican Dick Cheney's solid abilityto discuss subjects that make George W Bush look tongue-tied could diminish man at top of ticket The first presidential debate of campaign 2000 was testy and confusing. The meeting between the vice-presidential contenders was somber and informative. Now those debates are over, we can see the broad outlines of the political drama that will play out over the next four weeks. Voters will be trying to figure out whether the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, is knowledgeable enough to be president, and whether the Democratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore, is likable enough. To observe the personal nature of the choice between the candidates is not to denigrate the important role of issues like taxes, Social Security, health, education and defense. But anyone listening to the campaign dialogue on talk shows and at dinner tables has to be struck by the degree to which politically engaged people are focusing on the candidates' contrasting capabilities and personality traits. Both candidates' knowledge about government and their individual psychologies have figured in making taxes a central issue of the campaign. Mr. Bush, for example, clings almost self-destructively to his tax cut of at least $1.3 trillion over 10 years, even though it allows Mr. Gore to attack the plan as absurdly weighted toward the wealthiest Americans. The governor may have needed to propose the tax cut to win conservatives' votes in the Republican primaries, but the issue has turned into an albatross this fall. If he can win on an issue so strongly identified with President George Bush, however, he will have vindicated the family honor. Moreover, if he can really deliver on tax cuts once in office, the younger Bush will have succeeded where his father failed. All politics may be local. But in this dynastic contest, it is hereditary as well. As often noted, Mr. Gore's warnings about tax breaks for the richest Americans hark back to the New Deal populism of his father, Albert Gore Sr. The first presidential debate of campaign 2000 was testy and confusing. The meeting between the vice-presidential contenders was somber and informative. Now those debates are over, we can see the broad outlines of the political drama that will play out over the next four weeks. Voters will be trying to figure out whether the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush, is knowledgeable enough to be president, and whether the Democratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore, is likable enough. To observe the personal nature of the choice between the candidates is not to denigrate the important role of issues like taxes, Social Security, health, education and defense. But anyone listening to the campaign dialogue on talk shows and at dinner tables has to be struck by the degree to which politically engaged people are focusing on the candidates' contrasting capabilities and personality traits. Both candidates' knowledge about government and their individual psychologies have figured in making taxes a central issue of the campaign. Mr. Bush, for example, clings almost self-destructively to his tax cut of at least $1.3 trillion over 10 years, even though it allows Mr. Gore to attack the plan as absurdly weighted toward the wealthiest Americans. The governor may have needed to propose the tax cut to win conservatives' votes in the Republican primaries, but the issue has turned into an albatross this fall. If he can win on an issue so strongly identified with President George Bush, however, he will have vindicated the family honor. Moreover, if he can really deliver on tax cuts once in office, the younger Bush will have succeeded where his father failed. All politics may be local. But in this dynastic contest, it is hereditary as well. As often noted, Mr. Gore's warnings about tax breaks for the richest Americans hark back to the New Deal populism of his father, Albert Gore Sr. Speaking of father figures, how about those vice-presidential candidates. For the first time since his selection for the Republican ticket, former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney looked like an asset on Thursday night. Mr. Cheney's solid debate performance and his ability to talk about subjects that make Mr. Bush look tongue-tied carries the risk of diminishing the man at the top of the ticket. Even so, Mr. Cheney's steadiness may also pull in voters who find Mr. Bush attractive but are worried that he is too callow to be chief executive. Joseph Lieberman, for his part, showed mature judgment in letting Mr. Cheney make his points without feeling compelled to imitate Mr. Gore's combative debating style. But the No. 2's have had their day. In the upcoming debates, it will be purely up to Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to close the sale. The vice president probably remains the best-informed candidate running in the United States this year for any office. But with his new nonverbal vocabulary of sighs, grimaces and interruptions, he has managed to turn  that asset into an irritation and thereby flatten his lead in the polls. Even some supporters wondered whether his performance might foretell difficulties as president in drawing Americans to his side in moments of decision and crisis. Luckily for the Democrats, while Mr. Gore was squirming as if he were trying to attract the teacher's attention, Mr. Bush was struggling with the exam questions. In the end, Mr. Bush showed last Tuesday that he can avoid defeating himself with gaffes and factual blunders. But in the second and third debates, he will have to show that he can move beyond repetitive accusations of ''fuzzy math'' and smoothly expound authoritative numbers of his own. As our colleague William Safire observed, Mr. Bush at some point has to win by winning, especially since he wants to persuade the American people to change course at a time of extraordinary prosperity. On balance, Mr. Bush had a lucky week. Mr. Gore made mistakes on a few trivial matters, masking Mr. Bush's shaky grasp of the cost of his tax cut, his Social Security proposal and his own campaign. He may not be so fortunate on Wednesday night. It will be hard to get by on generalities about big government if Mr. Gore can draw him into a detailed and sigh-free discussion of budgetary and foreign policy issues.
 Gary Bauer Op-Ed article on presidential debates charges that George W Bush and Dick Cheney have forsaken Republican platform on social issues of abortion and gay marriage (S) Every public opinion poll suggests that the Bush-Cheney ticket has no more loyal supporters than the millions of men and women of faith who care about family and life issues. How surprising, then, that those voters have had their hearts broken in two consecutive debates, as they watched first a lackluster defense of the sanctity of life, and then a surrender on the defense of traditional marriage. Every public opinion poll suggests that the Bush-Cheney ticket has no more loyal supporters than the millions of men and women of faith who care about family and life issues. How surprising, then, that those voters have had their hearts broken in two consecutive debates, as they watched first a lackluster defense of the sanctity of life, and then a surrender on the defense of traditional marriage. I doubt if anyone wants an end to the Clinton-Gore era more than I do. I will continue, as I have for months, to promote the Bush-Cheney ticket. I favor lower taxes across the board, a stronger national defense and less Washington bureaucracy and red tape.
 George W Bush's performance in presidential debate reviewed; his appeals for bipartisanship reflect polls showing that Americans are wearing of bickering and gridlock in government; drawings of new political creature called the donkephant (M) A VOTER had to listen closely (and tune out Vice President Al Gore's aria of sighs) to hear it, but there was something off-kilter about Gov. George W. Bush's references to Democrats during the debate on Tuesday night, something off-key in his tone. A VOTER had to listen closely (and tune out Vice President Al Gore's aria of sighs) to hear it, but there was something off-kilter about Gov. George W. Bush's references to Democrats during the debate on Tuesday night, something off-key in his tone. About five minutes into the debate, Mr. Bush bragged about his harmonious relations with them in Texas. A minute or so after that, he looked forward to a similar situation in Washington. By the time the debate was only 25 minutes old, the Texas governor had hitched Republicans to Democrats no fewer than four times, and each time they were blissfully wed. Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate, followed suit, boasting about Mr. Bush's bipartisan orientation during Thursday night's vice presidential debate. ''I think you have to be able to reach out and work together,'' Mr. Cheney said, sounding more like a political therapist than a political warrior. The argument seems to be: Vote for Mr. Bush; he feels both parties' pain. It just sounds odd. Given how unpredictable the presidential race remains with so little time to go, Mr. Bush might have been expected to demonize the people across the aisle. That has been the strategy of many Republicans since the Reagan years, raised to an art by Lee Atwater and Newt Gingrich. That Mr. Bush did not come out swinging says a whole lot about the challenge he faces in trying to unseat an incumbent, his various strategies for dealing with it and, to some extent, the changing times. Mr. Bush, according to several political analysts and some of his advisers, is using this shift to find ways to assert an advantage over Mr. Gore. Since Mr. Bush cannot say he has as much experience as the vice president, who has held public office for nearly a quarter-century, he is suggesting that less is more. Dwelling on a vision of cooperation in the future highlights its absence in the present and tacitly indicts everyone in Washington -- including Mr. Gore -- for letting bipartisanship languish. ''There is this implicit accusation that Gore is so marinated in the bitterness of Washington D.C., there's no way he can get things done,'' said one of Mr. Bush's advisers. Mr. Bush's message that he will bridge the divide between Republicans and Democrats is also a way of saying that he is an outsider, a claim of questionable credibility but undeniable political acumen. Mr. Clinton, another state governor, at least partly took this tack in 1992. He referred to himself then as ''a different kind of Democrat.''  The Bush campaign has dubbed its candidate ''a different kind of  Republican.'' Voters want someone who straddles the vital center, and by promoting his ability to collaborate with Democrats, Mr. Bush is trying to position himself there. Interestingly, when Mr. Bush recently charged that Mr. Gore would use the projected surplus with as much restraint as Imelda Marcos used her Neiman Marcus card, he made a point of stating that plenty of other Democrats -- including Mr. Clinton -- had seen the fiscally prudent light. The problem, as Mr. Bush defined it, was not the opposing party, but rather its nominee. With his talk of bipartisanship, Mr. Bush is also saying that a person's political loyalty is not the most important thing about him. And that carries a potential meaning that is larger than politics. ''It addresses the whole element of compassion,'' said one of Mr. Bush's advisers, alluding to Mr. Bush's self-identification as a ''compassionate conservative.'' Calling for a truce among rival tribes signals an open heart and an open mind, or least the Bush campaign intends it to. And yet many political analysts said that there were inherent problems in Mr. Bush's approach. For starters, his positions themselves hold less hope for bipartisan compromise than his words, which may be  fig leaves covering very conservative ideological positions. His proposed tax cut of $1.3 trillion over 10 years is larger than what even conservative Republican members of the House were pushing over the last two years. His ideas for increasing the number of Americans with health insurance, building more houses for lower-middle-class people and bringing down the cost of fuel all involve measures that emphasize corporate competition and profit rather than government regulation. And on issues like abortion and gun control, Mr. Bush is either decidedly or arguably right of center. Mr. Mann and other analysts maintained that most voters would not be swayed by a candidate's claim that he could effectively lead other politicians, if they didn't like where he wanted go. And these analysts said that polls continue to show that more voters share Mr. Gore's positions on many key issues. Similarly, Mr. Bush's styling of himself as an outsider, while in line with three of the last four presidents -- Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton, governors all -- could be hard for him to carry off. His surname is a constant reminder of the favor he was able to curry with the Republican establishment, and of the support he draws from it. BUT Mr. Bush must use whatever advantages he has, and he and his advisers have always felt he maintains an edge on Mr. Gore in terms of sheer likability, which weighs heavily with some voters. Mr. Bush's promotion of himself as a congenial, inspiring leader works that vein, especially in contrast to Mr. Gore, who is seen by some voters and colleagues as the ultimate partisan attack dog.
 Mr. Orton says they need not ask because he's not going to tell.  ''That's nobody's business,'' he groused to The Salt Lake Tribune the other day. ''Mike Leavitt wants to run against Al Gore.'' Mr. Leavitt argues that whether a candidate for governor plans to back ''friends and neighbors of Utah'' is a legitimate question. Mr. Leavitt says he will be voting for his good friend George W. Bush.
 The first presidential debate last week demonstrated at numbing length the extent to which polling is consuming both politics and journalism. Like human semaphores, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore kept signaling each and every poll-determined swing group that they were on their side. The first presidential debate last week demonstrated at numbing length the extent to which polling is consuming both politics and journalism. Like human semaphores, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore kept signaling each and every poll-determined swing group that they were on their side. There were dueling prescription drug plans for the elderly and education plans to woo the suburban soccer moms. Mr. Gore's denunciations of ''tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent'' of Americans were aimed at the lower middle class, while Mr. Bush's rejected ''old-style Washington politics'' in a bid for independents. Next came the post-debate blizzard of media polls. MSNBC, with the help of the Republican pollster Frank Luntz, had 36 avowedly undecided voters in the swing state of Missouri using dials to record their reaction to every word of the debate. Fox News and SpeakOut.com were running a ''Rate the Debate'' forum via the Internet. CBS's online poll proclaimed Mr. Gore the winner by 56 to 42 percent. NBC's overnight poll gave it to Mr. Gore 46 percent to 36 percent. And ABC's snap poll said that Mr. Gore had won 42 percent to 39 percent. (In a bracing moment of on-air rebellion the ABC anchor Peter Jennings announced and then brazenly dismissed his own network's instant telephone poll as unscientific and meaningless). Mr. Bush likes to proclaim he ''won't be swayed by polls and focus groups.'' But then he turned around and started talking about an ''education recession,'' a phrase Republicans proudly said was carefully poll-tested. He is no worse an offender than Mr. Gore. All spring when Mr. Bush was ahead in the surveys, his campaign was being called masterful, his victory inevitable, his strategists confident and in command. By August, Senator Phil Gramm, a fellow Texas Republican, announced, ''I'm expecting our governor to win by maybe double digits.'' Mr. Gore was seen as wooden and, horror of horrors, as poll driven. Many thought he was fading from the race. Yet come September, as the polls shifted, Mr. Bush became the hapless one, his malapropisms fatal and his aides reactive, while Mr. Gore had metamorphosed into a bold risk taker gleaming with a winner's confidence. ''I've called it for Gore,'' Lawrence O'Donnell Jr., a contributing editor for New York Magazine, said on the ''Hardball'' television show. ''I think he's unstoppable at this point.'' He noted that an astute student of polls in the spring, instead of ordaining Mr. Bush, would have recognized that public opinion was not fixed. ''You would have seen how much volatility there was,'' Mr. Kohut said, ''that you can't trust this Bush lead.'' If there is one bright spot this year, it may be that the voters themselves almost seem like they want to confound everyone. Just when Mr. Gore looked like he was out of the race, the public swung his way. When Mr. Bush appeared in danger of permanently falling behind, he caught up. ''People are contrarian in a certain way,'' Mr. Kristol said, celebrating the twists and turns of this year's race. ''They keep wanting to do the opposite of what the polls tell them they want to do. The voters are less susceptible to herd mentality than the pundits.''
 Edward C Schmults letter on Richard V Allen's July 30 article holds George Bush was only person he reviewed in detail with Ronald Reagan before he chose vice presidential running mate in 1980 (S) At the convention, I was asked to recheck several items concerning Bush, and I met with him and James Baker in Bush's hotel room. Bush was the only one I reviewed in detail with Reagan before he made the telephone call that was pictured in your article, a call that I listened to from the photographer's side of the table. At the convention, I was asked to recheck several items concerning Bush, and I met with him and James Baker in Bush's hotel room. Bush was the only one I reviewed in detail with Reagan before he made the telephone call that was pictured in your article, a call that I listened to from the photographer's side of the table.
 Horowitz: I don't know. One of the best debate teams I ever saw used to write down their jokes before a tournament. I think the same may be true for Bush and Gore in terms of key phrases. In terms of persuasive flourishes, how you hold yourself in a debate, making eye contact, things like that, you're right: you can't really practice that. You can't look in the mirror and go, ''Ooh, I look credible today.''
 ''The biggest thing people are worried about is who's going to be in office,'' Dr. Naqvi said. His analysis: If Al Gore is elected, as he expects, and the Democrats gain control in Congress, drug stocks could fall 20 percent on fears of Mr. Gore's plan to change the Medicare system. By limiting some drug prices, that plan could reduce drug company earnings by 5 percent to 8 percent. But as long as the Republicans keep control of Congress, drug stocks will rise in the fourth quarter. And if George W. Bush is elected as well, that gain could be 20 percent.
 He intends to concentrate on states that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas seems to have written off or might write off, such as Massachusetts, which is strongly Democratic and Mr. Bush has no chance of capturing. Other states he is looking at include Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont, New York, Minnesota, Maryland, California and New Jersey. ''We plan to go into these states with radio ads,'' Mr. Buchanan said last week, ''and say in effect, 'The race in your state is over. Bush has written it off. Therefore the election is over here. Therefore a vote for Bush is a wasted vote. So take this opportunity in this one-party state to help create a new fighting conservative party.' '' The Bush campaign's answer: ''Nothing's been written off.''
 Michael K Deaver, Edwin Meese 3rd and Richard B Wirthlin letter disputes statement in Richard V Allen's July 30 article that 'co-presidency' between Ronald Reagan and former Pres Gerald Ford almost became a 'deal' and that George Bush was picked virtually by accident (S) Richard V. Allen's article (July 30) gives the impression that Ronald Reagan's 1980 campaign lacked a ''highly structured search'' for a vice-presidential candidate, that a ''co-presidency'' between Reagan and former President Ford almost became ''a deal'' and that George Bush was picked virtually by accident, at the last moment. Nothing could be further from the truth. Ronald Reagan began the search for a running mate in the spring of 1980, when he asked Richard Wirthlin, his director of planning and strategy, to explore voters' views on potential nominees for vice president. In May and early June an extensive survey was conducted of some 20 possible candidates. Three names emerged on top: Howard Baker, Gerald Ford and George Bush. In a private discussion with Ed Meese on Wednesday afternoon, Reagan said he believed Bush was the best prospect. That night, he went to the convention hall to announce it was Bush and to quell dream-ticket rumors that were building. Richard V. Allen's article (July 30) gives the impression that Ronald Reagan's 1980 campaign lacked a ''highly structured search'' for a vice-presidential candidate, that a ''co-presidency'' between Reagan and former President Ford almost became ''a deal'' and that George Bush was picked virtually by accident, at the last moment. Nothing could be further from the truth. Ronald Reagan began the search for a running mate in the spring of 1980, when he asked Richard Wirthlin, his director of planning and strategy, to explore voters' views on potential nominees for vice president. In May and early June an extensive survey was conducted of some 20 possible candidates. Three names emerged on top: Howard Baker, Gerald Ford and George Bush. In a private discussion with Ed Meese on Wednesday afternoon, Reagan said he believed Bush was the best prospect. That night, he went to the convention hall to announce it was Bush and to quell dream-ticket rumors that were building.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column reports that vice presidential debate has left her caught up in vanilla gust of approval for Dick Cheney, unrepentant insider's insider who blanches at gauzy handling and is preternaturally placid; finds him refreshing change from Al Gore's 'smarmy Eddie Haskell' and George W Bush's snorts, sniffles and thinly veiled terror when he hears names with more than three syllables (M) The Bushies kept telling me that, eventually, I would feel the Cheney magic. They said it would tingle ''like champagne,'' as one member of the clan put it. The Bushies kept telling me that, eventually, I would feel the Cheney magic. They said it would tingle ''like champagne,'' as one member of the clan put it. Let Al Gore sigh and roll his eyes and do his smarmy Eddie Haskell. (''With all due respect, Mrs. Cleaver, for a mom you're quite a babe.'') Let W. snort and sniffle and get that look of thinly veiled terror when he hears a three-syllable name with too many consonants in it. Let Holy Joe gush about his personal odyssey of ethnic acceptance. Bring me the bald, pasty head of Big Time. It's bracing to see a candidate who doesn't even bother to pretend that he's having a good time reading to schoolchildren or letting babies drool on him or hearing sob stories from the downtrodden. He is here as a Bush family retainer, after all. He prefers to pander up. He is preternaturally placid. The excitable Bushes, who hate being upstaged and who hate disloyalty, find that reassuring. Be afraid, Bushes. Be very afraid.
 In those days, too, there was talk of ''democratic values.'' In practice, though, those values won out in policy debates only when they converged with cold war interests -- like containing Cuba, overthrowing Nicaragua's Sandinistas or stemming the rise of Salvadoran leftist rebels. The heyday of doing business with generals and dictators was the 1950's, 1960's and early 1970's. Then the Carter, Reagan and Bush administrations incorporated the sponsorship of free elections into their playbooks for keeping leftists out of power. With confidence in  electorates that were not radical, they helped support Latin America's dramatic emergence from the era of military rule. So by the time  President Clinton was proclaiming his support for democracy, he was in the morally comfortable position of dealing almost exclusively with civilian presidents. The situation recalled the fall of Panama's General Noriega, who would do favors for the White House  one day and for Fidel Castro the next, until President Bush finally pushed him from power. Mr. Montesinos, like General Noriega, also shamelessly flaunted his closeness to Americans in order to enhance his power at home. In 1998, when another scandal threatened, he practically ambushed retired Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, President Clinton's drug czar, in order to appear on Peruvian television shaking his hand during an official visit.
 The trapping war began in 1986, when William Mannetti of New Haven, who founded the Animal Rights Front, and Joy Bush of Hamden, another member of the group, got trapping licenses. That year, the two won four-year trapping rights on two sites. The next time the state took bids, in 1990, they won four sites; in 1994, a growing group of anti-trappers got 10. In 1998, the clandestine war escalated. Anti-trappers won 36 sites totaling 47,000 acres of public land.
 Pres Bill Clinton, national security advisor Samuel R Berger and Vice Pres Al Gore comment on what they were thinking on April 8, 1997, when briefing in White House Map Room for state arrival of Canadian Prime Min Chretien was breaking up; photo (M) Vice President Gore (second from right): ''Tipper had come in during the briefing, and so when we started breaking up to go outside to the South Lawn for the official arrival, we finally got to say hi to each other. I wasn't self-conscious at all. I didn't think anybody else was paying attention to us. I was just thinking, 'I'm really glad to see you and I love you.' This was a time of incredible transition in our lives. We were finally coming to grips with the fact that our first daughter was about to go from being our little girl to somebody else's wife. It is a strange fact of the vice presidency, or any elected office, that your personal life becomes intertwined with your public one. It's something I'm not sure you ever quite grow used to.''
 Because George W. Bush was frequently answering questions on a variety of subjects from reporters on his campaign plane, his aides noticed that their chosen message of the day at major events was not getting through. ''Because Gore wasn't doing avails like that,'' said Karen P. Hughes, ''the networks were using shots from his events.'' Peter Marks, a New York Times reporter, noted, ''Unlike the campaign of Vice President Al Gore, which has strictly limited the candidate's access, Mr. Bush Because George W. Bush was frequently answering questions on a variety of subjects from reporters on his campaign plane, his aides noticed that their chosen message of the day at major events was not getting through. ''Because Gore wasn't doing avails like that,'' said Karen P. Hughes, ''the networks were using shots from his events.'' Peter Marks, a New York Times reporter, noted, ''Unlike the campaign of Vice President Al Gore, which has strictly limited the candidate's access, Mr. Bush ''Al [Gore] and I have tremendous regard for this industry,'' Senator Joseph Lieberman told a star-studded event raising funds from entertainment moguls. ''It's true from time to time we will have been, will be, critics or noodges.'' Having used the Yiddishism noodge, a noun meaning ''pest, annoying nag, persistent complainer,'' Lieberman went on to confuse the assembled glitterati by using the English verb nudge as if it were interchangeable with the Yiddish noun: ''We will nudge you, but we will never become censors.''
 For Mark Hampton, it was a pair of shutters he painted as a boy. For Mario Buatta, it was the experience of buying an 18th-century lap desk. What triggered Russell Bush's aesthetic epiphany was a magazine article extolling the town and country houses of the English photographer and dandy Cecil Beaton. Beaton's neo-Edwardian hoopla made an instant impression. ''I want to live just like this when I grow up,'' the schoolboy told his mother, brandishing a copy of House & Garden circa 1965. Today, after a brief detour working as a lingerie designer and a museum stylist, Bush not only sleeps in the steel-frame bed from Beaton's London pad, which he acquired from a friend, but he is a budding tastemaker to boot. And he may just be on his way to being Kutztown, Pa.'s most celebrated graduate since Keith Haring. For Mark Hampton, it was a pair of shutters he painted as a boy. For Mario Buatta, it was the experience of buying an 18th-century lap desk. What triggered Russell Bush's aesthetic epiphany was a magazine article extolling the town and country houses of the English photographer and dandy Cecil Beaton. Beaton's neo-Edwardian hoopla made an instant impression. ''I want to live just like this when I grow up,'' the schoolboy told his mother, brandishing a copy of House & Garden circa 1965. Today, after a brief detour working as a lingerie designer and a museum stylist, Bush not only sleeps in the steel-frame bed from Beaton's London pad, which he acquired from a friend, but he is a budding tastemaker to boot. And he may just be on his way to being Kutztown, Pa.'s most celebrated graduate since Keith Haring. ''He is an artist of spaces,'' says Shamina Talyarkhan, the owner of a hand-beaded-embroidery company that supplies couture fashion houses. Talyarkhan handed Bush the keys to her awkwardly proportioned modern penthouse on the Upper East Side and came home to a shimmering, stone-colored space dotted with handmade silver tables and Jaipur miniatures. ''The reasons I adore him are simple,'' she adds. ''First, he has exquisite taste. Second, he has a sense of style, personal and professional, that surely comes from the time he worked at the Costume Institute under Diana Vreeland. Third, he's a genius.'' Bush, 47, grins at the praise. ''I'm a camouflage decorator,'' he says, modestly allowing that he has a passion for transforming the disreputable into the deluxe. ''Not everybody wants to blow out the walls and start over from scratch,'' he adds, plainly puzzled by the notion of bulldozer decorating. ''There's nothing wrong with working with what's already there and making it better.'' A postmodern staircase in garish orange pearwood and brass? Bush gave it a Zen makeover using ebony stain and a dose of bronze finishing, until it looked like something Marlene Dietrich might have descended in ''Shanghai Express.'' A bedroom swathed in sweet-tempered, tea-green silk in the same Upper East Side apartment now has unexpected backbone: black Chinese tables and an unconventional headboard composed of towering 19th-century panels of French black and gold lacquer. In his own apartment -- a bijou one-bedroom whose tidy exoticism is one part Goncourt brothers to two parts ''Arabian Nights'' -- stacks of books are stored behind ceiling-high folding screens upholstered in Mughal woodblock-print cotton. And the gossamer silk bedroom curtains are edged in lowly black rickrack trim that, in Bush's hands, becomes suddenly chic. Even more startling is the fact that he made them himself. The apartment is a three-dimensional album of influences, its two small rooms filled with objects imbued with personal meaning. ''I like to surround myself with things that remind me of people I've known or admired,'' Bush says. Which accounts for such evocative ephemera as an envelope decorated by the ''Madeline'' illustrator, Ludwig Bemelmans, and addressed to the decorator Elsie de Wolfe; a pair of polychrome Russian side chairs that belonged to the great, eccentric Parisian designer Madeleine Castaing; and a small portrait of Stephen Tennant, a British socialite whose heavy makeup and passion for sailors and seashells made him an icon of alternative chic in the 1920's. A 19th-century French shawl conceals an old Singer sewing-machine base found in a shop in Pennsylvania. Though nothing special, it serves its purpose as a table. More than a practical solution, it is a subtle emblem of why Bush's clients feel they can trust him to stick to their budgets, even if they've been burned by other decorators in the past. ''We've heard about designer scams a lot lately, but he's not going to embroil you in multimillion-dollar pieces of furniture -- unless that's what you want,'' says Claudia Cohen, the entertainment reporter for ''Live With Regis,'' who has been a Bush client for more than a decade. (He's working on her house in the Hamptons, and recently completed a screening room in her Manhattan apartment.) ''He's scrupulously honest, and a gentleman, too -- kind and gracious and honorable.'' And he has his priorities straight, Cohen adds. ''He'll show you a world-class, museum-quality antique for the living room, and in the same meeting, flip through the Pottery Barn catalog and find the perfect table for your guest room.'' ''I come from simple stock,'' Bush says by way of explanation. ''My mama did not wear couture.'' But what his mother lacked in high fashion, she made up for in valuable life lessons. ''She taught me to see,'' Bush says, whether it was vegetables at the produce stand or old furniture at a local antique show. ''She taught me to pick out things that had the nicest shape, that were painted with the best symmetry. If I can tell a bad painting from a good painting, it's because of my mother.'' A 10-year stint under the wing of the society architect Peter Marino didn't hurt, either. ''Peter is obsessed with quality,'' says Bush, who went solo three years ago, after working on projects for the arts patron Anne Bass and the fashion designer Valentino. ''And so am I.'' His quest for the best doesn't mean riding roughshod over a client's desires. One woman told him, ''I know you don't think I have good taste, but this is what I like,'' apologizing for her insistence on a teeth-aching color scheme of peach and green. Bush wasn't disappointed; he was thrilled. ''My job is not to impose my taste,'' he says. ''My job is to take peach and green and make it beautiful.'' The American-born Victoria Lady de Rothschild, whose country house in England Bush helped to decorate, says, ''We work well as a team.'' The pair's common heroines are Diana Vreeland and Pauline de Rothschild, and it's Bush's mind as well as his talent that keeps her enthralled. ''When we met, there was this instant rapport, we were kindred spirits,'' Lady de Rothschild adds. ''He knows the history of everything: period furniture, fashion, people. So when we're together, we go off on these long conversations.'' To Bush, a room should reflect its occupant. ''Everybody's trying so hard to be stylish, everybody's too overly design conscious,'' he says, recalling the cognoscenti's disappointment when Jacqueline Onassis's legendarily luxurious apartment turned out to be merely pretty in photographs published after her death. ''People said it was so ugly, so dull, but I thought it was perfect. It was the backdrop to a fascinating woman. Rooms shouldn't compete with the people who live in them.'' And, he adds, eyes widening in astonishment, ''since when has 'pretty' been a dirty word?'' His look? He doesn't have a label for what he does, and doesn't want one, though one observer called it tradition-with-a-twist. Bush isn't so sure, but he accepts the description -- for now. ''I'm still formulating what I'm doing, where I'm going,'' he says. ''I'm always learning. I never want to lose that.''
 Article assesses Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush's attire during first presidential debate; photos (M) EARLY this year, when Vice President Al Gore was ostensibly under the stylistic tutelage of the writer Naomi ''release-your-inner-alpha-male'' Wolf, he showed up in New Hampshire for a primary debate with Bill Bradley looking more like someone trying to sign Minnie Driver to a three-picture deal than a politician aiming to lead the free world. On Jan. 26, Mr. Gore wore a snug three-button suit that wasn't quite dark enough, a shirt of French blue that appeared at once too French and too blue, and a horizontally striped tie. The look brought a rejoinder from DNR, the men's wear trade journal, deploring ''fashion offenses bordering on the impeachable.'' DNR made much of the fact that the vice president had buttoned the top button of his jacket. But the real transgression was his stab at flashiness, which his rivals in the Democratic primary seized on as cause for optimism. ''One of the things we thought Bradley had going for him was that Gore was too fashion-forward,'' said Richard Stengel, one of Mr. Bradley's consultants at the time. ''He could look natty, and natty isn't presidential.'' EARLY this year, when Vice President Al Gore was ostensibly under the stylistic tutelage of the writer Naomi ''release-your-inner-alpha-male'' Wolf, he showed up in New Hampshire for a primary debate with Bill Bradley looking more like someone trying to sign Minnie Driver to a three-picture deal than a politician aiming to lead the free world. On Jan. 26, Mr. Gore wore a snug three-button suit that wasn't quite dark enough, a shirt of French blue that appeared at once too French and too blue, and a horizontally striped tie. The look brought a rejoinder from DNR, the men's wear trade journal, deploring ''fashion offenses bordering on the impeachable.'' DNR made much of the fact that the vice president had buttoned the top button of his jacket. But the real transgression was his stab at flashiness, which his rivals in the Democratic primary seized on as cause for optimism. ''One of the things we thought Bradley had going for him was that Gore was too fashion-forward,'' said Richard Stengel, one of Mr. Bradley's consultants at the time. ''He could look natty, and natty isn't presidential.'' Of all the critiques one might make of the performance Mr. Gore and his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, gave on Tuesday in the first presidential debate -- overuse of the terms ''lockbox'' and ''fuzzy math,'' for example -- nattiness isn't one of them. Were Vice President Gore and Governor Bush playing it too safe in this tightly contested race? Were they afraid that anything veering from the mundane would send voters on the fence fleeing in the wrong direction? ''The tie shouldn't be too distracting,'' said Michael Deaver, the former adviser to President Ronald Reagan (a radical proponent of brown suits), commenting on the unwritten rules of debate wear. ''But it doesn't have to be quite as boring as solid red.'' All that said, to students of men's fashion, namely those able to identify hopsacking in a line-up, there were key differences. ''Men's wear is all about the nuances,'' said Simon Doonan, the creative director of Barneys New York. ''They looked the same, but in terms of what the clothing means, they're worlds apart.'' Vice President Gore wore a three-button suit, and his shoulders were softer, connoting more of a European sensibility than the governor's stiffer two-button affair. Please note, also, that the spread between the points of the vice president's shirt collar was far narrower than the one on Governor Bush. The governor's ''modified spread'' is generally considered a more conservative look. And then there is the controversial matter of cuff links: the vice president avoided them, Governor Bush did not. ''Democratic candidates can't wear cuff links,'' Mr. Stengel pointed out. ''It looks too luxe, too country club, too 1-percent-ish.''
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 A Night Out With column follows Gore Vidal from performance of his 1960 satire The Best Man to after-theater party at Sardi's; photo (M) IT is not so much that Gore Vidal entered the theater but that the theater entered him. Last week, he came to full attention at the back of the Virginia Theater to catch the last 15 minutes of ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man,' '' his 1960 satire of a political convention. When Spalding Gray, playing one candidate, delivered his comeuppance line, ''If I'm so unstable, why did you offer me the ambassadorship to Red China?'' Mr. Vidal reared back and laughed. IT is not so much that Gore Vidal entered the theater but that the theater entered him. Last week, he came to full attention at the back of the Virginia Theater to catch the last 15 minutes of ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man,' '' his 1960 satire of a political convention. When Spalding Gray, playing one candidate, delivered his comeuppance line, ''If I'm so unstable, why did you offer me the ambassadorship to Red China?'' Mr. Vidal reared back and laughed.
 A Straw Dollar in the Wind  How will business fare under a Gore or a Bush administration? Corporate leaders see very different prospects after inauguration day, depending on which candidate the voters choose as the next Regulator in Chief. MONEY & BUSINESS
 The setting is Southern California in 2025. The environment has been ravaged by pollution, plunder and global warming. (Apparently Al Gore lost the 2000 election.) Meat and fish are rarities, the forests have been leveled, and the climate careers between drought and unending, vicious rainstorms. A handful of nearly extinct animal species are kept on the sprawling estate of Maclovio Pulchris, a pop star modeled on Michael Jackson, while Tyrone O'Shaughnessy Tierwater, onetime heroic eco-warrior and now aged ex-con, manages the motley menagerie of hyenas, wart hogs, foxes and lions. A call from his former comrade in arms (and ex-wife), Andrea Knowles Cotton Tierwater, prompts in Tierwater memories of the heyday of Earth Forever!, an environmental action group modeled on Earth First!, in the late 1980's and 1990's. Flipping back and forth between the present and past, Boyle fills us in bit by bit on Tierwater's back story, which, in fact, provides the novel's slim narrative momentum save for some ''Bringing Up Baby'' high jinks with animals.
 Mr. Sakai came from a family descended from Samurai, Japan's ancient warrior class. He was taught to live by the code of Bushido, which he defined in his book, ''Samurai!'' published in 1957 by E. P. Dutton, as living so as to always be prepared to die. Saburo Sakai was born in Saga, on the island of Kyushu, in 1916 to a family that had turned to farming as changing economic and social conditions led to the passing of the warrior class. The family was poor, but intensely proud of their Samurai heritage, according to Mr. Sakai's book. And as Japanese militarism surged in the 30's, so did the popularity of the old Bushido ideology.
 Battlegrounds, series of articles on swing states in presidential race, revisits race in Pennsylvania; Republican politicians concede that Gov George W Bush faces steep uphill fight there, and that has national significance; Pennsylvania, with 23 electoral votes, has been one of half-dozen or so major battlegrounds from start of 2000 campaign; if it slips from Bush's grasp, he will have to win Florida and most other swing states to win majority in electoral college; photo (M) Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania sounded unconvincingly exuberant when he introduced his colleague, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, in this fast-growing town west of Philadelphia on the morning after the year's first presidential debate. Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania sounded unconvincingly exuberant when he introduced his colleague, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, in this fast-growing town west of Philadelphia on the morning after the year's first presidential debate. Never mind that very few politicians, pundits or other political professionals, in this state or elsewhere, thought that Mr. Bush had won a ''smashing victory'' over Vice President Al Gore. Most considered the outcome more like a draw, with an edge, perhaps, to Mr. Gore on substance and to Mr. Bush on demeanor.  But whatever the result, the underlying reality is that Pennsylvania Republicans have little reason for exuberance about this year's race for the White House. When they are not uttering brave, morale-boosting words for public consumption, Republican politicians concede that with about 4 1/2 weeks until Election Day, Mr. Bush faces a steep uphill fight here. One respected poll shows him 12 percentage points behind, and another puts him 4 back.  Most professionals sense that the real margin must be in between. And that has national significance.  Pennsylvania, whose 23 electoral votes are the country's fifth-largest prize, has been one of a half-dozen or so major battlegrounds from the start of the 2000 campaign. If it slips from Mr. Bush's grasp, he will have to win Florida and most of the other swing states -- like Missouri, Wisconsin, Michigan and Ohio -- to win a majority in the Electoral College. ''Unless something amazing happens, and I really can't imagine what it might be, Pennsylvania is a lost cause for Bush,'' said Prof. G. Terry Madonna, director of the Center for Politics and Public Affairs at Millersville University, west of Lancaster, Pa. ''It's starting to look an awful lot like 1992 and 1996. Nine percent for Bill Clinton, both times, and about the same for Gore.'' Mr. Bush's biggest problem lies here in the Philadelphia suburbs, in the four counties that form a semicircle around the city, from Bucks in the north through Montgomery and Chester to Delaware in the south.  When Republicans like Mr. Ridge and the state's senior senator, Arlen Specter, do well, they almost always run strongly in the suburbs, helping to offset the usual big Democratic vote in Philadelphia. Private polls taken recently for local candidates show Mr. Gore doing nearly as well, with a chance, in the view of one Democratic strategist, of breaking even in the four-county region, losing lopsidedly Republican Chester but winning Montgomery by a solid margin. ''Gore's hard to like,'' Professor Madonna said, ''but his stands on the issues fit the suburbs. Bush is having trouble with Republican women there, especially the younger ones, and with independents. A lot of it is abortion. It may not be at the top of the agenda, it may not be what they talk about first, but it's there. It's always there, and it certainly hurts Bush.'' Pennsylvania has relatively few registered independents, and Democrats outnumber Republicans on voter rolls by more than 474,000, according to the latest tally. So it is obviously crucial for any statewide Republican candidate to hold every vote in his partisan base. Mr. Bush is in trouble here because he has failed to do that, at least so far. Four weeks ago, Mr. Bush came to Pennsylvania, a state with an unusually large number of old people -- second only to Florida, by some reckonings -- to announce his prescription drug plan. Mr. Gore was pounding away at him on the health care issue. But older people, the polls indicate, have continued to drift toward the Democrats, perhaps because Mr. Gore's drug plan is simpler and relies less on H.M.O.'s and drug companies, both unpopular in the state. Two weeks ago, in another visit to the state, Mr. Bush huddled with the Republican chairmen of the four suburban counties in Media, another picturesque town west of Philadelphia.  The subject: how to halt the alarming slide in his fortunes in this region. According to participants, Mr. Bush sought suggestions and got them. The debate Tuesday, Mr. Novak argued, ''put the personality factor back into the election, and that's  nothing but good for our side, because Gore comes across as pedantic, rude, the kid who never puts his hand down in class.'' On issues, Mr. Novak said, Mr. Bush must ''show his centrist side.'' West Chester, Radnor, Doylestown and the other suburbs tend to be moderate places. Mr. Ridge, not a particularly partisan governor, is especially popular here. So Mr. Bush's emphasis during the debate on his record of working successfully with both parties went down well. Mr. Bush worked hard during the debate to allay suburban women's fears about his opposition to abortion. When Mr. Gore charged that his rival would ''appoint people who would overturn Roe v. Wade,'' the Supreme Court decision upholding a woman's right to choose an abortion, Mr. Bush replied that ''voters should assume that I have no litmus test'' on abortion when nominating judges. The Texan also gave a decidedly soft-edged answer to a question from the moderator of the debate, Jim Lehrer, when Mr. Lehrer asked whether Mr. Bush, if elected, would try to overturn last week's decision by the Food and Drug Administration allowing doctors dispense RU-486, an abortion-inducing pill. While he was ''disappointed'' by the decision, Governor Bush commented, he doubted that a president had the power to overturn such a decision (although the F.D.A. commissioner serves at the pleasure of the president). He added mildly, ''I hope the F.D.A. took its time to make sure that American women will be safe who use this drug.'' In his speech to a jubilant crowd at the Hollinger Field House at West Chester University, Mr. Bush steered well clear of social and cultural issues, emphasizing instead his tax cut plans and his contention that Mr. Gore would add ''thousands of bureaucrats'' to the federal payroll. But in hilly southwestern Pennsylvania, in the hardscrabble valleys of the Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers, where steel was once king, Mr. Gore has recovered after a beginning so hesitant it stunned local politicians. When the vice president traveled to the area on Memorial Day, Lou Lignelli, the district director for Representative Frank R. Mascara, a Democrat, listened to his rather lackluster speech and commented unhappily, ''Gore just doesn't have it.'' By this week, Mr. Lignelli had changed his mind. He said he thought Mr. Gore could stage a blowout in the region and state. ''The Gore campaign got its act together,'' he said. ''They moved to Nashville, they got themselves a better campaign manager, and then Gore picked Lieberman for vice president. That dissipated the morality issue in one fell swoop, and the morality issue counts for something in an area like this.'' Still, Mr. Novak promised that Mr. Bush would be back to Pennsylvania at least once every week until the election. His father, former President George Bush, who ran strongly in southeastern Pennsylvania in 1988 and narrowly carried the state, is due in the state next week. Perhaps he can supply the answer to the hard question his son asked at that meeting in Media in September: Why did the Reagan-Bush suburban majorities of the 1980's disappear in the 1990's?
 The bride's stepfather, William Y. Boyd II, is the chairman of the Boyd Steamship Corporation, Panama Canal agents. Her grandfather Mr. Phillips was the deputy permanent representative of the United States to the United Nations from 1969 to 1973 and the ambassador to Brunei during the Bush Administration.
 Vice Pres Al Gore trails Gov George W Bush among men over all by as much as 22 points in one poll, and is not doing well enough among women to be certain to offset that deficit among men; part of problem is that men lean Republican in most presidential races, seeing that party as being more protective of their assets; Gore tries to appeal to men by promoting himself as repository of fiscal responsibility and deficit reduction; political professionals in both parties say Gore's earnest, wonkish personality, and his tendency to lecture, present problems for him; note that Gore may suffer by comparison not with Republicans but with Pres Clinton, who as candidate and president appears often in pop culture forums that helped transform many voters' relationship with president and presidency from paternal one to more of peer-to-peer regard; photo (M) When Gov. Gray Davis's political advisers want to take Californians' temperatures on the presidential race in voter focus groups, they ask a question that might sound goofy: if Al Gore and George W. Bush were cars, what would they be? ''Among men, Gore is viewed as a Ford Taurus, a Chevy station wagon, a Volvo, safe and kind of boxy,'' said Garry South, the chief political aide for Mr. Davis, a Democrat. ''With Bush, you get things like Maserati and Mustang convertible, and by no means all of the men who say that are doing it pejoratively. They're saying: 'Wait a minute; that guy's like who I'd like to be.' '' When Gov. Gray Davis's political advisers want to take Californians' temperatures on the presidential race in voter focus groups, they ask a question that might sound goofy: if Al Gore and George W. Bush were cars, what would they be? ''Among men, Gore is viewed as a Ford Taurus, a Chevy station wagon, a Volvo, safe and kind of boxy,'' said Garry South, the chief political aide for Mr. Davis, a Democrat. ''With Bush, you get things like Maserati and Mustang convertible, and by no means all of the men who say that are doing it pejoratively. They're saying: 'Wait a minute; that guy's like who I'd like to be.' '' Mr. Gore is running comfortably ahead in the polls in California, in part because it is one of the few places where he is holding his own or slightly ahead among men, who tend here to be more liberal than their counterparts in the South and Midwest. But even here, Mr. Gore runs behind Mr. Bush among white men and married men, and the car quiz sums up what may be one of his biggest challenges as the presidential race moves into its final month: how to get guys who may not be like him to like him all the same. So this year, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have gone out of their way to demonstrate their sensitive New Age guyness by gushing with Oprah Winfrey and praising their wives' uplifting influences. In their debate on Tuesday, Mr. Bush, who like most Republicans does worse with women than his Democratic opponent, went so far as to brag about crying with Texas flood victims. ''That's what governors do,'' he said. But men, especially white men, remain a potent political force, perhaps even more complicated to court. And among this group, Mr. Gore is struggling, trailing Mr. Bush among men over all by 22 points in one recent Los Angeles Times national poll and by smaller but still significant margins in most other surveys. At the same time, Mr. Gore has not been doing well enough among women, especially married women, to be certain he will be able to offset his deficit among men. Part of the problem is axiomatic and beyond Mr. Gore's control: men are more likely to be what the Republican pollster Kellyanne Fitzpatrick calls ''congenital Republicans.'' Mr. Gore has made his share of efforts to appeal to men. He promotes himself as the repository of fiscal responsibility and deficit reduction. His biographical advertisements are careful to note his Army service in Vietnam. Even his celebrated kiss of his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic convention, pollsters say, could be seen as much as a gesture of solidarity with his fellow family men as an appeal to women. But political professionals in both parties say Mr. Gore also faces particular problems growing out of his earnest, wonkish personality, and his tendency to lecture. ''One of the things that I think is happening is that Bush has been able to convey and project a personality type that I think appeals to men,'' Mr. South said, ''a kind of free-wheeling, macho guy, more compatible with where the typical white, middle-aged male voter would be than Gore has.'' Mr. Bush may be helped in this regard by his running mate, Dick Cheney, a former high school football captain who made appearances at two athletic events this weekend. On Friday night Mr. Cheney went to a high school football game in Waterloo, Iowa. This afternoon he went to a tailgate party at the Iowa State-Nebraska football game in Ames, Iowa, shaking hands with chilly football fans huddled around beer kegs. Oddly, Ms. Fitzpatrick suggested, Mr. Gore may suffer by comparison not with Republicans but with Mr. Clinton, who as a candidate and president appeared often in pop culture forums that helped transform many voters' relationship with the president and presidency from a paternal one to more of a peer-to-peer regard. ''Before it was always, 'Can he stare down the Soviet Union?' '' Ms. Fitzpatrick said. ''Now it's, 'Is he like me and do I like him?' And with Al Gore the answer to both is no. Clinton is always looked at as having an outstretched hand, and Gore as having a pointing finger.'' Joel Cook, 32, a milk truck driver in Los Banos, Calif., a swing area in the Central Valley, said it did not matter to him that Mr. Gore was a veteran like himself. He said he thought Mr. Bush would do a better job of building up the military. ''I don't like the way Gore talks,'' said Mr. Cook, who usually votes Republican. ''I feel like he's trying to put one over on me, and tell me something just for a vote.'' Robert DeSouza, 60, a disabled former appliance repairman in Sacramento, still calls himself a Democrat but says he has voted Republican since Richard M. Nixon's election in 1968. He is not a big fan of Mr. Bush but says Mr. Gore could not persuade him to vote Democratic. In fact, according to the most recent New York Times/CBS News poll, taken late last month, Mr. Gore is doing about the same among men as Mr. Clinton did in 1992 and 1996, drawing the support of about 4 in 10  male voters, though other polls have shown him faring worse. But Mr. Gore is so far not doing as well among women as Mr. Clinton did, drawing the support of just 47 percent of likely female voters in the most recent Times/CBS News poll. When Mr. Clinton was elected in 1996, he won the support of 54 percent of women, surveys of voters leaving the polls found. Moreover, before Mr. Clinton's affair with a White House intern and his subsequent impeachment took its toll, the president had managed to make strong inroads of support among the kinds of blue-collar families that the Democrats had been ceding for years. These are among the voters Mr. Gore is trying to reclaim with his oratorical emphasis on ''working families.'' But here, too, Mr. Gore faces problems caused in part by Mr. Clinton's alienation of these voters, and in part by Mr. Gore's having spent much of the winter running to the left to stave off a primary challenge from Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey. At the same time, he may suffer in stylistic comparisons with Mr. Clinton, who is a past master at creating connections with his audience, whatever it happens to be. ''If he was asked about gay marriage, for example, the typical Clinton response lays out right away, 'I do not favor gay marriage,' '' said one Democratic strategist here who has complained to Mr. Gore about this point. ''And then he segues into a sympathetic-sounding response about how we have to uphold everybody's differences and dreams. Gore's tendency is to give the long, sympathetic answer, and then, as an afterthought, add, 'Having said that, I do not favor gay marriage.' '' Mark DiCamillo, director of the statewide nonpartisan Field Poll in San Francisco, said that younger men, in particular, should be a natural demographic target for Mr. Gore, but that Mr. Bush had shown strong appeal among this group. ''The issues that Bush is raising have a certain appeal for young men, like Social Security, where he says I'll give you the right to invest some of your own funds,'' Mr. DiCamillo said. ''When you poll the attitudes of the young, they basically have much less trust in government to be there when they need it, and the farther you are away from retirement age, the more likely you are to be skeptical about whether the government will deliver. I also think the entrepreneurial spirit, the kind that drives the booming California economy right now, that spirit is more reflected by Bush in his economic proposals. The key question to me nationally is, will these young people go out and vote?''
 George W. Bush: 30  % CHANGE FROM SEPT. 17 -- up 25%  NUMBER OF JOKES FROM SEPT. 17 -- 24 Al Gore: 21  % CHANGE FROM SEPT. 17 -- down 9%  NUMBER OF JOKES FROM SEPT. 17 -- 23 ''I was watching it. Both Al Gore and George Bush wore the exact same thing. Not similar, the exact same thing. Black suit, white shirt, red tie...They sounded alike, they dressed alike, it's like 'The Patty Duke Show.''' ''It's been reported that George W. Bush is thinking about dumping Dick Cheney as his running mate and replacing him with John McCain. Meanwhile, Dick Cheney is thinking about dumping George W. and replacing him with Martin Sheen.''
 Legal analysts say Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore are presenting voters with perhaps starkest choice in decades over kind of people they would select as judges for federal bench; two candidates clashed during their debate over judicial philosophy they would seek in candidates they would appoint to Supreme Court; election comes at time when not only Supreme Court but also many of nation's appellate courts are finely balanced ideologically; Bush adviser says Gov Bush would likely turn process of choosing judicial candidates over to group of committed conservatives; many liberal advocacy groups are hopeful that Gore will be bolder than Pres Clinton in his court choices (M) Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are presenting voters with perhaps the starkest choice in decades over the kind of people they would select as judges for the federal bench, according to legal analysts and several of the candidates' closest advisers. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are presenting voters with perhaps the starkest choice in decades over the kind of people they would select as judges for the federal bench, according to legal analysts and several of the candidates' closest advisers. ''In a sense, this is the single biggest issue before the country in this election in terms of differences between the two candidates,'' said William E. Leuchtenberg, a history professor at the University of North Carolina. ''Here you have two candidates who are in a number of other respects fighting for the center, but in this issue their points of views are sharply defined, with Bush certain to name conservatives to the bench and Gore prepared to choose more liberal judges.'' Traditionally, the issue of court appointments has had little effect in modern presidential elections. Yet each side has a small but highly motivated constituency on this issue, and Governor Bush, of Texas, and Vice President Gore have given unmistakable signals, as they did Tuesday night, to those groups as to how they would pick judicial nominees. Nonetheless, the candidates have left little doubt in the messages they are sending to their supporters. Governor Bush discovered in the primary season that indirect assurances that he would name only reliable conservatives were not sufficient. That was because the influential group of Republicans eagerly hoping to gain control of the White House and the nominating procedure has adopted ''No More Souters'' as its private slogan, one G.O.P. adviser said. The reference is to Justice David H. Souter, who has proved to be emblematic to conservatives of disappointment and even ideological betrayal. Justice Souter was nominated by President George Bush in 1990 with assurances to conservatives that despite his meager record as a federal appeals court judge, he would prove a reliable member of the court's conservative coalition. Instead, he has often voted with the court's liberal bloc. Governor Bush, after meeting with his advisers, decided to offer an explicit and hard-to-mistake signal and said that the justices he most admired were Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, who are widely viewed as the court's two most resolute conservatives and reliable foes of court rulings extending abortion rights. ''The voters will know I'll put competent judges on the bench, people who will strictly interpret the Constitution and will not use the bench to write social policy,'' Governor Bush said Tuesday night. ''I don't believe in liberal, activist judges; I believe in strict constructionists, and those are the kind of judges I will appoint.'' Mr. Gore responded: ''In my view, the Constitution ought to be interpreted as a document that grows with the -- with our country and our history. I believe, for example, that there is a right of privacy in the Fourth Amendment. And when the phrase 'strict constructionist' is used, and when the names of Scalia and Thomas are used as benchmarks for who would be appointed, those are code words, and nobody should mistake this, for saying that the governor would appoint people who would overturn Roe v. Wade,'' the 1973 ruling that first found a constitutional right to abortion. Mr. Gore said his appointees would ''have a philosophy that I think would make it quite likely'' that they would uphold the Roe decision. One Bush adviser said that to deal with the ''no more Souters'' issue, a new Republican administration would try to choose candidates with established records on the major issues. Lawyers who are advising Governor Bush said in interviews that his most likely models for appointing judges were his father, President Bush, and President Ronald Reagan, both of whom turned the process over to a group of committed conservatives. It is far less clear that Mr. Gore would closely follow President Clinton's approach in choosing judges. Mr. Clinton generally chose lawyers with moderate philosophical leanings and did not try to provide a counterweight to the previous 12 years in which Republicans sought to turn the courts rightward. Many liberal advocacy groups are hopeful that Mr. Gore would be bolder than Mr. Clinton in his court choices. ''For example, if Gore won, it's possible Rehnquist might try to hang on,'' he said. ''Whereas he might be inclined to leave and turn over the process of choosing his successor to Bush.'' One thing the guess lists of both candidates have in common is the presence of Hispanic candidates, as it is generally believed that both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore would like to reap the credit for naming the first Hispanic member of the court. Other possible Hispanic nominees for a Gore White House would be Judge Fortunato P. Benavides, 53, a federal appeals court judge in Austin, Tex., and Judge Sonia Sotomayor, 46, a federal appeals court judge in New York. Other possible Supreme Court nominees in a Gore administration include two members of the appeals court in Washington, Judge David S.  Tatel, 58, and Judge Merrick B. Garland, 47. Another leading candidate would be Walter E. Dellinger, 59, a former solicitor general and constitutional scholar. Lawyers close to Governor Bush say their leading Hispanic candidate would be Emilio M. Garza, 53, an appeals court judge in San Antonio. Another favorite with the conservative lawyers who would be influential in a Bush administration is Judge Jerry E. Smith, 53, a federal appeals court judge in Houston. Other candidates include Judge Edith H. Jones, 51, who sits on the same court as Judge Smith, and Judge Frank H. Easterbrook, 52, an appeals court judge in Chicago who is a leading judicial exponent of the so-called law and economics school. Abortion rights advocates and Mr. Gore have asserted that the court is one vote away from sharply curtailing the right to an abortion, though that is probably an exaggeration. There are only three solid votes on the court to overturn Roe: Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia and Thomas. Justice Kennedy has usually sided with the liberal bloc and Justice O'Connor to form a 6-to-3 majority that is generally in favor of abortion rights. Justice Kennedy sided, however, with the conservative minority in last term's 5-to-4 ruling striking down a Nebraska law outlawing a form of late-term abortion.
 Candidates Are Working To Close the Gender Gap  Vice President Al Gore is safely ahead among women, who since at least 1980 have tended to vote liberal and Democratic, but over all, men prefer Gov. George W. Bush -- in one poll likening him to a Maserati and Mr. Gore to a Volvo. Each candidate is trying to bridge the gender gap by tinkering with his image. Vice President Al Gore denied the Republicans' contention that he often embellishes his record.
