 Neither Vice President Al Gore nor Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has campaigned recently in the district, but Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, caused a splash when he showed up to help Ms. Harman, as did Senator John McCain of Arizona when he came in to help Mr. Kuykendall. In fact, Mr. McCain is due for a return visit in the final days of the campaign. ''The slightest political breeze over the next month could nudge either candidate to victory,'' said Amy Walter, who follows House contests for the Cook Political Report. ''Both sides will be pouring in the television and the mass mailings and working the streets, such as you can work streets in California. If Bush eventually pulls out of the presidential competition in the state to concentrate his efforts elsewhere, that just might give Harman the edge she needs. But then again, suppose Bush hangs in?''
 Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign runs a new commercial that seeks to connect Bush's stands on a variety of issues to a single notion: trust; its accuracy and effectiveness assessed; photo (M) The Bush campaign on Thursday began running a new 60-second commercial that seeks to connect Gov. George W. Bush's stands on a variety of issues to a single notion: trust. The spot is to run in 19 states, from the Pacific Northwest to the Southeast, that have been identified as having close races. The Bush campaign on Thursday began running a new 60-second commercial that seeks to connect Gov. George W. Bush's stands on a variety of issues to a single notion: trust. The spot is to run in 19 states, from the Pacific Northwest to the Southeast, that have been identified as having close races. ON THE SCREEN -- A serene-looking Mr. Bush in an open-neck shirt speaks directly to the camera. Interspersed are portraits of the governor interacting with workers, young children and businesspeople, each episode intended to underline one of the issues the spot highlights. SCRIPT -- Mr. Bush: ''I believe we need to encourage personal responsibility so people are accountable for their actions. And I believe in government that is responsible to the people. ACCURACY -- The positions outlined are restatements of policies that Mr. Bush has been emphasizing for months. Speaking here in the most general terms, the governor makes another pitch for his proposal to allow workers to take charge of the investment of some of their Social Security money. He also promotes his plan for broad-based tax cuts, a platform that has been attacked by Vice President Al Gore as overwhelmingly favoring the wealthiest 1 percent of the population. Though the federal government has little direct control over education, Mr. Bush says once again that he will demand greater accountability from schools in return for federal aid. And the declaration about giving parents ''different options'' seems a veiled reference to his support for charter schools and school vouchers, the latter a politically charged phrase he has stopped using of late. SCORECARD -- The Bush campaign rather cleverly uses Mr. Bush's stands on the issues to demonstrate he is a man of character. The governor uses the word trust six times in the spot, and it also materializes on the screen. (''Trust'' is, in fact, the title of the spot.) It is no accident that the nominee himself invokes the name of his opponent -- a rarity for Bush commercials. The idea he seems to want to convey in this thematic comparison is that only one candidate in the race is truly a man of his word.
 Vouchers, first proffered by the economist Milton Friedman in a 1955 essay, are among the most divisive issues in education, a critical point of dissension between this year's two major presidential candidates. Vice President Al Gore, who has been endorsed by the teachers unions, shares their adamant opposition to vouchers of any kind. Gov. George W. Bush has proposed allowing parents of children in failing schools to take $1,500 in federal money and use it for any education purpose, including private-school tuition, but has avoided the word voucher.
 This solid relationship is often tested by election-year politics. Mr. Clinton must consider the needs of Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential nominee, and Mr. Hastert, who seldom speaks with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, must nevertheless be sensitive to his standing in the polls. Mr. Bush's success or failure could play a pivotal role in whether Republicans keep control of the House.
 Gore Plans to Delegate Attacks  Vice President Al Gore's campaign is planning a multimedia offensive this week that assails Gov. George W. Bush over his record in Texas and his occasional slips of the tongue, Gore aides said. The strategy calls for Mr. Gore to delegate attacks so he can remain above the fray.
 Letter from Arthur C Helton (Council on Foreign Relations) says Vice Pres Al Gore is right to say that American troops can and should be used in appropriate circumstances to help stabilize war-torn societies (Oct 5 article); says US need not undertake such endeavors alone Vice President Al Gore is right to say that American troops can and should be used in appropriate circumstances to help stabilize war-torn societies -- including, I might add, to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of refugees (news article, Oct. 5). Many military leaders I have spoken with -- citing Haiti,  Bosnia and Kosovo -- accept that  such missions are part of the new reality. Vice President Al Gore is right to say that American troops can and should be used in appropriate circumstances to help stabilize war-torn societies -- including, I might add, to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of refugees (news article, Oct. 5). Many military leaders I have spoken with -- citing Haiti,  Bosnia and Kosovo -- accept that  such missions are part of the new reality.
 KING -- Congressman Franks, in the presidential debate last week, Al Gore criticized the tax cut proposed by George W. Bush, saying it was too large and that more than 40 percent of the dollars would go to the richest 1 percent of the population. Do you share those concerns, and would you vote for the Bush tax cut package? FRANKS -- I do share some of those concerns, and I would not vote for the Bush tax cut package as it is today. I'm concerned that it would crowd out other compelling priorities. This nation should first meet the obligations that we've already pledged. We need to save Social Security. We need to save Medicare. We need to continue to pay down the national debt. We need to first honor the commitments we've already made. CORZINE -- Well, this is one of the most important issues for comparison of Congressman Franks and myself. Last -- this month, in New Jersey Business Week -- or Monthly -- he proposed that we eliminate the capital gains tax. He talked about across-the-board tax cuts. He talked about the marriage penalty proposal that he's talked about, which actually is a new way of providing tax cuts for high-income folks, in addition to the folks that do deserve marriage penalty relief, and an elimination of the inheritance tax. If you add all those up and just divide by two what Governor Bush's proposal is with regard to tax cuts on an across-the-board basis, you come up to 1.8 trillion in tax cuts. That will foreclose anyone from having the ability to invest in our education, protect our environment, our health care, shore up Medicare, all of the things that I think people want to see us invest in. . .
 Sen Frank H Murkowski Op-Ed article urges exploration for oil and gas along Alaska's Arctic coastal plain and charges that Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph Lieberman present a false choice in suggesting that nation must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection; says determining whether there is oil there can be done with no environmental impact at all and that if there is a very large field there, it can be developed with minimal environmental impact (M) Clinging to a position that would prevent America from developing some of the most promising of its domestic energy resources, Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman have repeatedly stated their opposition to oil exploration in a tiny sliver of the Arctic Coastal Plain. They say it would yield only a six-month supply of oil, and only at the cost of the destruction of a pristine wilderness. In suggesting that we must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection, they are presenting a false choice. Clinging to a position that would prevent America from developing some of the most promising of its domestic energy resources, Al Gore and Joseph Lieberman have repeatedly stated their opposition to oil exploration in a tiny sliver of the Arctic Coastal Plain. They say it would yield only a six-month supply of oil, and only at the cost of the destruction of a pristine wilderness. In suggesting that we must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection, they are presenting a false choice. America will remain dependent on oil for the foreseeable future, and increasingly, our dependency is on foreign oil. During the Clinton-Gore years, our oil imports have soared 17 percent while domestic production has decreased 14 percent. We now rely on foreign suppliers for 58 percent of our crude oil, and that reliance carries several risks. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman heralded the recent release of oil from our existing Strategic Petroleum Reserve as instrumental in easing prices and building inventories of heating oil. But they oppose looking for the oil field that many geologists think may be under Alaska's coastal plain -- a huge field that could have a meaningful and sustained effect on  consumer prices. We are flirting with danger by refusing even to see what may lie under the coastal plain.
 LAZIO -- I would -- may I? I would say Sandra Day O'Connor. I think she had the right -- she's got the right intellect, the right experience, she has a respect for precedents. I think she has had a distinguished career on the bench. And that's what, I think, a senator should look for when it comes to confirmation. And this is consistent with, frankly, what both Vice President Al Gore said and what Governor Bush said in their debates: look for the most experienced, qualified person. No litmus tests. Let's make sure we get somebody who has a healthy respect for precedent, who's got the ability to make good decisions, and who's got, hopefully, a good experience of being on the bench and having the temperament that we would want to have as somebody who's going to be serving on America's highest court. CLINTON -- Well, I think that the fate of the Supreme Court hangs in the balance in this election. If we take Governor Bush at his word, his two favorite justices are Scalia and Thomas, both of whom are committed to overturning Roe v. Wade, ending a woman's right to choose. I could not go along with that. In the Senate, I will be looking very carefully at the constitutional views that any nominee from, I hope, Vice President Gore, but in the event, unfortunately, President Bush, as to what that nominee believes about basic, fundamental constitutional rights. Just as I could not support a nominee who would vote to overturn Roe v. Wade, I wouldn't support someone who would vote to overturn Brown v. Board of Education. . . . I was very moved when I visited Goree Island, twice. First on my own with my daughter and then with my husband. And we do owe, as my husband said that day, an apology to African-Americans for hundreds of years of slavery.
 Roger Dobrick letter replies to Oct 5 letter deploring intrusion of government bureaucrats into people's lives, a theme of George W Bush's presidential campaign An Oct. 5 letter posed a question -- ''are government bureaucrats more capable of running my life than I am?'' -- similar to what George W. Bush has asked in the debate and his stump speeches. To many of us, however, that is not the key question. An Oct. 5 letter posed a question -- ''are government bureaucrats more capable of running my life than I am?'' -- similar to what George W. Bush has asked in the debate and his stump speeches. To many of us, however, that is not the key question.
 Correction of an Oct 6 report on Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign stops A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Friday about travel by the presidential candidates misstated the number of states visited by Vice President Al Gore the previous day. It was two, not one. A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Friday about travel by the presidential candidates misstated the number of states visited by Vice President Al Gore the previous day. It was two, not one.
 They look like real books. They have glossy covers, and convincing promotional blurbs. Their titles sound like those of real consumer books: ''Al Gore: America in the Balance,'' ''Hillary Rodham Clinton: What Every American Should Know'' and ''Courting Disaster: How a Scalia-Thomas Supreme Court Would Endanger Our Rights and Freedoms.'' They look like real books. They have glossy covers, and convincing promotional blurbs. Their titles sound like those of real consumer books: ''Al Gore: America in the Balance,'' ''Hillary Rodham Clinton: What Every American Should Know'' and ''Courting Disaster: How a Scalia-Thomas Supreme Court Would Endanger Our Rights and Freedoms.'' ''After Bush said last year that his idea of model Supreme Court justices were Scalia and Thomas, we got together a small herd of lawyers to research what that would really mean, so we could inform voters,'' she said.
 Then again, it might not. Neither Al Gore nor George W. Bush is Martin Sheen. Nor does either of them have the actor Rob Lowe on his staff.
 Any claim that Pres Clinton and Vice Pres Al Gore have to credit for long run of prosperity dates to Aug 6, 1993, when Gore cast tie-breaking vote in Senate on administration's plan to reduce budget deficit by raising taxes and restraining spending, but many economists say it is a considerable stretch to suggest, as Gore often does, that powerful expansion of 1990's was born with the passage of that plan; graphs (M) Any claim that President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore have to credit for the country's long run of prosperity dates to the evening of Aug. 6, 1993. That was when Mr. Gore cast the tie-breaking vote in the Senate on the administration's plan to reduce the budget deficit by raising taxes and restraining spending, a move fraught with political as well as economic risks. Republicans, not one of whom voted for it, predicted that the legislation would choke what had been a fragile recovery from the 1990-91 recession. Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore asserted that it would unlock the economy's potential by easing the pressure on interest rates, and they say history has proved them correct. Any claim that President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore have to credit for the country's long run of prosperity dates to the evening of Aug. 6, 1993. That was when Mr. Gore cast the tie-breaking vote in the Senate on the administration's plan to reduce the budget deficit by raising taxes and restraining spending, a move fraught with political as well as economic risks. Republicans, not one of whom voted for it, predicted that the legislation would choke what had been a fragile recovery from the 1990-91 recession. Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore asserted that it would unlock the economy's potential by easing the pressure on interest rates, and they say history has proved them correct. ''Twenty-two million new jobs and the greatest prosperity ever,'' Mr. Gore said in touting the outcome in his debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Tuesday night. But many economists say it is a considerable stretch to suggest, as Mr. Gore often does, that the powerful expansion of the 1990's was born with the passage of that plan. For one thing, they say, other policy decisions played a role in straightening out the government's finances. Among them were a deficit-reduction bill signed by President George Bush in 1990 and a deal between Mr. Clinton and the Republican Congress in 1997 that cut capital gains taxes while further restricting spending. Moreover, economists and business executives say, much of what happened to the economy in the 1990's had little to do with Washington and was part of a process that began before Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore took office. At the urging of Mr. Gore, as well as advisers like Robert E. Rubin, then chairman of the White House's National Economic Council, and outsiders like Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, Mr. Clinton decided as he took office in 1993 that the economy was being held back largely by the dead weight of the budget deficit, which at that time was projected to grow inexorably. As Mr. Gore put it on Tuesday night, the ingenuity of the American people should get credit for the strong economy, but the American people also had plenty of ingenuity eight years ago when the economy was in the doldrums and the deficit was out of control. ''The difference is we've got a new policy,'' Mr. Gore said in the debate. At times he has been even more explicit about claiming the credit. ''I voted and we won and then we've had an economic recovery since then,'' he said in a speech on the economy late last year. Five months before Mr. Gore's tie-breaking vote in the Senate that August, engineers at the Intel Corporation in Silicon Valley had introduced their new Pentium chip.
 What powerful special interest strikes terror in the heart of both parties in Congress, and turns both Al Gore and George Bush into quavering sycophants? What powerful special interest strikes terror in the heart of both parties in Congress, and turns both Al Gore and George Bush into quavering sycophants? Although the subsidized industry's legion of lobbyists will lash back in fury, now's the time to ask: How will Al Gore, the professed populist, handle this hot potato? Where stands George Bush, who would probably appoint the F.C.C. commissioner Mike Powell, Colin's son, to the chairmanship?
 White House officials said they saw the new rules as a way to get around an impasse in Congress on patients' rights legislation. Publication of the rules could also yield political dividends for Vice President Al Gore, allowing him to boast that the administration is moving to protect patients while the Republican-controlled Congress fails to act. If elected president, George W. Bush, could alter the regulations, although as governor of Texas he has allowed similar legislation to take effect. Opinion polls have found broad public support for efforts to rein in H.M.O.'s. Mr. Gore and other Democrats have repeatedly denounced Congress for failing to deliver legislation. Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, Republican of Illinois, has avidly sought a compromise.
 ''If we take Governor Bush at his word,'' she said, ''his two favorite justices are Scalia and Thomas, both of whom are committed to overturning Roe v. Wade, ending a woman's right to choose. I could not go along with that.''
 But that emphasis, on attacking consumer demand in clinics and through education, was all but abandoned in the Reagan years and under President George Bush's drug czar, William J. Bennett, the film maintains. It portrays a rising right-wing effort to push federal policy futilely toward increasing reliance on strong-arm tactics: seizing shipments, smashing Latin American drug factories, sweeping the streets of dealers and filling jails with a disproportionate number of blacks.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, appearing on a Sunday talk show, accuses his rivals for White House of 'nasty personal attacks,' describes Dick Cheney as an 'attack dog' and even questions Gov George W Bush's own veracity; Bush aides use their television time to attack Vice Pres Al Gore's misstatements of fact (S) Answering Republican assaults on Vice President Al Gore, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman yesterday accused his rivals of ''nasty personal attacks,'' described Dick Cheney as an ''attack dog'' and even questioned Gov. George W. Bush's own veracity. It was a day when, in the round of Sunday talk shows, both camps became nasty and personal as the campaign reached a new level of incivility heading into the final four weeks, with polls showing Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush running neck and neck. Answering Republican assaults on Vice President Al Gore, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman yesterday accused his rivals of ''nasty personal attacks,'' described Dick Cheney as an ''attack dog'' and even questioned Gov. George W. Bush's own veracity. It was a day when, in the round of Sunday talk shows, both camps became nasty and personal as the campaign reached a new level of incivility heading into the final four weeks, with polls showing Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush running neck and neck. On CNN's ''Late Edition,'' Mr. Lieberman drew a contrast between the cordial tone of his debate on Thursday with Mr. Cheney, the former defense secretary, and Mr. Cheney's remarks the next day, when he called Mr. Gore's proposals ''hogwash'' and ''double talk.'' Republicans focused their attacks on Mr. Gore's misstatements of fact -- most recently, his statement in last Tuesday's debate that he had visited Texas during a period of wildfires with James Lee Witt, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Mr. Gore has since acknowledged that he went to Texas not with the director of the agency, but with the deputy director. Two top Bush advisers -- Karl Rove, chief strategist, on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' and Karen P. Hughes, communications director, on ''Fox News Sunday'' -- called Mr. Gore ''a serial exaggerator.'' ''This is a man who has difficulty telling the truth,'' Mr. Rove said. ''He constantly exaggerates and embellishes.'' In the debate, he said, Mr. Gore had exaggerated ''about being at the Parker County fires.'' In fact, Mr. Gore had said in the debate, ''I accompanied James Lee Witt down to Texas when those fires broke out.'' He never said he went to Parker County or to the fires. Mr. Lieberman reminded viewers that Mr. Bush has had misstatements of his own, as when he cited ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar'' as a favorite childhood book -- though it was written when he was in his 20's. And he ripped into Mr. Bush's record as governor of Texas. Republicans countered that the Democrats were trying to distract voters' attention from Mr. Gore's own shortcomings.
 Vice Pres Al Gore campaign aides and Democratic surrogates plan multimedia offensive that assails Gov George W Bush over his record in Texas and his occashional slips of the tongue; photo (M) As Vice President Al Gore fends off attacks on his credibility, his campaign and Democratic surrogates are planning a multimedia offensive this week that assails Gov. George W. Bush over his record in Texas and his occasional slips of the tongue, Gore aides said today. The Democratic strategy calls for Mr. Gore to delegate the attacks to his aides so he can maintain his pledge to remain above the fray. As Vice President Al Gore fends off attacks on his credibility, his campaign and Democratic surrogates are planning a multimedia offensive this week that assails Gov. George W. Bush over his record in Texas and his occasional slips of the tongue, Gore aides said today. The Democratic strategy calls for Mr. Gore to delegate the attacks to his aides so he can maintain his pledge to remain above the fray. Even as his aides were completing plans for their assault, Mr. Gore discussed his education proposals this afternoon with teachers, students and parents during a photo opportunity at his residence in Washington. He then flew to this beach resort near Sarasota, Fla., for three days of preparation for Wednesday night's debate with Mr. Bush in Winston-Salem, N.C., the second of their three scheduled encounters. But Mr. Gore's surrogates, including his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, and the Democratic National Committee's national chairman, Joe Andrew, will apparently feel little such restraint. And Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane, made it clear in an interview that Gore aides do not feel bound by their candidate's pledge. ''The governor will be held to presidential standards when it comes to describing his policy views,'' Mr. Lehane said. ''Thus far, he has not met the Quayle standard.'' That was a reference to former Vice President Dan Quayle, who was renowned for his verbal miscues while serving under Mr. Bush's father. Similarly, Mark D. Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager, said on CNN's ''Late Edition'' today that Mr. Bush ''was incoherent -- he was babbling'' in trying to explain his own tax-cut proposal at a campaign stop Saturday in Florida. Gore aides said the campaign had long planned to focus attention on Mr. Bush's record in the four weeks before the Nov. 7 election. But the timing takes on additional significance because of the continuing closeness of the race after the candidates' first debate last week and because of the Bush campaign's efforts to label Mr. Gore as a ''serial exaggerator.'' Those words were used today by Mr. Bush's chief strategist, Karl Rove, in an interview on CNN. The new Gore offensive will include Democratic National Committee television advertisements about Mr. Bush's record on health care and the environment. Several advertisements tailored to individual cities and states have been broadcast in selected markets in recent days. In environmentally conscious Seattle, for instance, one commercial describes the smog in Houston and implores viewers to ''take a deep breath and imagine Seattle with Bush's Texas-style environmental regulation.'' In addition, Mr. Lieberman will be dispatched to Texas for a ''failed leadership tour'' this week, and Mr. Andrew will hold a news conference on the subject here on Monday. Other surrogates, including members of Congress, also will be used, said Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman. This is not a new role for Mr. Lieberman. He traveled to Houston in late September to attack Mr. Bush's environmental record at a park in the shadow of an oil refinery. Mr. Lieberman provided a preview today by faulting Mr. Bush's environmental and health care records in an interview on CNN. ''The fact is that George Bush's record on the environment in Texas is horrible,'' he said. ''They have the most toxically polluted air in America. Houston is the dirtiest city. Kids in Houston don't know whether they can go out to play every day until the school officials or the local officials check the air quality.'' In addition to bringing attention to Mr. Bush's record on health care and the environment, the Gore surrogates are also expected to discuss Mr. Bush's approval of legislation permitting the carrying of concealed weapons in churches, hospitals and nursing homes, Gore aides said. The Gore campaign, according to aides, will issue regular press releases highlighting Mr. Bush's tortured syntax and will feature on its Web site video and audio of recent examples, like his disjointed description of his tax plan on Saturday. The Democratic National Committee is issuing similar releases by fax and e-mail messages, called ''Bush Lite,'' said Jennifer Backus, a party spokeswoman. Mr. Lehane, adopting a snippet of the vulgar phrase that Mr. Bush used to describe a reporter last month, said that ''Bush has shown a consistent pattern of making major-league mistakes'' when trying to explain his policies.
