 The most memorable utterance to be heard across the 90 minutes, again and again and again, was ''Al Gore and I.'' The most memorable utterance to be heard across the 90 minutes, again and again and again, was ''Al Gore and I.'' The phrase resounded no fewer than 18 times alone in the first half of the show, with no letup until the close when Mr. Lieberman confided to whatever part of the public that might have been listening, ''Al Gore and I agree on almost everything.'' Dick Cheney did not reply in kind, if only because of the confusion of political father and son that ''George Bush and I'' might have created. But, even with a minimal mention of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Cheney exhibited an easy talent as an articulate enunciator of facts and a confident defender of his champion. With a surgeon's skill, for example, he sought to rework Mr. Bush's utterance in the presidential debate about inviting President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to help solve the Yugoslav crisis. In Mr. Cheney's retelling, it became a firm challenge from Mr. Bush that Mr. Putin show where he stands. In the only vaguely dramatic gesture of the night, Mr. Cheney took off his glasses to criticize more than attack Vice President Gore for ''eight years of talk and no action.'' ''Big time -- if I may put it that way, Dick,'' Mr. Lieberman replied, teasing Mr. Cheney in quoting the Republican's backup endorsement of Governor Bush's open-mike gaffe in denouncing a news reporter.
 A late word of advice to Messrs Gore and Bush: before you commit entirely to this idea of being president, you might want to take a look at the solemn spectacle at City Center, presented in a modern Greek translation by Mr. Papavassileiou with supertitles.
 Richard W Stevenson article assesses statements made by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush during their presidential debate on budget surplus, tax cuts and other issues (M) RICHARD W. STEVENSON  In Tuesday's debate, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore threw at each other -- and viewers -- a barrage of claims and counterclaims, facts and figures and jargon. Many of the same issues came up in last night's vice-presidential debate. Here are explanations of some of the assertions. Gov. George W. Bush Mr. Bush's figures understate the proportion of the surplus that his tax cut would use and overstate the proportion that his spending would use. The total budget surplus over the next 10 years is projected by the Congressional Budget Office to be $4.56 trillion. Mr. Bush, like Mr. Gore and the two parties in Congress, has agreed that the portion of the surplus generated by Social Security -- $2.38 trillion, or 52 percent of the total -- should go only to reducing the national debt or shoring up the retirement system. Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut amounts to $1.32 trillion, or 29 percent of the surplus. It is also fair to say that Mr. Bush's tax cut uses up $1.6 trillion of the surplus. That is because the surplus is calculated on the assumption that all of it will go to reducing the national debt, lowering the government's interest costs. If $1.32 trillion of the surplus goes to a tax cut, the interest bill will rise by around $300 billion. If the tax cut is valued at $1.6 trillion, that would be 35 percent of the surplus. In saying he would devote one quarter of the surplus to ''important projects,'' Mr. Bush was referring to his plans for additional spending on health, education, agriculture, the military and other needs. He values his spending package at $475 billion over 10 years, which would be 10 percent of the surplus. If interest costs of $100 billion are added to the spending proposal, it would be 13 percent of the surplus. Mr. Bush's assertion was based on an analysis by his economic team that shows that people at lower income levels would get a bigger income tax cut in percentage terms, though not in dollar terms, than people at higher income levels. People earning $200,000 or more would pay 40.9 percent of all income taxes under the Bush plan, compared to 39.1 percent under current law. People earning between $20,000 and $30,000 would pay 1.9 percent of all income taxes under the Bush plan, compared with 2.2 percent under current law. The analysis excludes the proposed estate tax repeal. By reducing tax rates and doubling the child credit to $1,000, six million low- to middle-income families would see their federal income tax liability wiped out completely, according to the Bush campaign. But they would continue to be subject to the payroll taxes that finance Social Security and Medicare. Vice President Al Gore ''Under Governor Bush's tax cut proposal, he would spend more money on tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new spending that he proposes for education, health care, prescription drugs and national defense all combined.'' Mr. Gore's assertion is based on an analysis by a liberal-leaning tax research group, Citizens for Tax Justice. Its findings are similar to other studies in concluding that the wealthiest taxpayers -- those who pay the most taxes -- would get a far bigger tax cut in dollar terms from Mr. Bush than would low- and middle-income taxpayers. But the validity of the comparison to Mr. Bush's spending plans hinges on how the analysis deals with one element of Mr. Bush's plan, the repeal of the federal estate tax. Citizens for Tax Justice found that 42.6 percent of the benefits of the Bush tax cut, including the estate tax repeal, would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers by income -- those making $319,000 or more. If that percentage were applied to the $1.3 trillion price tag that Mr. Bush puts on his tax plan, it implies that $554 billion would go to the wealthiest 1 percent. Mr. Bush's budget proposal calls for $475 billion in additional spending over the next 10 years on the areas cited by Mr. Gore, and others. If the estate tax is taken out of the calculation, 30 percent of Mr. Bush's tax cut would go to the wealthiest 1 percent, according to Citizens for Tax Justice. Without the estate tax repeal, Mr. Bush values his tax cut at $1.06 trillion, and 30 percent of that would be $318 billion, or $157 billion less than Mr. Bush's spending plan. Mr. Gore was referring to proposals to wall off excess revenues being generated by Social Security and Medicare so that they could not be used to pay for tax cuts or new spending programs. There is no disagreement when it comes to Social Security. Mr. Gore has proposed that the Medicare surplus -- $360 billion over the next 10 years -- be dedicated solely to debt reduction. The idea has considerable bipartisan support in Congress. But Mr. Bush's proposed budget relies on the Medicare surplus to pay for his tax cuts and spending plans. Using the Bush campaign's figures, Mr. Bush's budget would go $95 billion into the red over 10 years if the Medicare surplus were put off limits. RICHARD W. STEVENSON  In Tuesday's debate, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore threw at each other -- and viewers -- a barrage of claims and counterclaims, facts and figures and jargon. Many of the same issues came up in last night's vice-presidential debate. Here are explanations of some of the assertions. Gov. George W. Bush Mr. Bush's figures understate the proportion of the surplus that his tax cut would use and overstate the proportion that his spending would use. The total budget surplus over the next 10 years is projected by the Congressional Budget Office to be $4.56 trillion. Mr. Bush, like Mr. Gore and the two parties in Congress, has agreed that the portion of the surplus generated by Social Security -- $2.38 trillion, or 52 percent of the total -- should go only to reducing the national debt or shoring up the retirement system. Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut amounts to $1.32 trillion, or 29 percent of the surplus. It is also fair to say that Mr. Bush's tax cut uses up $1.6 trillion of the surplus. That is because the surplus is calculated on the assumption that all of it will go to reducing the national debt, lowering the government's interest costs. If $1.32 trillion of the surplus goes to a tax cut, the interest bill will rise by around $300 billion. If the tax cut is valued at $1.6 trillion, that would be 35 percent of the surplus. In saying he would devote one quarter of the surplus to ''important projects,'' Mr. Bush was referring to his plans for additional spending on health, education, agriculture, the military and other needs. He values his spending package at $475 billion over 10 years, which would be 10 percent of the surplus. If interest costs of $100 billion are added to the spending proposal, it would be 13 percent of the surplus. Mr. Bush's assertion was based on an analysis by his economic team that shows that people at lower income levels would get a bigger income tax cut in percentage terms, though not in dollar terms, than people at higher income levels. People earning $200,000 or more would pay 40.9 percent of all income taxes under the Bush plan, compared to 39.1 percent under current law. People earning between $20,000 and $30,000 would pay 1.9 percent of all income taxes under the Bush plan, compared with 2.2 percent under current law. The analysis excludes the proposed estate tax repeal. By reducing tax rates and doubling the child credit to $1,000, six million low- to middle-income families would see their federal income tax liability wiped out completely, according to the Bush campaign. But they would continue to be subject to the payroll taxes that finance Social Security and Medicare. Vice President Al Gore ''Under Governor Bush's tax cut proposal, he would spend more money on tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new spending that he proposes for education, health care, prescription drugs and national defense all combined.'' Mr. Gore's assertion is based on an analysis by a liberal-leaning tax research group, Citizens for Tax Justice. Its findings are similar to other studies in concluding that the wealthiest taxpayers -- those who pay the most taxes -- would get a far bigger tax cut in dollar terms from Mr. Bush than would low- and middle-income taxpayers. But the validity of the comparison to Mr. Bush's spending plans hinges on how the analysis deals with one element of Mr. Bush's plan, the repeal of the federal estate tax. Citizens for Tax Justice found that 42.6 percent of the benefits of the Bush tax cut, including the estate tax repeal, would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers by income -- those making $319,000 or more. If that percentage were applied to the $1.3 trillion price tag that Mr. Bush puts on his tax plan, it implies that $554 billion would go to the wealthiest 1 percent. Mr. Bush's budget proposal calls for $475 billion in additional spending over the next 10 years on the areas cited by Mr. Gore, and others. If the estate tax is taken out of the calculation, 30 percent of Mr. Bush's tax cut would go to the wealthiest 1 percent, according to Citizens for Tax Justice. Without the estate tax repeal, Mr. Bush values his tax cut at $1.06 trillion, and 30 percent of that would be $318 billion, or $157 billion less than Mr. Bush's spending plan. Mr. Gore was referring to proposals to wall off excess revenues being generated by Social Security and Medicare so that they could not be used to pay for tax cuts or new spending programs. There is no disagreement when it comes to Social Security. Mr. Gore has proposed that the Medicare surplus -- $360 billion over the next 10 years -- be dedicated solely to debt reduction. The idea has considerable bipartisan support in Congress. But Mr. Bush's proposed budget relies on the Medicare surplus to pay for his tax cuts and spending plans. Using the Bush campaign's figures, Mr. Bush's budget would go $95 billion into the red over 10 years if the Medicare surplus were put off limits.
 In the 90-minute, nationally televised debate, the only scheduled meeting between the Democratic and Republican running mates, there were no slashing attacks, few well-rehearsed quips and only the occasional memorable exchange. Instead, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Cheney spent most of the night calmly and fluidly reinforcing the most significant points made by their principals, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, in their first debate on Tuesday night In the 90-minute, nationally televised debate, the only scheduled meeting between the Democratic and Republican running mates, there were no slashing attacks, few well-rehearsed quips and only the occasional memorable exchange. Instead, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Cheney spent most of the night calmly and fluidly reinforcing the most significant points made by their principals, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, in their first debate on Tuesday night Mr. Lieberman countered that the Republican proposal for a large across-the-board reduction in income tax rates, combined with various spending programs and the cost of Mr. Bush's plan to privatize part of the Social Security system, would leave the budget with a $1.1 trillion debt. [Excerpts, Page A28.] Mr. Lieberman, politely, disagreed. ''I have not changed a single position since Al Gore nominated me to be his vice president,'' he said. Within the confines of their mutual respect, the candidates did manage to establish the fundamental differences between their parties, writing something of a sequel to the debate between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Like Mr. Gore, Mr. Lieberman repeatedly emphasized that the $1.3 trillion, 10-year income tax cut proposed by the Republicans would primarily benefit the wealthy and would leave little of the projected federal surplus for priorities like improving education and expanding Medicare coverage. He also used a figure of $1.6 trillion to describe it, a number that includes the increase in interest costs to the government that such a tax cut might cause. Mr. Cheney, meanwhile, echoed Mr. Bush's contention that Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman would abandon the centrist Democratic policies of the Clinton years and would rely on big government solutions to the country's problems. He also repeated Mr. Bush's assertion that the Democrats had failed to lead during their eight years in the White House. ''With all due respect, Joe,'' Mr. Cheney said, ''there is just an awful lot of evidence that there has not been any bipartisan leadership out of this administration or out of Al Gore. And the fact is the Medicare problems have not been addressed. We've had eight years of promises on prescription drugs with no action. The Social Security problem has not been addressed. Now we've had eight years of talk and no action.'' Mr. Cheney also echoed Mr. Bush's contention that Mr. Gore's tax cut plan, which would provide relief for those putting money into savings accounts, college tuition, child care and other specific purposes, would serve as a form of social engineering. Mr. Lieberman responded that the American military was ''the best-trained, best-equipped, most powerful force in the world and that Al Gore and I will do whatever it takes to keep them that way.'' As a committed centrist, a moral critic of President Clinton and the first Jew nominated by a major party, Mr. Lieberman is widely considered to have boosted the appeal of the Democratic ticket. His primary vulnerabilities so far have been his historical differences with Mr. Gore on several issues, including affirmative action and school vouchers. Again, except when prompted by Mr. Shaw, Mr. Cheney chose not to exploit those differences.
 As bar codes proliferated, most consumers came to take them for granted, but the mysterious stripes never totally lost their power to confound and provoke. In 1992, President George Bush inadvertently bolstered his reputation for being out of touch with regular Americans when on a trip to a National Grocers Association conference he expressed amazement at a grocery scanner. And until recently, the Russian Orthodox Church condemned bar codes, seeing in their stripes ''the mark of the beast.''
 Editorial contends that in encounter characterized by polite, almost amiable disagreements, Sen Joseph Lieberman and former Defense Sec Dick Cheney defended men at top of their tickets, while carefully avoiding personal attacks of presidential debate; holds that they echoed disagreements of Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush, but with muted tone that seemed aimed at reassuring public about their respective commitments to civility In an encounter characterized by polite, almost amiable disagreements, Senator Joseph Lieberman and former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney defended the men at the top of their tickets, while carefully avoiding the personal attacks of the presidential debate earlier this week. In substance, the candidates echoed the disagreements of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, but with a muted tone that seemed aimed at reassuring the public about their respective commitments to civility. Mr. Lieberman sounded almost sorrowful in criticizing the Republican tax cut proposal, while Mr. Cheney hammered calmly at the vice president's alleged love of big government. Although almost refreshingly low key, the debate seemed unlikely to have an immediate impact on the polls. In an encounter characterized by polite, almost amiable disagreements, Senator Joseph Lieberman and former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney defended the men at the top of their tickets, while carefully avoiding the personal attacks of the presidential debate earlier this week. In substance, the candidates echoed the disagreements of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, but with a muted tone that seemed aimed at reassuring the public about their respective commitments to civility. Mr. Lieberman sounded almost sorrowful in criticizing the Republican tax cut proposal, while Mr. Cheney hammered calmly at the vice president's alleged love of big government. Although almost refreshingly low key, the debate seemed unlikely to have an immediate impact on the polls. Mr. Cheney's goal last night was to do no harm to Mr. Bush's candidacy and to reinforce, in somber tones, the Republican attack on Mr. Gore's approach to government. In recent weeks the former defense secretary has seized on the vice president's habit of stretching the record, but last night he dwelled mainly on Mr. Gore's links to the ''old ways of governing'' in Washington. On abortion rights, he seemed to go out of his way to say that although he and Mr. Bush were pro-life, they would work on incremental steps to reduce abortions. Mr. Lieberman countered that the Republican ticket simply did not believe in a woman's right to choose whether to have an abortion, and that he and Mr. Gore did. One of the sharpest exchanges of the evening involved military readiness and defense spending. Mr. Cheney accused the Clinton administration of producing a military that is ''overcommitted but under-resourced.'' Mr. Lieberman fired back that such charges undermined morale for the purposes of partisan advantage, adding that Mr. Gore's budget allotted more money for new weapons than Mr. Bush's did. Despite such fencing, the most striking aspects of the debate were its friendly atmosphere and yet its delineation of two sharply divergent philosophies of government. The candidates referred to each other as ''Joe'' and ''Dick,'' a reminder that they are both seasoned professionals and veterans of many political wars in Washington. One of their few vivacious exchanges was both barbed and friendly, when Mr. Cheney charged that the Clinton administration had been one of ''talk and no action.'' With a mischievous smile, Mr. Lieberman commented dryly that Mr. Gore and President Clinton had made promises and delivered on them ''big time, if I may put it that way'' -- a jab at Mr. Cheney's overheard comment after a verbal indiscretion by Mr. Bush. Despite the traditional ''hatchet man'' role of vice-presidential candidates, these two sounded more like moot-court lawyers arguing their briefs. For this reason, it was a debate in which anyone keeping a scorecard would have a hard time finding a winner or a loser. It was almost a textbook example of reasoned exchange, rather than a contest of killer lines, competing egos and replayable stumbles. At the end of the evening, both the contestants and the commentators seemed impressed by the civics lesson that had been broadcast on national television. But the election is certain to be decided less on what the running mates say than on how the voters view Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush as leaders and whether, by Nov. 7, the electorate sees the Republicans' sweeping tax cut proposal as sound policy or a giveaway for the wealthy.
 Conversations with two dozen voters in St Louis suburbs show that debate between Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush did have some effect on undecided voters; undecided women say they are now leaning toward Gore, while undecided men say they are leaning toward Bush; photos (M) Like any hyperscheduled mother of two with a full-time job, Toni Caracciolo does not have time to spend 90 minutes sitting still. So on Tuesday night she tuned in and out of the debate between Al Gore and George W. Bush while giving her young daughters a bath. Still, Ms. Caracciolo, a Republican, saw enough to consider doing something that she never has before and that would appall her husband: casting her vote for a Democrat. To her, Mr. Gore seemed to offer more for people with less. Like any hyperscheduled mother of two with a full-time job, Toni Caracciolo does not have time to spend 90 minutes sitting still. So on Tuesday night she tuned in and out of the debate between Al Gore and George W. Bush while giving her young daughters a bath. Still, Ms. Caracciolo, a Republican, saw enough to consider doing something that she never has before and that would appall her husband: casting her vote for a Democrat. To her, Mr. Gore seemed to offer more for people with less. ''I guess I felt more pride to actually be an American, because the proposals of his campaign take care of our neighbors,'' said Ms. Caracciolo, a 34-year-old advertising brand manager, who was having a business lunch today in Clayton, Mo., an affluent suburb of St. Louis. ''A true community takes care of all of those people.'' Mr. Gore, she added, ''came across to me last night as the one who would work the hardest.'' Conversations with a random assortment of two dozen voters in the St. Louis suburbs this week -- mothers taking their children to soccer practice, retirees at their afternoon bowling games, a chemist shopping at the local grocery chain, Schnuck's -- showed that the presidential debate did have some effect on those undecided voters interviewed. Specifically, undecided women said they were now leaning toward Mr. Gore, while undecided men said they were leaning toward Mr. Bush. Undecided women, whether Republican, Democratic or independent, said Mr. Gore seemed strong, presidential and, as one woman put it, less ''wishy-washy'' than expected. But undecided men, even some who support Mr. Gore, were put off by him. Robert Fishbone, a 49-year-old painter and musician who plans to vote for Mr. Gore, called him ''Mr. Technical.'' Dutt Vinjamoori, a research chemist for Monsanto, cast Mr. Gore as an annoying best student in the class who would lecture the country for the next four years. ''What he has to do is quit telling me all these minute details,'' said Mr. Vinjamoori, 52, an independent who voted twice for Ronald Reagan and twice for President Clinton and who is now leaning toward Mr. Bush. ''He has to tell me how he would lead the country, without lecturing me. And he sounds like he has preprogrammed answers. He doesn't speak from his heart.'' Especially irritating, Mr. Vinjamoori said, was Mr. Gore's aside that Yugoslavia is composed of ''Serbia plus Montenegro.'' A case in point is Jacqueline Taylor, a 43-year-old nurse and registered Democrat who lives with her husband, a doctor, and four children in Ladue. Ms. Taylor said she had started watching the debate with little enthusiasm for Mr. Gore, whom she thought of as ''such a wishy-washy person'' and ''a nerd.'' In fact, she said, ''I kind of in my heart wanted Bush to say something to change my mind, to swing me over.'' But Mr. Bush did not. In Ms. Taylor's view, he made a big mistake when he said that the Russians should intervene in the Balkans and help persuade Slobodan Milosevic to step down. ''Let the Russians handle it,'' Ms. Taylor said, paraphrasing Mr. Bush with disgust. ''We're supposed to be the world leader.'' His answer, she said, was ''wimpy.'' Mr. Bush, she said, should have been better prepared. And Mr. Gore, to her surprise, seemed commanding and forceful. Vicki Simon, a 55-year-old independent who often votes for Democrats, had a similar reaction. She was leaning with no excitement toward Mr. Gore and was willing to consider Mr. Bush. Ms. Simon said she had been particularly interested in the debate because she had spent the last two years as a lay missionary in Nairobi, Kenya, cut off from American politics and television. She was home for a visit with her son and will vote by absentee ballot. Mr. Bush's performance, she said, made up her mind -- against him. She said he seemed ''on the defensive'' and not intellectually matched against Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore surprised her, too: ''He wasn't as boring as I remember him,'' she said. Ms. Simon's 28-year-old son, Mark, of University City, saw it differently. He, too, is an independent, and he, too, was undecided before the debate. Now he still is, but he is more comfortable with Mr. Bush. Mr. Simon was also struck by what he described as Mr. Bush's endearing genuineness. ''I don't see him as clever enough or sophisticated enough to get away with lying,'' Mr. Simon said. ''He comes across as this simple guy who just says what he thinks. With Gore, I want to believe him, but I'm not sure I can trust all the acting stuff.'' Gary Hollingsworth, 56, a coffee salesman and an independent who was picking up his two children at the Old Bonhomme School in Olivette, said that he also distrusted Mr. Gore. He was leaning toward Mr. Bush before the debate, he said, and still is, particularly after he heard on the radio that Mr. Gore had embellished anecdotes he told during the debate about a crowded school classroom in Florida and a trip he took to inspect fires and floods in Texas. A number of voters said they remain troubled by Mr. Gore's ties to the Clinton administration. Its scandals, they said, have tainted him. But Ms. Caracciolo said Mr. Gore's debate performance owed much to the more relaxed style of Mr. Clinton. ''Watching Gore, I could tell that Clinton spent some time with him,'' Ms. Caracciolo said. ''He learned something from Bill.''
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column holds that Vice Pres Gore's lapses into semi-fiction have come to assume enormous import in presidential race; maintains that polls show that Americans agree with his positions on most issues, but they appear to be wrestling with question of whether they can bear to have him around for four long years (M) ''He loves to talk about numbers,'' cried George W. Bush at a post-debate rally, where he laced into Al Gore as -- well, a person who loves to talk about numbers. That was the cue for the crowd to chant: ''No fuzzy math! No fuzzy math!'' ''He loves to talk about numbers,'' cried George W. Bush at a post-debate rally, where he laced into Al Gore as -- well, a person who loves to talk about numbers. That was the cue for the crowd to chant: ''No fuzzy math! No fuzzy math!'' The crisis in Yugoslavia rescued Mr. Gore from the sloughs of post-debate despond. Yesterday voters had to be recalling that he was the candidate who knew Vojislav Kostunica's name, while Mr. Bush is the one who appears to celebrate every new foreign policy discussion by inventing a different way to pronounce ''Milosevic.'' ''I find it troubling as an American,'' said Mr. Bush's communications director solemnly. ''What if he were in a meeting with foreign leaders and he made something up?'' The Yugoslav upheaval gives Gorites a chance to retort that at least the vice president would know who the foreign leaders were. Still, this implosion in Mr. Gore's stock of true-life stories should be a lesson for the future. If presidential campaigns are going to continue to insist on dragging real people into every argument, they're going to have to start vetting them like vice-presidential candidates. Before you consult with that photogenic single mom who works three jobs to pay for health insurance, demand to see her tax forms and interview her neighbors. Those lapses into semi-fiction have come to assume an enormous import in this race. Mr. Gore comes up with an imaginary story about a good-will trip to Texas, and somehow it balances out the fact that Mr. Bush has an imaginary trillion dollars in his Social Security plan. The polls say Americans agree with Mr. Gore's positions on most issues. But they appear to be wrestling with the question of whether they can bear to have him around all the time for four long years. That's why we've suddenly elevated those funny noises he made during the debate to a matter of national significance. This is the genius -- well, let's not get carried away, this is the clever thing about the Bush campaign's new war cry. ''Fuzzy math'' doesn't really refer to Mr. Gore's numbers. It's how you feel when Mr. Gore starts talking about them. Maybe the answer is for the vice president to promise he'll run the country but send Joe Lieberman to tell us what's happening. Mr. Bush seems to be planning to use the interval between presidential debates to offer up all the rejoinders he'd have fired at Mr. Gore on Tuesday if only he'd thought of them. At almost every campaign stop he re-adds his budget to prove that the vice president was wrong when he said the Bush agenda spends more money on tax cuts than everything else combined. And that tax relief for the rich? ''The wealthy folks get one-fifth of the benefits -- far short, far short of what he was talking about,'' said Mr. Bush. Do you actually want to know who's right? Mr. Bush counts only  one of his many tax cuts when he's figuring out how much the wealthy get, while Mr. Gore adds them all up. And Mr. Gore is comparing Mr. Bush's tax cut with the Republican plans for spending hikes. But Mr. Bush is comparing the tax cut with the entire federal budget for the other programs, which obviously makes it look smaller.
 MR. CHENEY  I think it's an extraordinarily important decision we're going to make on Nov. 7. We're really going to choose between what I consider to be an old way of governing ourselves, of high levels of spending, high taxes, an ever more intrusive bureaucracy, or a new course, a new era if you will, and Governor Bush and I want to offer that new course of action. We care a great deal about the issues that are at stake here, and one of the difficulties we have, frankly, is that for the last eight years we've ignored a lot of these problems. We haven't moved aggressively on Social Security. We haven't moved, for example, on Medicare. There are important issues out there that need to be resolved, and it's important for us to get on with our business. And that's what Governor Bush and I want to do. And what we want to do, what Governor Bush and I want to do, is to change that. We think we know how to do it. Governor Bush has done it in Texas. We want to emphasize local control so that the people here in Danville, Ky., decide what's best for their kids. We want to insist on high standards. One of the worst things we can do is fail to establish high standards, in effect to say to a youngster because of ethnic background or their income level, we don't have the same kind of expectations from you that we have for everybody else. And we want accountability. We have to test every child every year to know whether or not we're making progress with respect to achieving those goals and objectives. So we think it's extraordinarily important. This is probably the single most important issue in this campaign. Governor Bush has made it clear that when he's elected this will be his No. 1 priority as a legislative major to submit to the Congress. MR. LIEBERMAN  Bernie, Al Gore and I are committed to making America's public schools the best in the world. And I disagree with what my opponent has said. A lot of progress has been made in recent years. Average testing scores are up and a lot of extraordinary work is being done by tens of thousands of parents and teachers and administrators all around America. But there's more to be done. And if you'll allow me, I want to go back to your last question because it leads to this question. I think both of us agree that, leaving aside the Social Security and Medicare surpluses, there's $1.8 trillion in surplus available to spend over the next 10 years. As I said before, we're being fiscally responsible about it. We're taking $300 billion off the top to put into reserve fund. The rest of it, we're going to use for middle class tax cuts and investments in programs like education. Now, there's a big difference here between these two tickets. Our opponents are going to spend $1.6 trillion of the $1.8 trillion surplus projected on that big tax cut that Al Gore talked about the other night so effectively. We're saving money to invest in education. You cannot reform education and improve it in this country without spending some money. Al Gore and I have committed $170 billion for that purpose: to recruit 100,000 new teachers, to reduce the size of classrooms, to help local school districts build new buildings so our children are not learning in crumbling classrooms. MR. LIEBERMAN  Well, it's a good and an important question. Obviously in our time, fortunately, great advances have been made by women achieving the kind of equality that they were too long denied. But, Bernie, your question is absolutely right. Women, actually the number I have is: receive 72 cents for every dollar a man receives in a comparable job. But Al Gore and I have issued an economic plan in which we've stated specific goals for the future. And one of those goals is to eliminate the pay gap between men and women. It's unfair and it's unacceptable. And the first way we will do that is by supporting the equal pay act which has been proposed in Congress, which gives women the right to file legal actions against employers who are not treating them fairly and not paying them equally. Secondly, we're going to do everything we can using governmental support of business agencies such as the Small Business Administration to help women business owners have an opportunity to invest and begin businesses and make larger incomes themselves. And there are other civil rights and human rights laws that I think can come to play here. So, bottom line, this is an unfair and unacceptable situation. And even though as the economy has risen in the last eight years, America's women have risen with it and received more income, until women are receiving the same amount of pay for the same job they're doing as a man receives, we've not achieved genuine equality in this country. And Al Gore and I are committed to closing that gap and achieving that equality. But I also think it's not just about the differential with respect to women. If you look, for example, at our opponent's tax proposal, they discriminate between stay-at-home moms with children that they take care of themselves and those who go to work or who, in fact, have their kids taken care of outside the home. You, in effect, as a stay-at-home mom get no tax advantage under the Gore tax plan as contrasted with the Bush proposal which, in fact, provides tax relief for absolutely everybody who pays taxes. And it's important to understand that the things that we're trying to change and the things that we're trying to address in the course of the campaign and what our agenda is for the future, our plans are for the future, focus very much upon giving as much control as we can to individual Americans, be they men or women, be they single or married, as much control as possible over their own lives, especially in the area of taxation. We want to make certain that the American people have the ability to keep more of what they earn and then they get to decide how to spend it. The proposal we have from -- from Al Gore, basically, doesn't do that. It, in effect, lays out some 29 separate tax credits, and if you live your life the way they want you to live your life, if you do, in fact, behave in a certain way, then you qualify for a tax credit and at that point you get some relief. Bottom line, though, is 50 million American taxpayers out there get no advantages at all out of the Gore tax proposal, whereas under the Bush plan everybody who pays taxes will in fact get tax relief. . . . The first thing is that, in fact, the tax relief program that Al Gore and I have proposed, one of those many tax credits for the middle class that Dick just referred to includes a $500 tax credit for stay-at-home moms. Just as a way of saying that we understand that you are performing a service for our society, we want you to have that tax credit. Second, the number of 50 million Americans not benefiting from our tax cut program is absolutely wrong. It's an estimate done on an earlier form of our tax cut program and it's just plain wrong. And secondly, although Governor Bush says that his tax cut program, large as it is, gives a tax cut to everybody as the newspapers indicated earlier this week, the Joint Committee on Taxation, again a nonpartisan group in Congress, has said that 27 million Americans don't get what the governor said they would in their tax cut program. Again, Al Gore and I want to live within our means. We're not going to give it all away in one big tax cut and certainly not to the top one percent of the public that doesn't need it now. MR. CHENEY  Bernie, the abortion issue is a very tough one, without question, and a very important one. And, Governor Bush and I have emphasized that while we clearly are both pro-life, that's what we believe, that we want to look for ways to try to reduce the incidence of abortion in our society. Many on the pro-choice side have said exactly the same thing. Even Bill Clinton, who's been a supporter of abortion rights, has advocated reducing abortion to make it as rare as possible. With respect to the question of RU486, we believe that of course that it's recently been approved by the F.D.A. That really was a question of whether or not it was safe to be used by women. They didn't address the, sort of the question of whether or not there should or should not be abortion in the society so much as evaluate that particular drug. What we'd like to be able to do is to look for ways to reach across the divide between the two points of view and find things that we can do together to reduce the incidence of abortion, we're thinking of such things as promoting adoption as an alternative, encouraging parental notification and we also think banning the horrific practice of partial-birth abortions is an area where there could be agreement. Congress has twice passed, by overwhelming margins, a significant number of votes from both parties, the ban on partial birth abortions. Twice it's been vetoed by Bill Clinton and Al Gore and we would hope that eventually they would recognize that that's not a good position for them to be in. With respect to the RU486 proposal, at this stage, I haven't looked in particular at that particular piece of legislation. Governor Bush made it clear the other night that he did not anticipate that he would be able to go in and direct the F.D.A. to reverse course on that particular issue, primarily because as I say the decision they made was on the efficacy of the drug, not the question of whether or not we supported abortion. But let me say more generally that the significant difference here on this issue is that Al Gore and I respect and will protect a woman's right to choose. And our opponents will not. We know that this is a difficult personal, moral, medical issue, but that is exactly why it ought to be left under our law to a woman, her doctor and her God. Now, one area in which we agree, Al Gore and I, is that we believe that the government ought to do everything it can to reduce the number of unwanted pregnancies, and therefore the number of abortions. And incidentally, here there is good news to report. The number of abortions is actually down in America over the last eight years. In fact, over the last eight years the number of teenage pregnancies has dropped 20 percent. And the reason it has is that there are good programs out there that Al Gore and I will continue to support, such as family planning and programs that encourage abstinence. But when the health of a woman is involved, I think the government has to be respectful. I know our opponents have said that they thought that was an overreaching. It wasn't. It was a matter of principle and America's national interest and values. And the fact is that we stopped the aggression; we stopped the genocide. And therefore strengthened our relationship with our European allies in NATO and, in fact, made the United States more respected and trusted by our allies and more feared by our enemies. I think that Vice President Gore played a critical role, passionate, purposive role, in leading the administration, along with Republican supporters like Bob Dole and John McCain, to do the right thing in the Balkans. And, hopefully, tonight we are seeing the final results of that bold and brave effort. I think with respect to how this process has been managed most recently, we want to do everything we can to support Mr. Milosevic's departure. Certainly, though, that would not involve committing U.S. troops. I do think it's noteworthy that there appears to be an effort under way to get the Russians involved. I noted the other night, for example, Tuesday night, in the debate in Boston, Governor Bush suggested exactly that, that we ought to try to get the Russians involved to exercise some leverage over the Serbians, and Al Gore pooh-poohed it. But now it's clear from the press that, in fact, that's exactly what they were doing and that Governor Bush was correct in his assessment and his recommendation. MR. SHAW  Your question, Mr. Secretary. You and Governor Bush charge that the Clinton-Gore administration have presided over the deterioration and overextension of America's armed forces. Should U.S. military personnel be deployed as warriors or peacekeepers? He's concerned that if he ever had to send them into combat it would mean lives lost. That is a legitimate concern, and this is a very important area and the fact the U.S. military is worse off today than it was eight years ago, a major responsibility for us in the future and a high priority for myself and Governor Bush will be to rebuild the U.S. military to give them the resources they need to do the job we ask them to do for us and to give them good leadership. MR. LIEBERMAN  Well, I am, Bernie. And, most important, I want to assure the American people that the American military is the best-trained, best-equipped, most powerful force in the world and that Al Gore and I will do whatever it takes to keep them that way. It's not right, and it's not good for our military, to run them down, essentially, in the midst of a partisan political debate. The fact is that you've got to judge the military by what the military leaders say. And Secretary Bill Cohen, a good Republican, General Shelton, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, both will tell you that the American military is ready to meet any threat we may face in the world today. And the fact is, judging by its results from Desert Storm to the Balkans, Bosnia and Kosovo to the operations that are still being conducted to keep Saddam Hussein in the box in Iraq, the American military has performed brilliantly. In fact, this administration had turned around the drop in spending on the military that began in the mid-80's and went right through the Bush-Cheney administration and the early years of the Clinton administration. But now that's stopped. In fact, we passed the largest pay increase in a generation for our military. And the interesting fact here, in spite of the rhetoric that my opponent has just spoken, is that the -- reality is that if you look at our projected budgets for the next 10 years, Al Gore and I actually commit more than twice as much -- $100 billion -- in additional funding for our military than Governor Bush does. And their budget allows nothing additional for acquisition of new weapons systems. And that's something that the same general, Mike Ryan of the Air Force, and all the other chiefs of the services, will not be happy about because they need the new equipment, the new systems, that Al Gore and I are committed to giving them. And the fact is that Governor Bush recommended in his major policy statement on the military earlier this year that we skip the next generation of military equipment -- helicopters, submarines, tactical air-fighters, all the rest. That would really cripple our readiness, exactly the readiness that Dick Cheney is talking about. Al Gore and I are committed to continuing this acquisition program, transforming the military. There's fewer people in uniform today but person to person -- person by person, unit by unit, this is the most powerful and effective military not only in the world today but in the history of the world. And again, Al Gore and I will do whatever is necessary to keep it that way. I mean, America has a national strategic interest and a principled interest in peace in the Middle East. And Al Gore has played a critical role in advancing that process over the last eight years. What pains me as I watch the unrest in recent days between the Israelis and the Palestinians is that these two peoples have come, in some senses, generations forward, centuries forward in the last seven years. They are so close to a final peace agreement. Now we've been on a very constructive course in the Middle East, played an unusual, unique role. And I am convinced that Al Gore and I, I commit that Al Gore and I will continue to do that. I hope I might, through my friendships in Israel and throughout the Arab world, play a unique role in bringing peace to this sacred region of the world. MR. CHENEY  Bernie, it has been a very, very difficult area to work in for a long time. Numerous administrations going back, certainly to World War II, have had to wrestle with the problem of what should happen to the Middle East. We made significant breakthroughs, I think, at the end of the Bush administration because of the Gulf War. In effect, we had joined together with Arab allies and done enormous damage to the Iraqi armed forces, and Iraq, at the time, was the biggest military threat to Israel. By virtue of the end of the cold war, the Soviets were no longer a factor. They used to fish in troubled waters whenever they had the opportunity in the Middle East. But with the end of the Soviet Union, the implosion, if you will, of the empire, that created a vacuum, if you will, and made it easier for us to operate there. MR. SHAW  This question is for you, Mr. Secretary. If Iraq's President Saddam Hussein were found to be developing weapons of mass destruction, Governor Bush has said he would ''take him out.'' Would you agree with such a deadly policy? The fact is that we will not enjoy real stability in the Middle East until Saddam Hussein is gone. The gulf war was a great victory. And incidentally, Al Gore and I were two of the ten Democrats in the Senate who crossed party lines to support President Bush and Secretary Cheney in that war, and we're both very proud that we did that. But in the end, there's not going to be peace until he goes. And that's why I was proud to co-sponsor the Iraq Liberation Act with Senator Trent Lott, why I have kept in touch with the indigenous Iraqi opposition broad based to Saddam Hussein. Vice President Gore met with them earlier this year. We are supporting them in their efforts and we will continue to support them until the Iraqi people rise up and do what the people of Serbia have done in the last few days, get rid of a despot. We will welcome you back into the family of nations where you belong. MR. LIEBERMAN  Not enough. But this administration and Vice President Gore and I have had both a long-term strategy to develop energy independence and a short-term strategy. In fact, if this administration had been given the amount of funding that it had requested from the Republican Congress, we'd be further along in the implementation of that long-term strategy which is aimed at developing alternative cleaner sources of energy aimed at giving tax credits to individuals and businesses to conserve and use energy more efficiently, aimed at a partnership for a new generation of vehicles with the American automobile industry which is making great progress and can produce a vehicle that can get 80 miles per gallon. We also have a short-term strategy and it's a deal with exactly the kind of ups and downs of energy prices and I know it was controversial. But Al Gore and I believed that it was important in the short term to reach into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, take some of that oil that we have, put it in the market, show the big oil companies and the OPEC oil-producing countries that we've got some resources with which we can fight back. We're not just going to lay back and let them roll over our economy. And we did it also because gasoline prices were rising and home heating oil inventories were real low. And both of our tickets agree on LIHAP, Low Income Housing Assistance Program, but our opponents really offer no assistance to middle-class families who are hit by rising gas prices and a shortage of home heating oil. The fact is that since the reserve was opened the price of oil on world markets has dropped $6 a barrel. Now that's a good result and I'm proud of it. MR. LIEBERMAN  Ah, yes indeed. I can pledge to the American people categorically that no one will lose benefits under our plan for Social Security as far forward as 2054. And let me come back and say, Bernie, that Al Gore and I view Social Security as probably the best thing the government did in the second half of the last century. It has created a floor under which seniors cannot fall. And so many of them depend on it for their basic living, for their livelihood. It is critically important to protect it. That's why Al and I have committed to, to putting that Social Security surplus in a lock box, not touching it. And that's what allows us to keep Social Security solvent to 2054. . . . MR. CHENEY  You won't be surprised, Bernie, if I disagree with Joe's description of our program. The fact of the matter is the Social Security system's in trouble. It's been a fantastic program. It's been there for 65 years, it's provided benefits for -- for senior citizens over that period of time, for my parents. It means a great deal to -- to millions of Americans. And Governor Bush and I want to make absolutely certain that the first thing we do is guarantee the continuation of those payments, those benefits and keep those promises that were made. But it's also why I'm so proud that Al Gore has said two things. First, we would issue, if we're fortunate enough to be elected, an executive order prohibiting racial profiling. And secondly, the first civil rights act legislation we would send to Congress would be a national ban on racial profiling. It is just wrong. It is un-American. And to think that in the 21st century this kind of nonsense is still going on, we've got to stop it.
 Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, said, ''Our country must work closely with our allies in Europe and the international community, including Russia, to pressure Mr. Milosevic to go.'' Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee, said: ''We call upon Milosevic to get out of power. It will be taken from him if he does not, because the people of Serbia have spoken, and now they are rising up.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush court swing voters in battleground states of Midwest; Gore campaigns in Grand Rapids, Mich, and Bush campaigns in Michigan, Wisconsin and Iowa; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush both courted parents and swing voters in battleground states of the Midwest today. Here in the heavily Republican hometown of former President Gerald R. Ford, Mr. Gore visited a child care center and appeared at a downtown rally. He discussed his own proposal for tax credits for day care and once again criticized Mr. Bush's plan for a tax cut worth $1.3 trillion over 10 years. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush both courted parents and swing voters in battleground states of the Midwest today. Here in the heavily Republican hometown of former President Gerald R. Ford, Mr. Gore visited a child care center and appeared at a downtown rally. He discussed his own proposal for tax credits for day care and once again criticized Mr. Bush's plan for a tax cut worth $1.3 trillion over 10 years. ''For every dollar that I propose to spend on education, my opponent, Governor Bush, proposes to spend $5 on a tax cut for the wealthiest 1 percent,'' Mr. Gore said. ''That's a fact and cannot be refuted. Those are the wrong priorities, in my opinion.'' Mr. Bush, meanwhile, spent the day campaigning in Michigan, Wisconsin and Iowa, highlighting ideas to help with child-rearing. He said he wanted government to ''stand side by side with parents,'' and told parents he understood that ''you're battling a culture sometimes that sends a different signal.'' At the Helen Keller middle school outside Detroit and the McKinley elementary school in Appleton, Wis.,  Mr. Bush spoke of a variety of proposals to help parents, touching on everything from Internet filtering technology, to compensatory time as an alternative to pay for overtime work, to tax credits for telecommuting. He also repeated his call for zero tolerance of misconduct in the schools and for teachers to be shielded from lawsuits resulting from their disciplinary steps. ''I want to make it clear about me,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I'm not the kind of person during the day to scold Hollywood, then at night go out there and say: 'Well, I really didn't mean it. I'd like your contribution.' '' As for Mr. Gore, he too sought to reach parents concerned about what their children watch. At his rally here in Grand Rapids, he pledged, ''I will work to help parents and strengthen families.'' Mr. Gore also said that ''in order to respect all of our families, we have got to make sure that Social Security and Medicare are sound and reliable and not used as piggy banks for some kind of experimentation on privatizing Social Security.'' ''I'm opposed to diverting one out of every six dollars away from the Social Security trust fund and into the stock market,'' he said of Mr. Bush's proposal to allow workers to direct part of their payroll taxes to private retirement investment accounts. After interviews with several Michigan television stations, Mr. Gore flew to Orlando, Fla., where he planned to watch the vice-presidential debate tonight. Mr. Gore arrived in Michigan late Wednesday night after attending a fund-raising concert at the home of Jon Bon Jovi in Middletown, N.J. The event raised $850,000 from people paying as much as $25,000 a couple to chat with the vice president and Mr. Bon Jovi, who lives in a chateau-like mansion where celebrities including Heather Locklear, Geraldo Rivera and Roger Penske also maintain residences. ''We are going to remember this evening for a long time,'' Mr. Gore said. ''This may be the single most fun event of the campaign.''
 Tennessee is as much swing state this year as ever, and there is possibility that Vice Pres Gore, who along with his father represented state for 48 years in Congress, could be embarrassed there; Huntingdon Mayor Dale R Kelley says Gore's state support has eroded; photo (M) Since the Civil War, this state, this county and this small northwest Tennessee town have been evenly split between Republicans and Democrats, swinging unpredictably from candidate to candidate. And in the last few weeks, it has become increasingly clear that Vice President Al Gore's presence on the ballot as a native son is not going to change that division much, if at all. Tennessee is as much a swing state this year as ever, and there is a serious possibility that Mr. Gore, who along with his father represented this state for 48 years in Congress, could be embarrassed here. Since the Civil War, this state, this county and this small northwest Tennessee town have been evenly split between Republicans and Democrats, swinging unpredictably from candidate to candidate. And in the last few weeks, it has become increasingly clear that Vice President Al Gore's presence on the ballot as a native son is not going to change that division much, if at all. Tennessee is as much a swing state this year as ever, and there is a serious possibility that Mr. Gore, who along with his father represented this state for 48 years in Congress, could be embarrassed here. The signs are evident on the town square here in the seat of Carroll County, which has uncannily voted for the winning president in every election since 1964. Shopkeepers and customers are evenly split between Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and even old-timers will not venture a confident prediction of who will win the county or the state. Outside the local branch of the Edward Jones investment brokerage, Lewis Carter, a retired welder, said he had never voted for a Democratic president in his 73 years. His friend Marvin Edwards, 74, said he had never voted for a Republican. Neither is particularly moved by the fact that Mr. Gore's family farm is seven counties away. ''I don't care if Al Gore's from Tennessee or anywhere else,'' said Mr. Carter, spitting tobacco juice on the street. ''His daddy was an old liberal Democrat for years and years, and I don't vote for Democrats no matter where they come from.'' Mr. Edwards, a retired farmer whose family has voted Democratic since the Civil War, said he doubted that Mr. Gore's residency would make much difference among fellow Democrats. Mr. Gore may be doing well in the Northeast and on the West Coast, but he is struggling for a clear lead in his home state. A poll conducted last week for two major state newspapers showed Governor Bush slightly ahead here, though his lead was within the margin of sampling error. Even though most politicians and analysts still expect Mr. Gore to carry the state, if narrowly, he may well do so despite his roots. Tennesseans simply do not seem impressed by the fact that Mr. Gore's family is from Carthage. Having grown up mostly in Washington during his father's terms in office, Mr. Gore has been an accepted if never particularly beloved figure in this state, and voters say they expect to make their final calculation the way they always have. As many residents enjoy pointing out, one president from Tennessee, James K. Polk, did not carry his home state in 1844. Since the Civil War, party loyalties have been handed down like family Bibles, with Republicans in the east and Democrats dominating the west and middle. (Republicans now rule the growing suburbs of Memphis and Nashville.) The state has long been the South's most evenly divided, voting for Democrats, Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter, in 1964, 1976 and 1980, and for Republicans, Richard M. Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George Bush, in 1968, 1972, 1984 and 1988. Tennessee did vote for Bill Clinton in the last two presidential elections -- by margins of five percentage points in 1992 and two points in 1996 -- and Mr. Gore's presence on the ticket is generally given some credit for that. But Ross Perot may be equally responsible, because Mr. Clinton never won a majority here. In the same period, voters elected Republicans to both United States Senate seats and to the governor's office. The Republican National Committee, eager to embarrass Mr. Gore at home, has gleefully seized on the latest poll numbers and is beginning a small television advertising campaign in the state's major markets. The Gore campaign has been able to avoid spending money in the state but may be forced to divert some resources here to prevent a humiliation, and even supporters sound less than fully confident. ''It's no surprise that it's a close race here,'' said Greg Wanderman, executive director of the Tennessee Democratic Party. ''It's been an increasingly Republican state for the last 10 years, mostly in the suburbs. But I think Gore will win if the base turns out.'' The party's base is in the urban areas of Memphis and Nashville, and in the former pro-Confederate counties of western and middle Tennessee that have always been Democratic. At best, Mr. Wanderman said, he hopes that Mr. Gore will do a few points better than Mr. Clinton did in his two elections. Other Democrats have complained that the poll, conducted by Mason-Dixon Polling and Research for The Chattanooga Times and Free Press and The Tennessean in Nashville, understated Mr. Gore's support because it relied too heavily on voters in local and state elections. But many Republicans say that next month's vote, even if Mr. Gore barely wins, could consolidate a trend away from partisan balance and toward a domination by the kind of moderate Republicans who do well here. Tennesseans remember that Mr. Gore's positions were notably more conservative when he was representing the state, said Dale R. Kelley, Huntingdon's Republican mayor. ''My sense is that Gore enjoyed a good deal more support in Tennessee when he was in Congress,'' said Mr. Kelley, a former state legislator who also served in former Gov. Lamar Alexander's cabinet. ''The changes that he made to run on the national ticket have changed the attitudes of this state.''
 So much for other people's daddies. As for her own, she explained between gooey bites of Rice Krispies Treats the other day at a Starbucks in Greenwich Village that she did not dish any dirt on him, either. He is, of course, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, Vice President Al Gore's running mate. Ms. Lieberman, a rangy 5-feet-8 with pea-soup eyes and her father's mobile mouth, strode up to Starbucks in tight jeans and a gray crewneck sweater, dragging a large black suitcase on wheels like a symbol of her transitory life at the moment. She has been touring the country representing the Gore-Lieberman ticket on college campuses. Despite a description of her in The New York Observer as a ''bleached blonde,'' she does not look the least bit artificial. (''I spent a lot of money on this,'' she protested.)
 In addition, neither Vice President Al Gore nor Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has spent much time addressing tribal issues, underscoring for many Indians a disconnection they feel from mainstream America. In addition, neither Vice President Al Gore nor Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has spent much time addressing tribal issues, underscoring for many Indians a disconnection they feel from mainstream America. Montana's political profile is decidedly Republican, with Mr. Bush expected to carry the state and Senator Conrad Burns a slight favorite to win a third term over his Democratic challenger, Brian Schweitzer. In other races, including those for governor and the House -- both open seats currently held by Republicans -- political experts say Democrats are holding a slight lead.
 Gov George W Bush, campaigning in Appleton, Wis, says economy's done more for Clinton administration than administration has done for economy (M) Challenging an incumbent in times of peace and prosperity is not easy. And as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas campaigned across the Midwest today, he showed just how difficult it can be. Mr. Bush was asked by a woman what she could tell a Democratic friend who did not like Vice President Al Gore but feared upsetting the economy through a change in administrations. Challenging an incumbent in times of peace and prosperity is not easy. And as Gov. George W. Bush of Texas campaigned across the Midwest today, he showed just how difficult it can be. Mr. Bush was asked by a woman what she could tell a Democratic friend who did not like Vice President Al Gore but feared upsetting the economy through a change in administrations. Finally he began a story of how he had built a working relationship and friendship with his first lieutenant governor, Bob Bullock, a Democrat. ''You tell your friend that I think I have the capacity to reach across the partisan line,'' Mr. Bush said, ''to elevate the spirit of America, to call upon the best of this nation, not to play partisan politics with every issue, but to focus on what's good for our citizens. Just tell her that and see if that doesn't work.''
 The presidential debate moved some undecided voters in Missouri. Women said they were now leaning toward Al Gore, men toward George W. Bush. Page A26. The presidential debate moved some undecided voters in Missouri. Women said they were now leaning toward Al Gore, men toward George W. Bush. Page A26.
 Gore's Embellishments  Republicans complained about the accuracy of several of Vice President Al Gore's statements in his debate with Gov. George W. Bush, and even some Democrats expressed puzzlement over Mr. Gore's repeated missteps in this regard.
 Mr. Lazio's campaign has begun a push for such voters on the theory that some Democratic supporters of Vice President Al Gore, who polls suggest is ahead of Gov. George W. Bush in New York, are willing to back Mr. Lazio out of opposition to Mrs. Clinton.
 Jay W Shuffield letter on campaign debate between Al Gore and George W Bush; criticizes both for opposing use of US military force to protect lives and rights of people in oppressed countries; suggests military morale may be low because soldiers realize their role is just to protect American pocketbooks Watching the presidential debate on Tuesday night, I was disturbed by the way in which our prospective leaders viewed foreign policy (news article, Oct. 4). George W. Bush said the United States should intervene abroad only to protect its own interests. In other words, we should use the military if we have something to gain, but not to protect the lives and rights of those in oppressed countries. Al Gore's position leaned more toward intervening in cases of atrocities, but his stance was not firm on the point. He did not convey a willingness to argue strongly for sending troops to Yugoslavia to enforce democracy there. Watching the presidential debate on Tuesday night, I was disturbed by the way in which our prospective leaders viewed foreign policy (news article, Oct. 4). George W. Bush said the United States should intervene abroad only to protect its own interests. In other words, we should use the military if we have something to gain, but not to protect the lives and rights of those in oppressed countries. Al Gore's position leaned more toward intervening in cases of atrocities, but his stance was not firm on the point. He did not convey a willingness to argue strongly for sending troops to Yugoslavia to enforce democracy there.
 Mr. Clinton made it plain that the previous two Republican presidents, Ronald Reagan and George Bush, were specifically excluded from this tradition. Mr. Clinton said he and Vice President Al Gore had found a ''third way'' to restore confidence in progressivism. With the challenges of record deficits and mounting national debt now behind the country, Mr. Clinton said, the country's next test will be to expand opportunity for people like the Navajo girl he met last week in New Mexico, who had won a computer but had no phone line; conquer diseases like AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis overseas; and bring the same success America has in business to the problems of families.
 Prof William Thurston letter says that as mathematician he was puzzled by George W Bush's remark that opponent Al Gore uses 'fuzzy math'; finds expression dismaying in man who claims to lead educational reform As a mathematician, I was interested when, in the debate, George W. Bush described Al Gore's economic figures as ''fuzzy math'' (front page, Oct. 4). But I was chagrined when Mr. Bush left it at that. Although he repeated the phrase several times, he never discussed specific problems with Mr. Gore's reasoning or his figures, nor did he offer any alternatives. I gradually came to understand that by ''fuzzy math'' Mr. Bush meant, ''Math is confusing and fuzzy, so ignore it.'' As a mathematician, I was interested when, in the debate, George W. Bush described Al Gore's economic figures as ''fuzzy math'' (front page, Oct. 4). But I was chagrined when Mr. Bush left it at that. Although he repeated the phrase several times, he never discussed specific problems with Mr. Gore's reasoning or his figures, nor did he offer any alternatives. I gradually came to understand that by ''fuzzy math'' Mr. Bush meant, ''Math is confusing and fuzzy, so ignore it.'' This is dismaying to see in a man who says he will be a leader of educational reform. We can at least be thankful that if elected, Mr. Bush intends to assemble panels of experts that will presumably know how to work out numbers when economic crises arise.
 THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO: Tendency to Embellish Fact Snags Gore**Republicans complain about accuracy of several statements by Vice Pres Gore during his debate with Gov George W Bush; some Democrats express puzzlement over Gore's misstatements (M) For years, his political opponents have groused that Vice President Al Gore has trouble with facts. They pounced on statements he made about his service in Vietnam, about his record in Congress and even about the price he has to pay for his dog's arthritis medicine. On Tuesday, they got even more ammunition: Several of Mr. Gore's comments in his debate with Gov. George W. Bush set off a fresh outcry over what even some of his supporters acknowledge is a tendency to embellish anecdotes about his roles in events. For years, his political opponents have groused that Vice President Al Gore has trouble with facts. They pounced on statements he made about his service in Vietnam, about his record in Congress and even about the price he has to pay for his dog's arthritis medicine. On Tuesday, they got even more ammunition: Several of Mr. Gore's comments in his debate with Gov. George W. Bush set off a fresh outcry over what even some of his supporters acknowledge is a tendency to embellish anecdotes about his roles in events. ''It's a weird pattern that has emerged,'' Karl Rove, the chief strategist for Mr. Bush, said in an interview. ''We have these episodes in which Gore is playing Forrest Gump or Zelig.'' Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, issued a statement saying he was ''puzzled and saddened'' by Mr. Gore's misstatements, while the conservative New York Post trumpeted ''Liar! Liar!'' as its main headline today. While many politicians are prone to spice up a story here and there, Republicans and Democrats say Mr. Gore's shading of the truth has become so frequent that some politicians are no longer dismissing it as sloppy oratory from a candidate under the glare of television cameras. This predilection of Mr. Gore's is all the more surprising because it often involves trivial matters -- ones that could easily be checked -- such as how Mr. Gore recalled a childhood lullaby that did not exist. Even as he tried to defend Mr. Gore, Art Torres, chairman of the California Democratic Party, could not come up with an explanation for the misstatements. ''I have no idea,'' he said. ''I'm not a psychiatrist.'' But Mr. Torres said it was unfair to dwell on Mr. Gore's comments, asserting that it was far more important to focus on substantive issues. ''Those debate situations are pretty strenuous,'' he said. ''With so many activities, so many campaign stops, you might not be able to totally remember the facts.'' Mr. Gore's most recent troubles began with the first question of the debate. The moderator, Jim Lehrer of PBS, noted that Mr. Gore had once questioned whether his opponent had the experience to be president and asked him what he meant. Mr. Gore denied that he had ever raised questions about Mr. Bush's qualifications for the presidency. The truth is, he had. In a speech to the American Society of Newspaper Editors in April, Mr. Gore cited Mr. Bush's call for a tax cut and posed this question: ''Does he have the experience to be president?'' Then there was Mr. Gore's story of a 15-year-old girl in Sarasota, Fla., who he said is such a victim of school crowding that she has to stand in class. The fact is, the girl has a desk, and went without one for only a day. At another point, Mr. Gore said he had traveled with James Lee Witt, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to inspect fire and flooding damage in Texas in June 1998. In fact, Mr. Gore went to Texas, but not with Mr. Witt. At another point, Mr. Gore said he ''took a risk'' in asking the former Prime Minister of Russia, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, to become personally involved in negotiating an end to the conflict in Kosovo. In fact, President Boris Yeltsin of Russia had two weeks early designated Mr. Chernomyrdin as a special envoy to the Balkans and the diplomatic mission that Mr. Gore described had been initiated by other top officials in Russia, Europe and the United States. In an interview last weekend, Mr. Gore volunteered that PBS had never invited him to be appear on a documentary about presidential debates. But officials at PBS said he had been invited personally, and the vice president's own spokesman said the campaign had rejected the offer. Mr. Gore, in an interview today with a television station in Grand Rapids, Mich., sought to deflect accusations that he is an embellisher by turning the tables on Mr. Bush. ''In the debates, when he said that I spent more in my campaign than he has, the numbers show that he has spent twice as much as I have,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But I don't seize on that as evidence of some character flaw. He made a mistake, and I'm not going to attack him personally.'' In another interview months ago, Mr. Gore tried to make light of questions at the time about his exaggerations, turning to the reporter and blurting, ''I think it's an exaggeration!'' Rather than explain Mr. Gore's misstatements, one of his aides, Mark Fabiani, focused on Mr. Bush, saying, ''We've never attacked Bush for his numerous crimes against the English language.'' In and of themselves, many of Mr. Gore's embellishments can be excused or seem quite mild. Unlike the times that President Clinton has twisted the facts to get himself out of a humiliating scrape or scandal, Mr. Gore's slip-ups appear to be far more unnecessary. People who know Mr. Gore have suggested that he was reared in a political family where embellishments were part of life. And Mr. Gore spent his childhood in a way that was intended for use in a press release. His mother, Pauline, used to tell reporters that she would have dinner with her son no matter what else was going on. ''Nothing lonelier than a meal eaten alone,'' she would say. The truth is, Mr. Gore was alone a lot. Several prominent Democrats said privately that they were worried that Mr. Gore was giving ammunition to his opponents. Indeed, Mr. Bush and the Republicans have gleefully seized on Mr. Gore's statements. ''The press has been too easy on him on this,'' said Bill Pascoe, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee. ''If the only thing you knew about Al Gore was what you read in the press, you'd think he was just a charming fellow who loves his wife.'' Robert Schmuhl, a professor of American studies at the University of Notre Dame, said Mr. Gore should take greater care to watch what he says. ''It's reaching a point where a stereotype might form and we might think of Gore as someone who is prone to exaggeration,'' Mr. Schmuhl said. ''That's a real danger for someone who is trying to run for president without the strain of character questions or problems of credibility.'' But Chris Wetzel, a professor of psychology at Rhodes College in Memphis, said he was willing to give Mr. Gore the benefit of the doubt and did not believe he had sinister motives.
 Gov George W Bush chose Pennsylvania as place to announce his program to help states ease drug costs for those on Medicare; Pennsylvania and many other states are struggling with rising prescription drug costs and tight eligibility requirements that are excluding many older residents; how effective Bush's proposed federal subsidies would be in solving problems is in dispute (M) Pennsylvania has one of the nation's largest state-run drug-subsidy programs for its older low-income residents. So it seemed natural for Gov. George W. Bush to choose it last month as the place to announce his program to help states ease drug costs for those on Medicare. The thrust of Mr. Bush's proposal is to let managed care companies compete for patients with Medicare, the federal health insurance program for people 65 or older. Since the plan would not take effect for at least four years, Mr. Bush has proposed an interim step of allocating $48 billion -- $12 billion a year -- to subsidize state prescription drug plans. Pennsylvania has one of the nation's largest state-run drug-subsidy programs for its older low-income residents. So it seemed natural for Gov. George W. Bush to choose it last month as the place to announce his program to help states ease drug costs for those on Medicare. The thrust of Mr. Bush's proposal is to let managed care companies compete for patients with Medicare, the federal health insurance program for people 65 or older. Since the plan would not take effect for at least four years, Mr. Bush has proposed an interim step of allocating $48 billion -- $12 billion a year -- to subsidize state prescription drug plans. But even as Mr. Bush announced his proposal, problems in Pennsylvania's program were increasing. How effective Mr. Bush's proposed federal subsidies would be in solving these problems is in dispute. But Marilyn Moon, a Medicare expert at the Urban Institute, said that Mr. Bush's interim plan would fall short by its fourth and final year because more people would ask for help and drug prices would probably continue to rise. In addition, more than half the  states have neither established nor authorized programs. For those states, the Bush proposal would require a new bureaucracy, said John McDonough, a former Massachusetts legislator who helped write that state's first drug-subsidy law. ''If Congress and Governor Bush want to unload this responsibility on states that weren't asking for the programs, it will be much more difficult to reach the target populations quickly.'' Dr. Gail R. Wilensky, a Bush campaign adviser and former administrator of the government office that runs Medicare, said that giving money to the states was ''the fastest way to get money out short-term.'' ''If Congress passed the Bush plan next summer,'' he said, ''the next session of the Texas Legislature would be in 2003, and it would be hard to start a program there until the following year.'' The Bush program's state subsidies are sizeable -- but Mr. Snedden wants to see the fine print.
 BY THE NUMBERS  Back on the trail yesterday, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore each hit the Midwestern swing states, reaching out to voters still undecided after Tuesday night's presidential debate. Each candidate stopped in Michigan, only miles apart, and continued to hammer away at the other's positions. Here are the stats: Length of the Official Day: Gore, 12 hours; Bush 15 1/2 States Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 3 Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 4 Events: Gore, 1; Bush, 5 Media interviews: Gore, 13; Bush, 10 Diners visited/unscheduled drop-bys: Gore, 1; Bush, 0 Vice Presidential Debate Watch: Gore, Orlando, Fla.; Bush, Cedar Rapids, Iowa Main message: Gore, tax cuts tailored for the middle class; Bush, ''tools for parents.'' Correction:  October 9, 2000, Monday  A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Friday about travel by the presidential candidates misstated the number of states visited by Vice President Al Gore the previous day. It was two, not one. A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Friday about travel by the presidential candidates misstated the number of states visited by Vice President Al Gore the previous day. It was two, not one.
 Because of an editing error, a phrase was omitted in some editions on Wednesday, altering the meaning, in a front-page article about the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. As written, the article said the confrontation took on greater significance because the contest was ''disturbingly close FOR BOTH CANDIDATES.'' Because of an editing error, a phrase was omitted in some editions on Wednesday, altering the meaning, in a front-page article about the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. As written, the article said the confrontation took on greater significance because the contest was ''disturbingly close FOR BOTH CANDIDATES.''
 Correction of Oct 4 front-page article about debate between Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush Because of an editing error, a phrase was omitted in some editions on Wednesday, altering the meaning, in a front-page article about the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. As written, the article said the confrontation took on greater significance because the contest was ''disturbingly close for both candidates.'' Because of an editing error, a phrase was omitted in some editions on Wednesday, altering the meaning, in a front-page article about the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. As written, the article said the confrontation took on greater significance because the contest was ''disturbingly close for both candidates.''
 Correction of Oct 5 article about number of people who watched televised debate between Vice Pres Gore and Gov George W Bush An article yesterday about the number of people who watched the televised debate on Tuesday between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas referred incorrectly in some copies to Ronald Reagan's opponent in 1980, when the largest audience for a presidential debate was recorded. He was Jimmy Carter; Walter F. Mondale ran for vice president that year, and for president four years later. An article yesterday about the number of people who watched the televised debate on Tuesday between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas referred incorrectly in some copies to Ronald Reagan's opponent in 1980, when the largest audience for a presidential debate was recorded. He was Jimmy Carter; Walter F. Mondale ran for vice president that year, and for president four years later.
