 Pres Clinton has taken intense and consuming interest in wife Hillary Clinton's campaign for Senate in New York, interposing himself on matters ranging from far-reaching strategy to custodial details that would seem to fall below presidential duties; no other race in nation--including one by Vice Pres Al Gore to succeed him--has commanded as much of his attention, and drawn as much of his time and concern; aides to Hillary Clinton say intensity of Clinton's involvement varies from day to day, but his influence is felt as much as anyone's at her headquarters, save that of candidate herself; Clinton and his aides play down what he is doing in New York, concerned partly that his involvement would suggest that Hillary Clinton's political skills are not up to demands of race; Clinton has attended dozens of fund-raisers, raising more than $5 million for wife's campaign; photo (M) No other race in the nation -- including the one by Al Gore to succeed him -- has commanded as much of Mr. Clinton's attention, and drawn as much of his time and concern, the president's friends say. While aides to Mrs. Clinton say the intensity of Mr. Clinton's involvement varies from day to day, depending on the pull of his other duties, his influence is felt as much as anyone's at her headquarters, save for that of the candidate herself.
 Gov George W Bush accuses Clinton administration of fighting illicit drugs 'without urgency' and 'without success' and proposes $2.7 billion in new grants in next five years to combat narcotics and provide drug treatment; Bush, campaigning in Marion, Ill, has kind words for Clinton's drug czar, retired Gen Barry R McCaffrey, but says drug war lacked presidential leadership; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush today accused the Clinton administration of fighting illicit drugs ''without urgency, without energy and without success'' and proposed $2.7 billion in new grants in the next five years to combat narcotics and provide drug treatment. For the third consecutive day, Mr. Bush tailored his campaign to focus on ways to help parents protect their children from influences outside the home. This time his focus was not Hollywood entertainment or sexually graphic and violent Internet sites, but illicit drugs. Gov. George W. Bush today accused the Clinton administration of fighting illicit drugs ''without urgency, without energy and without success'' and proposed $2.7 billion in new grants in the next five years to combat narcotics and provide drug treatment. For the third consecutive day, Mr. Bush tailored his campaign to focus on ways to help parents protect their children from influences outside the home. This time his focus was not Hollywood entertainment or sexually graphic and violent Internet sites, but illicit drugs. ''The job of protecting our children falls to us -- as parents,'' Mr. Bush said this morning in an address to several hundred supporters in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. ''Yet we want to know that our government is on our side. We want to live in a society that supports our values and upholds our authority. We need allies, not adversaries. Schools that form character. A decent public culture. And leaders who set a good example.'' After his speech, Mr. Bush flew to Illinois, en route to Florida, where the campaign has become highly competitive. He was greeted here by a crowd chanting, ''No more Gore.'' A warm-up speaker, State Representative Lee Daniels, attacked the character of President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, saying, ''We are sick and tired of the lies and the immorality and the exaggeration.'' Mr. Bush pushed his $1.3 trillion, 10-year tax-cut proposal, dismissing Mr. Gore's criticisms in the first presidential debate that the plan would give too much to the wealthy. ''He loves pitting people against people,'' he told the cheering crowd. ''You can't lead the nation by dividing people into groups.'' And repeating his debate dismissal of Mr. Gore's statistics, he said, ''No fuzzy math.'' But the centerpiece of his day was his stand against drugs. Mr. Bush vowed, if elected, to set a goal of a ''drug-free society.'' Mr. Bush acknowledged that teenage drug use had leveled off in recent years -- the Clinton administration said that teenage drug use had dropped over that period -- but he called drug policy ''one of the worst public policy failures of the 90's.'' Robert Weiner, the spokesman for General McCaffrey, said Mr. Bush was using ''ancient numbers.'' Mr. Weiner said that Mr. Clinton cut the drug office staff to 25 when he took office, as a part of a pledge to reduce the White House staff, but that he had since turned around, and the office now has 154 staff members. The Gore campaign charged in a statement that ''using Washington-fuzzy math, Bush tried to create the false impression that under Clinton-Gore the budget on the war on drugs had been slashed.'' To fight drugs, Mr. Bush proposed a series of grants, including $25 million for nonprofit groups that teach parents drug prevention, $25 million to groups that help small businesses fight drug use in the workplace, $350 million for community antidrug coalitions, and $100 million to expand a federal school antidrug program. Mr. Bush also said he would seek to reduce cultivation of coca in Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador and opium in Southwest Asia by spending $165 million over five years for alternative crop development in the regions. Bush Finds Validation on Putin CLEARWATER, Fla., Oct. 6 (By The New York Times) -- Gov. George W. Bush tonight seized on the events leading to the fall of Slobodan Milosevic in Yugoslavia as vindication of his statement during the presidential debate that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia should enter the diplomatic effort ''and convince Mr. Milosevic it's in his best interest and his country's best interest to leave office.'' In his response, Vice President Al Gore said that since Russia had not yet recognized Vohislav Kostunica as the winner of elections, ''I'm not sure that it's right for us to invite the president of Russia to mediate this dispute.'' With the Russians recognizing Mr. Kostunica today, Mr. Bush said it turned out that President Clinton had been in touch with Mr. Putin about the situation in Yugoslavia before the debate. News reports had mentioned conversations between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Putin before the debate, but Mr. Bush did not cite them until today. Mr. Bush said that when he suggested a Russian role, ''I felt it was the right position to take, and evidently President Clinton does too.''
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column says first presidential debate added zero to public's knowledge of either Al Gore or George W Bush; says Bush, who is fond of boasting that he is man of principle, not 'polling and focus groups,' was just as scripted as his opponent; expects most voters to skip next two exchanges of rehearsed sound bites between candidates, no matter how much they are hyped as 'make or break'; drawings (M) It would be ''make or break.'' It would be Kennedy-Nixon. Bush might drool. Gore might explode. At MSNBC, the breathless anchor predicted an audience ''as high as 90 million'' -- 10 million more than the record set by Reagan-Carter in '80. Democracy in action, baby! Well, that was Tuesday. By Wednesday it was clear that there hasn't been this much hype for a flop show since the Olympics. The first great debate didn't make or break anything except the viewer's patience. No Bush malapropisms. No over-the-top Gore attacks. No eloquence. Not only was this no Kennedy-Nixon, it wasn't even Bentsen-Quayle. And the audience? A mere 46 million, according to Nielsen. MSNBC's prediction, echoed everywhere, including The Times, was off by 50 percent. It would be ''make or break.'' It would be Kennedy-Nixon. Bush might drool. Gore might explode. At MSNBC, the breathless anchor predicted an audience ''as high as 90 million'' -- 10 million more than the record set by Reagan-Carter in '80. Democracy in action, baby! Well, that was Tuesday. By Wednesday it was clear that there hasn't been this much hype for a flop show since the Olympics. The first great debate didn't make or break anything except the viewer's patience. No Bush malapropisms. No over-the-top Gore attacks. No eloquence. Not only was this no Kennedy-Nixon, it wasn't even Bentsen-Quayle. And the audience? A mere 46 million, according to Nielsen. MSNBC's prediction, echoed everywhere, including The Times, was off by 50 percent. Still, I wouldn't have missed the debate for anything. Though it added exactly zero to our knowledge of either Al Gore or George W. Bush, it is a keeper for any time capsule of America 2000. At a cultural moment when many voters are forced constantly to make that hard choice between the Gap and Banana Republic, what is more apt than the spectacle of two princely boomers in identical outfits hypothesizing about how to spend a surplus of infinitely elastic trillions that both assume will last indefinitely? Now that branding and marketing are the national ideology -- and focus groups have a clout unmatched by labor unions or the religious right -- what could be more fitting than a debate in which not a single word is uttered that hasn't been pre-tested more rigorously than a McDonald's breakfast sandwich rollout? There was almost a Platonic perfection to the event's complete insulation from even the possibility of spontaneity, let alone the rude intrusion of present-day reality. You could watch all 90 minutes -- I'm not sure too many did -- and never know of bloodshed in the Middle East, or of a drug war run amok, or of an America populated by anyone other than the elderly and schoolchildren. The only comic relief was not Mr. Bush's lame jokes (by the same hand that wrote his wisecrack about David Letterman's open-heart surgery?) but both candidates' response to Jim Lehrer's question of how they might respond to an economic crisis. These are men who have never known bad times; neither had an answer. In this sense, too, the debate encapsulated a boom in which hardship is for many forgetful Americans only a theoretical possibility. Though Mr. Bush is fond of boasting that he's a man of principle, not ''polling and focus groups,'' he was just as scripted as his opponent -- no small feat. Mr. Gore's hit parade of tested buzz words and phrases -- ''middle class'' (10 mentions), ''wealthiest  1 percent'' (10), ''lockbox'' (7) -- was nearly matched by Mr. Bush's Pavlovian references to bringing ''Republicans and Democrats'' together (9) and ''fuzzy'' math (4). There were five times when the governor tried to prove his credentials as a leader by telling us what governors do, as in the ''governor is the chief executive officer and learns how to set agendas,'' and ''governors are oftentimes found on the front line of catastrophic situations.'' While Mr. Bush may spare us Mr. Gore's insufferable, schoolmarmish tone, his ''affable'' alternative is to speak to us as if we've all been held back together with him in grade school. Even more revealing was what polling and focus groups told the two men not to say. Mr. Bush won't use the word ''vouchers'' (though he's in favor of them) or ''impeachment'' (though he was presumably in favor of that too). In a real debate, surely the Texas governor would bring up the signature issue of his party for the past four years, and Mr. Gore's contemporaneous contention that Bill Clinton ''will be regarded in the history books as one of our greatest presidents.'' But no. Polling says that any criticism of an opponent will be perceived by Oprah-fied women as a ''personal attack,'' so even Mr. Bush's mention of the Buddhist temple arrived tentatively, late in the game. Mr. Gore is just as cautious. The Texas governor presents himself as a guardian of education and health care, but if you turn to his own campaign's official Web site, you'll find that his so-called rebuttals of embarrassing facts about his Texas -- 48th in per-capita spending for public health and 41st in per-capita spending on public education, first in uninsured children -- rely on fuzzy, often bogus comparisons and irrelevant math. But like the Clinton presidency, Mr. Bush's Texas record is off-limits because polling shows that an attack on an opponent's public record is now also considered ''personal.'' Since both men are so straitjacketed by self-censorship, how could the debate have possibly advanced the story line? It's the bland leading the bland. No wonder that the soporific vice-presidential sequel was widely overpraised by contrast -- the guys at least sounded like free-speaking human beings. (And give Dick Cheney bonus points for being the only man on either ticket not to wear a red tie and white shirt.) No wonder, too, that young voters ignore debates, skip elections and seek out an alternative culture where people say what they mean. A steady diet of Bush-Gore could drive anyone to Eminem. With the exception of Dan Rather -- who alone among TV heavies had the guts to pronounce the presidential face-off ''pedantic, dull, unimaginative, lackluster, humdrum, you pick the word'' -- the bloviators were as rigid in analyzing the debate as its combatants were in waging it. They focused on the twin plot lines that had been hyped in advance -- would Gore be too mean? would Bush commit a gaffe? -- and adjudicated the ''winner'' accordingly. (Since neither man committed the predicted sins, the verdicts were vague and divided.) Much as some at first missed the significance of Rick Lazio's paper-wielding stunt in his debate with Hillary Clinton, male pundits may have underrated the one moment in the Bush-Gore debate that might actually have moved some of those undecided suburban swing-state women voters said to hold the Electoral College's key. The moment came when Mr. Bush told a Gore-like whopper, fudging his previous stand in favor of trying to thwart the F.D.A.'s approval of RU-486, the abortion pill. Planned Parenthood polling shows that undecided Republican and independent women in states like Florida, Michigan and Missouri are disproportionately pro-choice and disproportionately likely to choose a candidate on that issue -- but that many of them don't yet know that Mr. Bush is both anti-choice and (despite his professed desire to make abortion ''more rare'') hostile to family planning. The Bush campaign has no doubt seen similar polling, as evidenced not only by its man's evasive debate answer but also by his decision a week earlier to announce his initial stand against RU-486 by press release rather than on camera. Otherwise, there was no discernible movement -- nor could there be. Mr. Bush remains a conventional anti-tax, small-government Republican with the hard-right edges sanded down; Mr. Gore remains a conventional Democratic believer in governmental activism, though with any traces of leftist grandiosity muted into earth tones. G.O.P.-lite, Democrat-lite: For the 95 percent of the country unwilling to go for Ralph Nader or Pat Buchanan, that is the choice, it always has been the choice, and it will still be the choice on Nov. 7. Dueling prescription-drug plans -- both likely to be folded into a compromise by a divided Congress anyway -- hardly alter the equation. And if character counts most, that, too, isn't changing. Mr. Bush is still an entitled, hail-fellow-well-met American blueblood who has coasted through life with the right name and its attendant connections. Mr. Gore is still the overcalculating child of the expediencies of Washington, where no principle is written in stone for longer than a polling cycle. The only hope for a real shake-up in this tale is a true October surprise that can't be greeted with pre-fab language -- perhaps a shocking F.B.I. resolution to the question of who mailed a Bush debate preparation tape to the Gore camp. (Please say it wasn't Wen Ho Lee.) Short of that, much of the audience will skip the next two exchanges of rehearsed sound bites between the candidates, no matter how much they are hyped as ''make or break.'' There's no need to settle for reruns now that there's a new season of ''The West Wing.''
 Labor Department reports unemployment fell to 3.9 percent in September, matching lowest level since 1970, and nation's employers added 204,000 new jobs; decrease in unemployment from 4.1 percent in August includes decline in black unemployment of full percentage point, to 7 percent, lowest level in history; rates for teenagers and adult women also registered significant declines; there is evidence in report that still robust economy is gradually slowing; Pres Clinton cites jobs report as new evidence of success of his economic policies; says Republicans' 'irresponsible tax plans' will undermine expansion; Labor Sec Alexis Herman argues that administration, far from expanding government, as Republicans have charged, has reduced federal payroll; Ari Fleischer, spokesman for Gov George W Bush, Republican candidate for president, says single biggest cause for decline in federal employment is cutbacks at the Pentagon; holds it gives wrongful impression to suggest that government is shrinking when it is Defense Department that is shrinking; average hourly pay of production workers in September rose only 3 cents, to $13.83; hourly wage has risen 3.6 percent over the last year; graphs; charts (M) The Republicans responded in kind. ''The single biggest cause for the decline in federal employment is cutbacks at the Pentagon,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican candidate for president. ''It gives a wrongful impression to the American people to suggest that the government is shrinking when it is the Defense Department that is shrinking.''
 Op-Ed column by Anthony Lewis says Gov George W Bush, in first presidential debate, laid down specific guidelines on what his foreign policy would be, portraying much more limited American role in world; says his definition pointedly excludes what has been most notable mission of US troops abroad in recent years: to prevent continuing genocide by Slobodan Milosevic's forces in Bosnia and Kosovo; says if United States had not intervened in Bosnia and later in Kosovo, Serbs would not now be in streets of Belgrade, celebrating Milosevic's downfall (M) Just 36 hours after the first presidential debate came those unforgettable scenes in Belgrade as the Serbs reclaimed their destiny. They underlined what may be the most important question in our election: Could George W. Bush as president deal wisely with the crises of the world? In the debate, Governor Bush laid down a number of specific guidelines on what his foreign policy would be. They portrayed a much more limited American role in the world. If they had been in effect in recent years, I do not believe those scenes in Belgrade would have taken place. Just 36 hours after the first presidential debate came those unforgettable scenes in Belgrade as the Serbs reclaimed their destiny. They underlined what may be the most important question in our election: Could George W. Bush as president deal wisely with the crises of the world? In the debate, Governor Bush laid down a number of specific guidelines on what his foreign policy would be. They portrayed a much more limited American role in the world. If they had been in effect in recent years, I do not believe those scenes in Belgrade would have taken place. Jim Lehrer asked Mr. Bush how he would go about deciding when it was in the national interest to use U.S. force abroad. He replied that it must be ''in our vital national interests,'' and he went on to define the phrase. That careful definition pointedly excluded what has been the most notable mission of U.S. troops abroad in recent years: to prevent continuing genocide by Slobodan Milosevic's forces in Bosnia and Kosovo -- places that have not been considered within America's ''vital national interests.'' Earlier this year Governor Bush said explicitly that ''we should not send our troops to stop ethnic cleansing and genocide in nations outside our strategic interest.'' Mr. Bush went on in the debate to indicate that our soldiers should be withdrawn from some places where they are now stationed. And he denounced what he called ''nation-building'' as a mission. From what places would Mr. Bush now withdraw U.S. forces? Someone really should ask him. Japan? Korea? The NATO countries? The Persian Gulf? Kosovo, where he in fact supported President Clinton's intervention? Bosnia? In fact, Bosnia is the example that shows how tragically mistaken the Bush policy would be. Mr. Milosevic sent his thugs into Bosnia in 1992 as part of his strategy to distract Serbs' attention by playing on nationalism -- a strategy that also took him into Croatia and Kosovo. Why should Governor Bush ignore those realities and lay down constricting principles for the American role in the world? There may be an element of loyalty to his father, who as president did nothing to stop Mr. Milosevic when he began his rampage; but I cannot believe that is the major reason. More likely it is an attempt to appeal to one particular slice of conservative opinion: a contemporary version of isolationism. But perhaps George W. Bush really believes that an American president should turn his eyes away from genocide in Europe. That is an alarming possibility, in a world dependent on American leadership.
 Profile of Lt Gov Rick Perry of Texas, 50-year-old Republican who will become governor if George W Bush wins presidential election; photo (M) Mr. Perry, a 50-year-old Republican, is also wearing something that might surprise quite a few people in Texas political circles: the calm demeanor of a man seemingly without worries despite good reason to have a few. He is not actually up for election this November, but his political future is hip-locked to the presidential fortunes of Gov. George W. Bush. If Mr. Bush wins, Mr. Perry will become governor and a likely front-runner in the 2002 gubernatorial election; a Bush defeat would leave him in that corner office with the prospects of a far tougher race in 2002. Mr. Perry, a 50-year-old Republican, is also wearing something that might surprise quite a few people in Texas political circles: the calm demeanor of a man seemingly without worries despite good reason to have a few. He is not actually up for election this November, but his political future is hip-locked to the presidential fortunes of Gov. George W. Bush. If Mr. Bush wins, Mr. Perry will become governor and a likely front-runner in the 2002 gubernatorial election; a Bush defeat would leave him in that corner office with the prospects of a far tougher race in 2002. Mr. Perry expresses complete confidence that Mr. Bush will win but in any case claims to lose no sleep dwelling on what happens if he doesn't. ''I don't pay a lot of attention to the 'what ifs,' '' he said, an outlook that places him in a tiny minority in Austin. But no matter what happens on Election Day, Mr. Perry will emerge as one of the most powerful figures in Texas, either as a new governor with a friend in the White House or as a powerful lieutenant governor with a lame-duck governor, since Mr. Bush has said he will not run again anyway. So, as Mr. Bush campaigns across the nation, Mr. Perry is in the midst of a different sort of campaign, quietly introducing himself to a Texas public that barely knows his name. In recent months, Mr. Perry has raised his political profile, though not always as intended. He technically runs the state during Mr. Bush's frequent absences, which means he has presided over executions, offered disaster relief after tornadoes hit Fort Worth and, most of all, kept the government running smoothly. He has also provided political help for Mr. Bush at key moments, offering public support when the governor was being pilloried for the execution of Gary Graham or when cost overruns were discovered in the state budget. Should Mr. Bush win in November, Mr. Perry promises, there will be few changes in governing philosophy here in Austin. He does say he will focus attention on higher education (Mr. Bush has concentrated on K through 12) and on improving state highways. And, in a year when capital punishment in Texas has come under heavy outside criticism, he rules out a moratorium on executions but suggests that lawmakers will address ''a number of issues'' including DNA testing and ensuring that indigent defendants receive competent legal counsel. Of course, any discussion of a Perry administration could be premature, particularly if Mr. Bush loses in November. The conventional political wisdom in Texas is that another Republican, the popular Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, will stay in Washington if Mr. Bush wins. But she is said to be considering a run for governor in 2002 if he loses. Politicians agree that she would be a formidable opponent for Mr. Perry in a Republican primary, possibly even a favorite. Mr. Perry calls her ''my friend'' and none too subtly counsels that she remain in Washington, in the best interests of the state. One thing is certain: Mr. Bush is far from the only person in Texas with his future on the line this Nov. 7.
 Analysis: Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, in setting out their agendas, are counting on nearly $4.6 trillion in projected federal budget surpluses; discussion of whether surplus will materialize as predicted, how much will really be available for new initiatives, and how long will it last; graph (M) In setting out their agendas, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are counting on nearly $4.6 trillion in projected federal budget surpluses. Given the zeal with which they are apportioning still-hypothetical money, it may be worth asking a few questions: In setting out their agendas, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are counting on nearly $4.6 trillion in projected federal budget surpluses. Given the zeal with which they are apportioning still-hypothetical money, it may be worth asking a few questions: Even if all the money comes in as expected, there are claims on it beyond those being made by the presidential candidates. The affordability of the plans offered by Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush will come into focus only as Congress and the next administration sort out their priorities. Mr. Gore has called for using nearly all of the Social Security surplus for debt reduction. Mr. Bush would use $1 trillion of it to help establish personal investment accounts within Social Security. Mr. Gore's tax and spending proposals come to $1.5 trillion. Mr. Bush's total $1.9 trillion.
 Report Questions Federal Surpluses  A Congressional Budget Office study on federal budget surpluses warned that although the fiscal outlook for the next decade or so is bright, and getting brighter, the picture over the longer run remains troubled. In setting their agendas, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are counting on nearly $4.6 trillion in projected surpluses. [A11.]
 Republicans unleash some of their strongest assaults yet on Vice Pres Al Gore's credibility, at two rallies held to celebrate Dick Cheney's performance in debate with Sen Joseph I Lieberman, meeting variously described as gentlemanly, mannerly and downright friendly; Gore campaign responds by saying Cheney is back on the attack because he lost debate on the issues (M) The civility was short-lived. At two rallies today celebrating Dick Cheney's performance in a debate with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman that was variously described as gentlemanly, mannerly and downright friendly, Republicans unleashed some of their strongest assaults yet on Vice President Al Gore's credibility. Mr. Cheney, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, said that Mr. Gore's contention that his tax proposal helps working families is ''hogwash,'' accused his campaign of ''double talk'' on the state of the military and said that Mr. Gore ''seems to have a compulsion to embellish.'' The civility was short-lived. At two rallies today celebrating Dick Cheney's performance in a debate with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman that was variously described as gentlemanly, mannerly and downright friendly, Republicans unleashed some of their strongest assaults yet on Vice President Al Gore's credibility. Mr. Cheney, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, said that Mr. Gore's contention that his tax proposal helps working families is ''hogwash,'' accused his campaign of ''double talk'' on the state of the military and said that Mr. Gore ''seems to have a compulsion to embellish.'' Mr. Cheney's wife, Lynne, was cheered when she told rallies here and in Shreveport, La., that she planned to send Mr. Gore an autographed copy of her book ''Telling the Truth.'' And former Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming, who campaigned with Mr. Cheney today, charged that Mr. Gore's decision to break with his party and support the resolution in favor of the gulf war -- which the vice president cites as an example of his independence of mind and principled approach to governing -- was motivated not by patriotism but by a desire to get publicity. Mr. Simpson called Mr. Gore the ''provocative prevaricator of our times.'' The Gore campaign said the charges were groundless. ''Dick Cheney is back on the attack because they lost the debate on the issues,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a Gore campaign spokesman. ''When the facts are inconvenient for the Bush campaign, they resort to these kinds of attacks.'' From the first event in the morning, Mr. Cheney, Mrs. Cheney and Mr. Simpson -- who was Wyoming's senator when Mr. Cheney was the state's lone congressman -- assailed Mr. Gore's credibility and character. Mr. Simpson leveled what might be the most damaging charge: that in 1991 Mr. Gore had sold his vote supporting the gulf war to get more time on television. Mr. Simpson charged -- as former Senator Bob Dole did in the 1992 election -- that Mr. Gore negotiated with both Democrats and Republicans to see who would give him more speaking time in the debate on the floor of the Senate before casting his vote. ''He had simply decided to support the side that gave him the most time at prime time,'' Mr. Simpson said. Mr. Hattaway denied the charge. ''Al Gore broke with his own party and voted to support the gulf war because it was the right thing to do,'' he said. ''Simpson's claim is absolutely false and obviously politically motivated.'' Appropriating a line that the Bush campaign uses against Mr. Gore, Mr. Hattaway said, ''Bush's supporters will obviously say anything to get him elected.''
 For 90 minutes, America put its best foot forward. Joseph I. Lieberman and Dick Cheney allowed me to forget about Al Gore and George W. Bush. Instead of watching a split-screen debate filled with sighs, head-shaking, scowls and blank stares, I watched an honorable exchange on the issues.
 Gentility of Debate Hid Weapons Under the Table  Strategists on both sides said the decision to hold to a more courtly tone in the vice-presidential debate was made on the fly, by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman and Dick Cheney, though each had been prepared to respond if the other attacked. While some of the 28.5 million television viewers confessed to being slightly bored with a thoughtful, informative debate free of rancor and with minimal posturing, others said they were left feeling braced. But the debate did not appear to have changed many minds, nor did strategists think it would influence the two remaining debates between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Bush's Plan to Fight Drugs  Gov. George W. Bush accused the Clinton administration of fighting illicit drugs ''without urgency, without energy and without success'' and proposed $2.7 billion in grants to groups and schools to combat narcotics and provide treatment.
 The ''other two'' are Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, their parties' presidential nominees, who clashed in the campaign's first debate in Boston on Tuesday night, and Mrs. Obando was hardly alone in thinking that the leading men had been outclassed by their running mates. To many viewers, the easy cordiality of Mr. Cheney, the former defense secretary, and Mr. Lieberman, the Connecticut senator, reflected poorly on the combative tone of the first presidential debate, particularly on Mr. Gore's exaggerated diction and aggressive bids to have the last word. Some found that Mr. Cheney's authoritative answers, particularly on foreign policy and national security, underscored the thinness of Mr. Bush's responses in those areas. After watching Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Cheney, ''I wish they were running for president more than Al Gore and George Bush,'' said Kathryn White, 36, a Web designer in Athens, Ga. ''They were seasoned pros above all the mudslinging.'' It need not have been so. In keeping with the traditional role of the No. 2 candidate, the vice-presidential nominees have made many of their campaigns' strongest attacks -- and Mr. Cheney resumed doing so yesterday. Mr. Cheney, in particular, has been on the offensive for a month, questioning the Democrats' policies and Mr. Gore's character. Strategists on each side said they were ready for -- even half-expected -- a debate nearly as rough as the one between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, who will face each other twice more. The decision to hold to a more courtly tone, they said, was made on the fly, by the candidates themselves. An aide to Mr. Cheney said the decision to keep the debate cordial and issue-oriented was the way Mr. Cheney wanted to turn the discussion. The Bush campaign was also pleased with the result, which Cheney aides said they viewed as beneficial in the long run because they expected that it played well with independents and swing voters who were tired of finger-pointing and name-calling. ''He had a number of salvos ready if he needed them,'' an aide said, explaining that Mr. Cheney had been prepared to question Mr. Gore's character and credibility, and positions Mr. Lieberman had changed after joining the ticket. It is not as if Mr. Cheney is shy about going on the attack. For several weeks, he has aimed an average of at least one barb a day at Mr. Gore, accusing him of ''making things up out of whole cloth,'' of  ''embellishing,'' of proposing a ''Swiss cheese budget.'' Even as he was being lauded for his gentlemanly conduct yesterday, he issued some of his sharpest criticisms yet. Aides said Mr. Cheney preferred to use his time in the debate laying out the Bush campaign's proposals on taxes, Social Security and education. His one attack on Mr. Lieberman, in response to a pointed question from Mr. Shaw, was almost apologetic, prefaced with a disclaimer: ''Boy, we've been trying very hard to keep this on a high plain, Bernie.'' William M. Daley, chairman of the Gore campaign, said the Republicans decided not to go on the offensive after seeing polls showing that most people believed Mr. Gore won the debate in Boston. ''Gore seems to talk down to people, and to hammer a point home so many times that it's a little obnoxious,'' Mr. Wayne said. ''And a lot of Bush's answers were light. He was good at name-calling about Gore's numbers, but he didn't really rebut them or get beyond general themes.''
 State of Florida is becoming increasingly central to strategy that Vice Pres Al ore's campaign believes could give him landslide victory in November; polls have him and Gov George W Bush in statistical dead heat there; because Bush's brother, Jeb, is governor of Florida, and leader of strong political machine there, no one is counting Republicans out; but Gore clearly sees opening in Florida that could catapult him to White House; photo (M) The ''magic place'' that Vice President Al Gore was talking about today was Walt Disney World, but in political terms, it could easily have been the state of Florida, which is becoming increasingly central to a strategy that his campaign believes could give him a landslide victory in November. The polls have Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in a statistical dead heat here, just as they have been in national race. And with Mr. Bush's brother Jeb as the governor and leader of a strong political machine here, no one is counting the Republicans out. But the Gore campaign is making increasing investments here with the candidate's time and the campaign's money, two of the strongest indications that Mr. Gore perceives an opening in Florida that could catapult him to the White House. The ''magic place'' that Vice President Al Gore was talking about today was Walt Disney World, but in political terms, it could easily have been the state of Florida, which is becoming increasingly central to a strategy that his campaign believes could give him a landslide victory in November. The polls have Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in a statistical dead heat here, just as they have been in national race. And with Mr. Bush's brother Jeb as the governor and leader of a strong political machine here, no one is counting the Republicans out. But the Gore campaign is making increasing investments here with the candidate's time and the campaign's money, two of the strongest indications that Mr. Gore perceives an opening in Florida that could catapult him to the White House. The conventional wisdom is that Mr. Gore can win the election without Florida but that Mr. Bush cannot. Of the populous states, Mr. Gore appears to have California and New York in his pocket, and probably Pennsylvania and Illinois. Mr. Bush can count on Texas, but beyond that, Ohio is the next-biggest state where he is slightly ahead, and that lead appears tenuous. Without Florida, Mr. Bush has a hard time gathering enough electoral votes to put him over the top. With Florida, Mr. Gore could win in an electoral landslide. ''This state is the key to the election, and central Florida is the key to this state,'' Mr. Gore declared at an outdoor rally today at the Walt Disney Amphitheater beside placid Lake Eola. His campaign is not counting vacations but campaign events. Since the Democratic National Convention in mid-August, Mr. Gore has visited Florida 11 times. That compares with 13 times for George Bush, who plans to return tomorrow, and is scheduled to ride across the central part of the state in a bus. Mr. Gore spent four days in Florida just last week, when he prepared for the first presidential debate. And he is planning to return in a couple of days for another four-day preparation session for the next debate, scheduled for Wednesday in North Carolina. At the party convention, he engineered the roll call of states so that Florida could officially give him the nomination. And in what was perceived as a move to help motivate voters for Mr. Gore, President Clinton flew to Florida to watch the Gore debate. Mr. Gore dropped in last night from Michigan just to watch the debate between the vice-presidential candidates in a symbolic gesture to show that Florida was important. At his rally today, Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper, were joined by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, his running mate, and his wife, Hadassah. The show of force was another overt play for Florida, and an effort to activate Democratic voters. Mr. Gore's selection of Mr. Lieberman, the first Jew on a national ticket, has played particularly well with Florida's large Jewish population, and Mr. Lieberman appeared thrilled today to be here with the Gores. Mr. Gore said today in an interview with WTVT of Tampa that of the next four weeks until the election, he expected to spend a total of about one week in Florida, some of it for debate preparation. Ms. MacManus said that she believed that Mr. Gore's multiple visits here were intended to send a message more broadly to older Americans across the country. Polls here and nationally give Mr. Gore a decided edge with voters older than 65. In Florida, one in three voters is over 65, and Mr. Gore highlighted several subjects of interest to older voters today. For one thing, he said that Mr. Bush would bankrupt Social Security. ''We give you a generous incentive to save and invest, not at the expense of Social Security but on top of Social Security, so that you can set aside money without putting at risk the basic safety net that Social Security represents,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Bush's plan, he said, ''would cause the bankruptcy of Social Security in a single generation.'' Both presidential campaigns are advertising heavily here, and with the competition keen for some state and local races, watching television here is like watching one long nonstop political commercial. The Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee spent more than $6.2 million on commercials here between June 1 and Sept. 20, while the Gore campaign and the Democratic National Committee have spent about half that. Ms. MacManus, for one, said that the key for Mr. Gore would be a strong turnout among blacks, who accounted for 10 percent of the vote in the 1996 presidential election. Hispanics accounted for about 12 percent of that vote, according to polls of people as they left the voting booth, and this year Hispanic voters are leaning toward Mr. Bush. That makes the black vote even more important this year. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has already devoted $400,000 for get-out-the-vote efforts in Florida, and Gore aides say more efforts will be made. Today's visit was a nod to the growing number of Hispanics who have settled in east-central Florida. And at his rally here, Mr. Gore took advantage of a perk of incumbency by referring to recent flood damage in Miami and the federal government's disaster aid. At a predebate party on Thursday night in Orlando, Mr. Gore declared:  ''This state of Florida will pick the next president of the United States. This state of Florida will be decisive in this election. This state of Florida is the one that will have such a powerful voice.'' ''I truly believe that this is such an important moment in American history with such a great opportunity to do the right thing,'' Mr. Gore said at the party.
 The lowest-rated vice-presidential debate on record was the Oct. 9, 1996, confrontation between Vice President Al Gore and Jack Kemp. It was watched by 26.6 million people. The lowest-rated vice-presidential debate on record was the Oct. 9, 1996, confrontation between Vice President Al Gore and Jack Kemp. It was watched by 26.6 million people. The Oct. 11, 1984, debate between Geraldine A. Ferraro and Vice President George Bush was the highest-rated vice-presidential debate on record. It was watched by 56.7 million people.
 GORE UPSTAGED  Vice President Al Gore learned something about scene-stealing last night in New York. As he talked to an audience of his in-laws' friends in Greenwich Village, his grandson, Wyatt, toddled across the stage, rolled over on his back, clapped his hands and otherwise made complete hay of the evening. ''I'm melting,'' the vice president said. laughing, as the boy, who is 15 months old, rolled over at Mr. Gore's feet. The evening began with the private reception by David and Lisa Schiff, the parents of Drew Schiff, Mr. Gore's son-in-law, at the Village home of Jennifer Bartlett, an artist and longtime Schiff family friend. Also on hand was Mr. Gore's mother, Pauline, visiting from Tennessee. She was celebrating her 88th birthday but was unable to descend the stairs where the 80 people were sitting in chairs. So her son carried her a cake, ablaze with candles, up the winding staircase. UNION LEADERS TAKE TO THE ROAD  The A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, John J. Sweeney, and more than a dozen other union leaders are planning a series of bus tours around the Midwest and Northwest to whip up support for Vice President Al Gore. When the buses carrying Mr. Sweeney, Richard Trumka, the secretary treasurer of the labor federation, and Linda Chavez-Thompson, its executive secretary, arrive in towns there will be rallies, worksite leafleting, phone banks and town meetings.  The tours will go to Illinois, Kentucky, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Washington, West Virginia and Wisconsin. Length of the Official Day: Gore, 18 hours; Bush 11 hours  States Visited: Gore, 3; Bush, 3  Towns and Cities Visited: Gore, 3; Bush, 3  Events: Gore, 2; Bush, 3  Interviews : Gore, 10; Bush, 10  Diners visited/unscheduled drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush, 0  Main message: Gore, middle-class tax cuts to help families save for retirement; Bush, empowering parents, ''tools for parents'' and renewing the fight against drug abuse.
