 Both parties, of course, say they support lowering the drug costs for older people, but it was the Democrats who were first to recognize the telegenic appeal of mixing pills and politics. Democratic Party officials say it was no coincidence that they made Vice President Al Gore's support for the drug benefit the subject of his campaign's first commercial. Mr. Schweitzer has run several drug commercials, including the one in which he compares the prices with those of pet medicines. It was reminiscent of a statement by Mr. Gore that his mother-in-law paid three times as much for an arthritis medicine as he did for the drug for his dog. (The Gore campaign later acknowledged the anecdote was based on a Congressional study.) Still, Mr. Schweitzer's advertisements have boosted his poll numbers, his advisers say, and forced the opposition to respond. In a new advertisement, the state Republican Party asserts that Mr. Schweitzer ''backs Al Gore's big government health care agenda,'' a plan it calls ''bad medicine for Montana.''
 Stakes will be far greater than anticipated in presidential debate because contest is so excruciatingly tight; operatives for Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush suspend many important strategic decisions, at least until day after first debate, so they can gauge whether fundamental dynamics of contest have shifted; these decisions include where to buy advertising and where, precisely, candidates should be deployed in final weeks of campaign; first debate will be held on Oct 3 in Boston, followed week later with debate in Winston-Salem, NC, then one in St Louis week after that; photo (M) When Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore appear side by side in Boston on Tuesday before the largest single television audience of the presidential campaign, officials in both camps say, the stakes will be far greater than they had anticipated because the contest is so excruciatingly tight. The debate has emerged as so consequential, in fact, that operatives for Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush said they had suspended many important strategic decisions, at least until Wednesday, so they could gauge whether the fundamental dynamics of the contest have been shifted. Those decisions include where to buy advertising and where, precisely, the candidates should be deployed in the final weeks of the campaign. When Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore appear side by side in Boston on Tuesday before the largest single television audience of the presidential campaign, officials in both camps say, the stakes will be far greater than they had anticipated because the contest is so excruciatingly tight. The debate has emerged as so consequential, in fact, that operatives for Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush said they had suspended many important strategic decisions, at least until Wednesday, so they could gauge whether the fundamental dynamics of the contest have been shifted. Those decisions include where to buy advertising and where, precisely, the candidates should be deployed in the final weeks of the campaign. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, played down the debates a few weeks back, saying they tended only to reinforce voters' support of one candidate or another. Mark Fabiani, a strategist for Mr. Gore, put it this way: ''No question it's a huge event. It's a really, really important event. It's a time when people really tune in to who you are and what you've done.'' Officials involved in the negotiations said that they had not been particularly contentious, but that the Gore representatives -- who had more collective background in debate talks -- were more aggressive in making demands, though not all were met.''A lot of this was head-fake stuff,'' said a person involved in the talks. The Gore campaign had one victory before the negotiations began:  the Bush organization had abandoned its objections to having all three events sponsored by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. (The commission will also sponsor the vice-presidential debate in Danville, Ky., on Thursday.) Bush representatives had also opposed Boston as the site of the first debate. For example, the Gore negotiators pressed, unsuccessfully, for the candidates to be able to wear lapel microphones in the first debate, presumably so the vice president could leave his lectern and prowl the stage, as he sometimes did in debates in the primaries. Officials involved in the discussions said backers of Mr. Bush had asked that the height of his lectern be lowered, apparently because he is slightly shorter than Mr. Gore and did not want to appear diminished in his presence. But both lecterns will stand 48 inches high. Mr. Bush's representatives prevailed, however, in altering the format so that there will be more time than in the past for give and take on a single topic. Beyond the polls showing a see-saw contest in which Mr. Gore seems slightly up one day and Mr. Bush the next, another reason both camps are so focused on the debates might be that they are well aware that the impact of television seems particularly strong in this election. Many Democrats and Republicans credit Mr. Gore's speech at the Democratic convention -- even the kiss he gave his wife, Tipper -- as propelling Mr. Gore in the polls. Yet for all those millions, officials in both campaigns say Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore will focus their messages on the narrow swath of swing voters who are expected to decide the election. For the Bush campaign, officials said, the goal is to demonstrate to those wavering voters that the Texas governor has a command of the issues and a presidential bearing. They also intend to assure women and undecided voters that he is no uncompromising conservative. Mr. Rove said the best way for the governor to reassure the public is ''to let the American people know what his agenda is, what he would do as president, what his philosophy is and to contrast it with Gore whenever possible.'' The pressure is particularly intense for Mr. Bush because he needs to address lingering concerns that he lacks the capacity to be president. For the Gore campaign, the aim is to underscore Mr. Gore's grasp of the issues by offering many specifics, as he did in his speech at the Democratic convention. His aides said he was aiming his appeals at working-class families by presenting himself as someone who will fight for them. ''This is our opportunity to talk in some specificity and detail about our ideas and our plans for the country,'' said Carter Eskew, a veteran strategist for Mr. Gore. Mr. Gore is a far more accomplished debater than Mr. Bush, having dispatched politicians ranging from Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries this year to Jack Kemp in the vice-presidential debates in 1996 to Ross Perot before that. That does not mean it will be a lopsided matchup. Mr. Bush is less versed in the issues, but his advisers said his personality might shine through -- and his affable, everyday-guy appeal might score points with voters. Mr. Bush also benefits from low expectations. If he makes it through Tuesday night without a discernible gaffe or tangled syntax, the pundits -- and more importantly, the voters -- could pronounce him the victor. ''It's nearly impossible to win a debate but it is possible to lose one,'' said Nelson Polsby, a political scientist at the University of California at Berkeley. ''Therefore, whoever is perceived going in as having the higher level of expectations is the one that's most at risk. I would say that's Gore.'' And the Bush campaign was trying mightily to keep the expectations high for the vice president. ''He is one of the most practiced debaters in American politics,'' said Karen Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. ''He's debated 30 or 40 times over the last 12 years.'' But for the candidates at least, the pressure will be intense. Walter F. Mondale, Gerald R. Ford, Michael S. Dukakis and former President George Bush have all told interviewers that their stumbles in debates -- or the nimbleness of their opponent -- might have cost them the White House. ''The debates have been elevated to high drama in this country and particularly in this election year,'' said former Representative Bill Paxon, an adviser to Mr. Bush. ''This election is just about as close as you can have it.''
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on sugary public romantic moments between Al and Tipper Gore, and inevitable contrast with rocky marriage of Bill and Hillary Clinton; adds that only couple that cannot campaign as couple this year is couple that sparked current obsession with couplehood (M) Al Gore was appearing with his wife on Larry King's show Thursday, leaning closer and closer to her. Al Gore was appearing with his wife on Larry King's show Thursday, leaning closer and closer to her. Mr. King asked the Gores if, in their White House, they would invite contributors for sleepovers, as Hillary Clinton has to underwrite her New York Senate campaign. The Clintons' Humpty-Dumpty relationship has shaped the 2000 race. Husbands and wives strive to prove how incredibly happy -- and faithful -- they are. Tipper Gore, Laura Bush, Hadassah Lieberman, Lynne Cheney, Pat Lazio -- these women are everywhere playing political footsie with their guys. Pat chats proudly about cleaning the family nest, Tipper talks up Al's hunkiness, and Hadassah introduces her husband as ''the love of my life'' and ''my Joey.''
 Gov George W Bush tells annual conference of Christian Coalition that he would sign law to ban late-term abortion, then adds that 'good people disagree' on abortion issue; fact that Bush does not ratchet up his oratory for audience that surely would have appreciated it reflects delicacy of his dance with religious conservatives; they are important part of his base, but to win presidency, Bush must appeal to moderate Republicans and independents, many of whom support abortion rights (M) Gov. George W. Bush told an annual conference of the Christian Coalition today that the country needed to place more value on ''the life of the unborn'' and that he would sign a law to ban late-term abortions. But Mr. Bush added that ''good people disagree'' on the abortion issue, and he did not mention the Food and Drug Administration's decision this week to approve the use of the abortion-inducing drug mifepristone, which was opposed by many conservative Christians. Gov. George W. Bush told an annual conference of the Christian Coalition today that the country needed to place more value on ''the life of the unborn'' and that he would sign a law to ban late-term abortions. But Mr. Bush added that ''good people disagree'' on the abortion issue, and he did not mention the Food and Drug Administration's decision this week to approve the use of the abortion-inducing drug mifepristone, which was opposed by many conservative Christians. ''Should I be elected, I will lead our nation toward a culture that values life -- the life of the elderly and the sick, the life of the young and the life of the unborn,'' Mr. Bush said in videotaped remarks that were played tonight at the Christian Coalition's conference in Washington. Mr. Bush was at his ranch near Waco. ''I know good people disagree on this issue, but surely we can agree on ways to value life by promoting adoption and parental notification,'' Mr. Bush continued. ''And when Congress sends me a bill against partial-birth abortion, I will sign it into law.'' It was the same tempered language that Mr. Bush typically uses to discuss abortion, which he opposes except in cases of rape, incest or risk to a pregnant woman's life. He has said that he would support a constitutional amendment to outlaw abortion if it included those exceptions. But the fact that he did not ratchet up his oratory for an audience that surely would have appreciated it seemed to reflect the delicacy of his dance with religious conservatives. They are an important part of his  base, but to win the presidency, Mr. Bush must appeal to moderate Republicans and independents, many of whom support abortion rights. Although his father, President George Bush, addressed the group in 1992 and Bob Dole did so in 1996, the Bush campaign had said earlier that Mr. Bush had no plans to speak to the conference. Aides said he would be busy with debate preparations. But after some Christian conservatives criticized that decision and warned that Mr. Bush should not take religious conservatives for granted, the campaign announced that Mr. Bush would videotape remarks to be played to the group. Governor Bush told the audience: ''I need your help. This may be the closest election in 40 years. That means every day will count. Every vote will count.''
 Officials with Bush campaign say they do not believe employee of campaign's advertising firm was involved in sending confidential debate-preparation materials to Gore campaign, even though employee, Yvette Lozano, has drawn attention of FBI investigators; security videotape reveals that Lozano took package to post office from which campaign materials were apparently sent; Lozano claims package contained clothing her boss, Mark McKinnon, was returning to store, and McKinnon says same thing; McKinnon and Lozano are with Maverick Media; photo (M) Officials with the Bush campaign said today that they did not believe that an employee of the campaign's advertising firm, who has drawn the attention of F.B.I. investigators, was involved in sending confidential debate-preparation materials to the Gore campaign. The Bush campaign officials' defense of Yvette Lozano, an administrative assistant at the firm, Maverick Media, came as law enforcement officials said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had broadened its inquiry into the matter over the last several days and that investigators were expanding the number of people at whom they were taking a close look. Officials with the Bush campaign said today that they did not believe that an employee of the campaign's advertising firm, who has drawn the attention of F.B.I. investigators, was involved in sending confidential debate-preparation materials to the Gore campaign. The Bush campaign officials' defense of Yvette Lozano, an administrative assistant at the firm, Maverick Media, came as law enforcement officials said that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had broadened its inquiry into the matter over the last several days and that investigators were expanding the number of people at whom they were taking a close look. The bureau's investigation concerns an Express Mail package received on Sept. 13 by a former congressman, Thomas Downey, who was helping Mr. Gore prepare for the presidential debates. It contained a videotape of one of Gov. George W. Bush's debate practice sessions and a thick briefing book. And ever since, the matter has been the subject of considerable intrigue and suspicion, involving charges and countercharges. Several  Bush advisers said the materials may have been stolen from the Austin offices of Maverick Media, which they said were not as secure as their campaign headquarters and which were next to a film editing facility used by Republicans and Democrats. They also sought to focus attention on the Gore campaign's suspension last week of a low-level employee who had bragged to a friend about having a mole in the Bush camp. Gore aides said that the employee had been kidding. Democrats in Texas, meanwhile, speculated that the sending of the materials was a dirty trick by the Bush campaign to embarrass the Gore campaign. Several Bush advisers said today that they did not understand the logic of that. Ms. Hughes was with Mr. Bush at his ranch near Waco to help him prepare for his first debate with Vice President Al Gore on Tuesday night in Boston. Mr. Bush said, ''I'm confident that no one who supports my candidacy would have mailed the tape.'' According to law enforcement officials and several of Mr. Bush's aides, F.B.I. investigators have visited Maverick Media several times and talked to almost all of the employees and volunteers there, some of whom, like Mr. McKinnon, have worked for Democrats in the past. Several Bush advisers said today that Mr. McKinnon, like Ms. Lozano, had been fingerprinted, but that no one else had. Mr. McKinnon said that both he and Ms. Lozano had offered to take polygraph tests, but that the F.B.I. had not taken them up on it. An official with the Bush campaign said today that two other people who work for Mr. McKinnon at Maverick Media had also come under close scrutiny, and law enforcement officials said they would be re-interviewing many of the people at Maverick over the next few days. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE INQUIRY  Correction:  October 2, 2000, Monday  A credit yesterday for a picture of Mark McKinnon, a media adviser with the Bush campaign, misspelled the photographer's surname in some copies. He is Mathew Sturtevant, not Sturevant. A credit yesterday for a picture of Mark McKinnon, a media adviser with the Bush campaign, misspelled the photographer's surname in some copies. He is Mathew Sturtevant, not Sturevant.
 Vice President Al Gore visited Mr. Baranello in his Centereach law office last spring to seek his support. And he was among the first New Yorkers that Hillary Rodham Clinton called when she began her bid to become a United States Senator.
 Vice Pres Al Gore is assembling 'debate camp' of 13 ordinary citizens he has met along campaign trail to help him prepare for presidential debates; Gore will also spend time with his professional campaign consultants, including Carter Eskew, Bob Shrum, Stanley Greenberg, Ted Devine and William M Daley, his campaign chairman; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore met with a couple of his hand-picked ''real people'' today to begin preparing for Tuesday's debate with Gov. George W. Bush in Boston -- what he called, in President Clinton's phrase, a ''job interview'' with the American people. In a novel approach, Mr. Gore is assembling a ''debate camp'' of 13 ordinary citizens he has met along the campaign trail to help him prepare for the debates. All 13 were to gather here later tonight. Vice President Al Gore met with a couple of his hand-picked ''real people'' today to begin preparing for Tuesday's debate with Gov. George W. Bush in Boston -- what he called, in President Clinton's phrase, a ''job interview'' with the American people. In a novel approach, Mr. Gore is assembling a ''debate camp'' of 13 ordinary citizens he has met along the campaign trail to help him prepare for the debates. All 13 were to gather here later tonight. ''The average working person in this country represents the person who I'm really fighting for in this election,'' Mr. Gore said. ''You know, I see a debate kind of like a job interview. And so I want to spend my time preparing for the debate with the people who are representative of the ones who are going to be doing the hiring.'' One of those greeting him was Donald Jalbert, 43, a school principal from Lewiston, Me. Mr. Jalbert said that the Gore campaign had provided him with an inch-thick packet of issues papers to study. But, he said, he thought Mr. Gore was looking for ''something a little different.'' He said Mr. Gore ''has to try to attract the swing voters, and needs to figure out how to say some of these things they've been talking about a little differently.'' For his part, Mr. Gore told reporters on Air Force Two, ''When I get to places in the preparation where I have a question about how to proceed, I want to use them as a sounding board.'' Mr. Gore will also be spending time with his professional campaign consultants, including Carter Eskew, Bob Shrum, Stanley Greenberg, Tad Devine and William M. Daley, his campaign chairman. Florida is also a staging ground with a purpose -- the presidential race is dead even here and if Mr. Gore can win it, his advisers believe he can win the election. But Mr. Gore was playing down the competitive aspects of the debates, saying he was just looking for a way of communicating with voters. Reporters noticed that Mr. Gore's fingernails were bitten down to the quick. Asked if he bit his nails, he replied, ''Uh, yeah, sometimes.''
 There was Laura Bush -- whose husband once promised that she would never have to deliver a political speech -- giving the first major address at the Republican National Convention. There was the little matter of that kiss Vice President Al Gore planted on his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic convention. Their daughter Karenna Gore Schiff has become a close adviser to Mr. Gore. And the story of Hadassah Lieberman's journey from the daughter of Holocaust survivors to the wife of the Democratic vice-presidential nominee has come up many times on the campaign trail. There was Laura Bush -- whose husband once promised that she would never have to deliver a political speech -- giving the first major address at the Republican National Convention. There was the little matter of that kiss Vice President Al Gore planted on his wife, Tipper, at the Democratic convention. Their daughter Karenna Gore Schiff has become a close adviser to Mr. Gore. And the story of Hadassah Lieberman's journey from the daughter of Holocaust survivors to the wife of the Democratic vice-presidential nominee has come up many times on the campaign trail. Crowds seem to remember Mrs. Cheney best for her days as the voice from the right on CNN's ''Crossfire Sunday,'' if not her books or her tenure as head of the National Endowment for the Humanities in the Reagan and Bush administrations. Mr. Cheney says his wife is one of his closest advisers. Even before he was tapped to run for vice president, Mrs. Cheney, a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, gave advice to Gov. George W. Bush on education policy in Texas and for his presidential campaign. It is an issue she has strong feelings about. In her book ''Telling the Truth'' (Simon & Schuster, 1995), she laments that political correctness and relativism have corrupted the nation's culture and educational institutions. All this has given Mrs. Cheney an unusually high profile for a would-be second lady. This month, she testified before Congress, taking the entertainment industry to task after a Federal Trade Commission report found that the industry regularly marketed adult-rated materials to children and teenagers. The following Sunday, she appeared on three morning talk shows -- hardly usual for the wife of a vice-presidential candidate -- talking more about the entertainment industry and criticizing Mr. Gore for attending a fund-raiser with media moguls where, she said, ''X-rated jokes'' were told. And this week, the campaign sent Mrs. Cheney on what for it has become the politically delicate task of addressing the annual convention of the Christian Coalition in Washington.
 Outside the leafy walls of universities, however, the degree has become known as a golden passport, a credential that is nearly a requirement for joining upper management. The current chief executives of General Motors, Goldman Sachs, Hewlett-Packard, I.B.M., Merck and Nike, for instance, all hold the passport -- as does, for the first time this year, a major-party nominee for president, George W. Bush. The M.B.A., its many supporters say, gives people a business grounding that they would otherwise need years to learn.
 Nothing is more notable in modern American campaign oratory than its careful, gray, timid quality. Can anyone imagine any candidate now essaying such a robustly masculine paragraph as the one quoted above? George W. Bush is not about to invoke ''the fate of many nations,'' for fear that he may be asked to name some of them. One doubts that Al Gore would risk using the word ''cripple,'' even as a verb. (Some time back, his boss, careless of the dictionary, actually apologized to Welsh-Americans for saying that Congress was ''welching'' on its responsibilities.) Neither Vice President Gore nor Governor Bush seem able, in their carefully scripted utterances, to say anything that has the slightest ping of personality. Even as ''just folks,'' both men stiffen up. Their joviality, in armchair schmoozes with Jay Leno or Oprah Winfrey, is that of a pair of Toby jugs. That onstage kiss at the Democratic Convention persuaded a lot of people that Honest Al has a blood temperature of more than an ecologically correct 68 degrees Fahrenheit. But for this viewer, it looked as engineered as the torch-lighting ceremony in Sydney.
 Theodore M Brody letter points out that if Sen Joseph Lieberman dropped out of Senate race in Connecticut and he and Al Gore lose presidential election, state and nation would be deprived of outstanding voice (S) You indicate (Topics of the Times, Sept. 27) that Joseph I. Lieberman is running simultaneously for the vice presidency and the Senate based on self-interest. You describe the scenario should he and Al Gore win the election, emphasizing that Mr. Lieberman's decision to run for both positions fails to ''serve democracy or his Connecticut constituents well.'' You indicate (Topics of the Times, Sept. 27) that Joseph I. Lieberman is running simultaneously for the vice presidency and the Senate based on self-interest. You describe the scenario should he and Al Gore win the election, emphasizing that Mr. Lieberman's decision to run for both positions fails to ''serve democracy or his Connecticut constituents well.'' You do not point out, however, that should Mr. Lieberman drop out of the Senate race and he and Mr. Gore lose the national election, Connecticut would be deprived of its outstanding senator and the country of a voice that should be heard. Democracy would be less well served.
 What to do with federal budget surpluses will likely be major topic of upcoming presidential campaign debate between Al Gore and George W Bush; various proposals discussed (M) Yet what to do with that opportunity will likely dominate Tuesday night's arguments, when Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore face off. Mr. Bush has not backed off a tax cut plan that has made some in his party so queasy that they have come up with their own, more modest proposals. And Mr. Gore has learned that even if paying down the national debt is, as one of his advisers puts it, ''an eat-your-broccoli message,'' it seems to be registering in the polls. In their more candid moments, Mr. Gore's strategists concede that the Clinton administration stumbled into debt reduction. Mr. Clinton used a State of the Union address to declare that America's mission was to ''save Social Security first,'' which was little more than a tactic for fending off Republican tax cuts. It worked. True, but a very popular second choice. So popular that both Democrats and Republicans in the House overwhelmingly approved legislation two weeks ago that would commit this year's surpluses to pay down debt. And President Clinton, beating the drum for his own legacy and Mr. Gore's candidacy, stepped out of the White House on Wednesday morning armed with a big magic marker to declare that the government's fiscal year was ending with a $230 billion surplus -- and that all but $7 billion of it would be used to pay down debt. That puts the United States on track to paying off the debt by 2012, Mr. Clinton said. By remarkable coincidence, Mr. Gore's plan sets the same date. Mr. Bush's plan would also pay off the debt, only in 2016. But he doesn't talk about it much, preferring instead to dwell on tax cuts that seem drawn from the playbook of Ronald Reagan. Meanwhile, as Mr. Gore continues to portray himself as the man who will lift the debt off  the shoulders of the nation's children, Mr. Bush  has to make the case that under his plan Americans can have their big tax cuts and eat their  debt, too. ''Bush is caught caught between a rock and a hard place,'' said Mr. Reischauer, ''because he wants to establish individual accounts for Social Security, and those will be funded out of the Social Security surplus. So there will be less debt paydown.'' Mr. Bush's advisers, not surprisingly, look at the numbers differently, arguing that Mr. Gore's surplus is a phantom that will disappear after Election Day. Mr. Gore, meanwhile, is betting on the analogy he believes Americans will make between debt reduction and the way they would like to manage their own household budgets. ''No one can relate to a $2 trillion budget,'' Mr. Bixby said. ''But they can understand that when you have a big expense coming up -- kids going to college, or retirement -- it makes sense to get rid of your debts.'' Virtuous as paying down the debt may be, it is not necessarily the best use of the government's money. Mr. Bush's tax cuts could, arguably, put more money in the stock market, where it would be available to old and new companies for research and new technologies. (If those cuts come too soon, though, they could also overstimulate an economy and a stock market that many fear is still flying too high, forcing the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates even more.) Or maybe the return on investment would be better if the money was spent on education. After all, a well-trained software engineer -- or 10 million of them -- can foster a lot of growth.
 Endorsement of George W Bush's presidential candidacy by group of military veterans, including senior officers who until recently served under Pres Clinton, raises concerns inside and outside Pentagon about politicization of the ranks that erodes long tradition of nonpartisanship; photo; retired generals Wesley Clark and John Shalikashvili say senior retired officers do disservice by getting into partisan politics; those endorsing Bush include Colin Powell, Adm Jay L Johnson and Gen Anthony C Zinni (M) Those restraints are lifted when an officer retires. But even so, the recent announcement that a group of military veterans -- including senior officers who until recently served under President Clinton -- had endorsed Gov. George W. Bush is raising concerns inside and outside the Pentagon about  the growing politicization of the ranks. That has not stopped politicians of both parties from embracing those in uniform and tailoring messages to appeal to them and to veterans, a far more sizable voting group. They often take their campaigns to organizations that support the military, like the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars, solicit veterans' endorsements, and use veterans to bolster their own stature. Gen. Colin L. Powell, who retired after serving as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1989 to 1993, is a fixture of Mr. Bush's presidential campaign (though, like Eisenhower, he was also once courted by the Democrats). In 1992, President Clinton eagerly accepted the support of Adm. William J. Crowe, another former chairman, at a time when his campaign was dogged by questions over the steps he took to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. To many current and retired officers, the recent endorsement by Veterans for Bush-Cheney -- a group organized by Gen. Charles C. Krulak, who retired as commandant of the Marine Corps last year --  seemed to cross the apolitical line. The retirees were acting collectively, they noted,  and some had retired only weeks before, including Adm. Jay L. Johnson, the former chief of naval operations, and Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, the marine who served as commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf until August. Such officers, retired or not, they say, embody the institutions they served. For those reasons, they said, the endorsements gave the impression -- one certainly welcomed by the Bush campaign -- that it was the military itself, not simply a handful of veterans, that supported Mr. Bush's candidacy. ''I really believe it is a disservice if senior military officers, even if retired, get drawn into the political process,'' said Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs (who has, however, advised the Gore campaign). ''It is unhealthy for the military, which works best, I think, when we do not become openly politicized.'' GENERAL CLARK, now an investment banker in New York, said he had been courted for an endorsement, though he refused to say whether the overture had come from the Bush camp or Vice President Al  Gore's campaign, or both. He said he had declined. General Krulak and others who signed on to the Bush campaign have strongly defended their right to endorse the Texas governor, a point that is not contested by their critics, who simply warn that so many four-star officers backing a candidate, openly and in concert, undermined the military's carefully cultivated apoliticism.
 Overall, the two sides have fought more or less to a stalemate, which is one reason for the relatively low visibility of the abortion issue in this year's presidential campaign. George W. Bush has a lock on most anti-abortion voters, and Al Gore on most fervently abortion-rights ones, and so far neither candidate has appeared especially eager to advertise his stance to an electorate where most undecided voters may view abortion from the murky middle.
 Surprisingly missing from the current oil-price debate are the environmentalists, Mr. Malloch Brown said. As protests spread in Europe against the high-tax strategies that were adopted after the oil shock of the 1970's to slow the rise in energy consumption, he added, there were no strong voices from the environmental lobby arguing that these policies were right and should not be abandoned. In the United States, Vice President Al Gore, author of ''Earth in the Balance,'' has called for a draw-down in strategic oil reserves instead of a new look at American energy use. ''The environmental community ought to look at itself pretty hard,'' Mr. Malloch Brown said.
 it's not only what you say, but how**Media and political experts offer advice to Al Gore and George W Bush on demeanor in upcoming presidential campaign debate; photo (M) IF Al Gore and George W. Bush really want to win over millions of Americans in their first debate on Tuesday night, they might dispense with the briefing books, give their policy advisers the weekend off and get some tips from a pro: Mark Burnett, the executive producer of the megahit television show ''Survivor.'' IF Al Gore and George W. Bush really want to win over millions of Americans in their first debate on Tuesday night, they might dispense with the briefing books, give their policy advisers the weekend off and get some tips from a pro: Mark Burnett, the executive producer of the megahit television show ''Survivor.'' Richard G. Darman, who was President George Bush's budget director and was involved in Republican debate preparations in the 1980, 1984, 1988 and 1992 campaigns, said the focus on style over substance was ''regrettable but may not be such a negative because the electorate is using its intuition to judge values, character and personality.'' The fate of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush could come down to stagecraft, performance skills and this all-important question: Which guy more looks (and acts) like he belongs in the Oval Office? Mr. Gore does not have the fraternity boy persona of Mr. Bush and he should not pretend he does. But unlike Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush does not revel in policy minutia and  should not act like he does. ''The key to debate is to play to your strengths and not change who you are,'' said Jordan Factor, a 2000 graduate of Brandeis University who won the national championship of the American Parliamentary Debate Association. ''Bush should come across being a nice guy and the kind of guy you'd want to sit around and have a beer with. He should tell jokes and stories about his life in Midland. The tip I'd give Gore is to recognize that he is a serious guy and that's O.K.'' Mr. Bush was fairly successful in keeping his smirk in check during the primary debates. Now, the biggest thing he has to watch is his tendency to mangle words. Mary Ellen Doran-Quine, a speech pathologist in Reston, Va., said Mr. Bush should not be too jumpy in responding. ''Sometimes he doesn't think before he talks,'' she said. ''If he pauses just a millisecond or two, he probably could prevent some of that. Bush could also open up his mouth a little bit more to get more resonance. He has a pinched nasal quality to his voice.'' By contrast, she said, Mr. Gore ''has a very nice voice quality -- voice is the element of seduction.'' Mr. Gore has his own issues. Ms. Doran-Quine said the vice president is so steeped in policy that he would be better off not to cram. ''I would never memorize anything if I were him,'' she said. ''It sounds like it's rehearsed.'' Another concern for Mr. Gore is that he must control his inclination to verge on condescension. Mr. Burnett, the Survivor producer, said he learned this from his program: ''Don't overexplain things. You don't need to talk on a child's level.'' Peter Jennings, the ABC News anchor who moderated a presidential debate in the primaries, said Mr. Gore could have saved himself from negative media coverage if he had backtracked on his statement that he would favor a litmus test for military leaders to ensure they would allow gays in the military. ''He could have said, 'Peter, I want to reconsider my answer about that question of gays in the military,' '' Mr. Jennings said. ''That would have stopped everyone dead. When I get in trouble on television, I try to share with viewers why we make a mistake.'' ''You don't want to look like you've just performed in the George Hamilton tan-off,'' said Sig Rogich, an image consultant for President Reagan in 1984 and later for President Bush. ''But you certainly want to look your best. Let's not forget they are performing before the American people.'' ''Tension city,'' is how former President Bush recently described presidential debates to Jim Lehrer of PBS, the moderator again this year. To calm down, Mr. Gore is famous for strenuous workouts before debates. Mr. Warfield said he kept Mr. Dole ''locked down'' four years ago ''to keep him insulated from last-minute suggestions.'' He explained, ''The last thing you want to do is have someone come up with a bold idea that could bomb.''
 George W. Bush takes his own feather pillow with him wherever he goes on the road. What do you take from home?
 ''Bushwick doesn't know Williamsburg,''  said City Councilman Martin Malave Dilan, who represents Bushwick and has twice run for the 54th Assembly seat. ''Cypress Hills doesn't know East New York. It makes it difficult to form coalitions. It makes it difficult for voters to hold representatives accountable.''
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 The elusive aura of electoral inevitability once possessed by Gov. George W. Bush, and then captured for a time by Vice President Al Gore, has vanished from the presidential race. The latest polls show Mr. Bush ahead, Mr. Gore ahead or a tie. The only things that seem inevitable now are that the Election Day result will be close -- perhaps as narrow as the Kennedy-Nixon race of 1960 and the Ford-Carter race of 1976 -- and the series of presidential debates that begins Tuesday will be pivotal. The swing voters are entering their decision phase. The elusive aura of electoral inevitability once possessed by Gov. George W. Bush, and then captured for a time by Vice President Al Gore, has vanished from the presidential race. The latest polls show Mr. Bush ahead, Mr. Gore ahead or a tie. The only things that seem inevitable now are that the Election Day result will be close -- perhaps as narrow as the Kennedy-Nixon race of 1960 and the Ford-Carter race of 1976 -- and the series of presidential debates that begins Tuesday will be pivotal. The swing voters are entering their decision phase. These are lessons that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are no doubt studying hard this weekend as they prepare. On most issues, especially tax cuts, Social Security, Medicare and campaign finance reform, Mr. Gore continues to have positions with broader public support. The spurt in oil prices has exposed sharp differences between the candidates over Mr. Bush's proposal to open up wilderness areas to drilling and Mr. Gore's proposal to tap the strategic petroleum reserve. Here, too, the vice president would appear to benefit from the public's preference for environmental protection and lower fuel prices. The Food and Drug Administration's approval last week of an abortion-inducing pill is bound to come up in the debates, allowing Mr. Gore to solidify his lead among women by stressing his pro-choice position. For all that, Mr. Bush has recovered from the dive he took after the Democratic convention, and he is coming off a better couple of weeks than Mr. Gore. As was the case early in the campaign, Mr. Bush's personality seems to be offsetting his narrower issues base and Mr. Gore's advantage in expertise. A few weeks ago Mr. Bush said he would be focusing on issues more than character, but he seems to have picked up in the polls because of his genial style on television with the likes of Oprah Winfrey, Regis Philbin and Larry King. Part of his challenge is to bring that level of comfort into the auditorium in Boston on Tuesday. In the end, a mysterious mixture of issues, personalities and performance will flow into the public perception of who won the debates. In terms of performance, each side has its risk factors and its own version of the expectations game. The Gore team worries that Mr. Bush will get excessive credit for a merely competent performance. The Bush team hopes that Mr. Gore's strong debating skills will come across as more slashing and off-putting than masterly.
 Patricia M Hendrickson letter on George W Bush's potential Supreme Court nominees; warns that if he is elected president women can expected further weakening of their right to legal abortion (S) The choice of the next president is crucial. If George W. Bush, who supports the Republican platform of appointing anti-abortion judges to the Supreme Court, wins, women can expect a further weakening and the eventual demise of Roe v. Wade. Al Gore has promised to always support women's reproductive freedom.
 Vice President Al Gore has invited 13 everyday people to help him bone up for the first presidential debate on Tuesday. Well, not just any everyday people. It just so happens they hail from Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, Florida, Pennsylvania, New Mexico and a few other swing states. Vice President Al Gore has invited 13 everyday people to help him bone up for the first presidential debate on Tuesday. Well, not just any everyday people. It just so happens they hail from Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, Florida, Pennsylvania, New Mexico and a few other swing states. With the presidential race as tight as the 400-meter Olympic hurdles, neither side seems to be bypassing any chance to send a message to voters in the swing states. Or as William M. Daley, the Gore campaign chairman, put it: ''The presence of these special guests is an opportunity for us all to remember what's really important in this election.'' Gov. George W. Bush, meanwhile, sought to leave another kind of impression with the voters: that Mr. Gore was not enough like President Clinton on the issue of reducing the size and influence of government. ''The vice president was seated right behind Bill Clinton at the State of the Union when the president declared, 'The era of big government is over,' '' Mr. Bush told workers at a plant in Green Bay, Wis. ''Apparently, the message never took.'' The vice president lobbed the issue of soft money right back at the Texas governor. Acting on a demand by two senators -- Russell D. Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat, and John McCain, an Arizona Republican -- Mr. Gore challenged Mr. Bush to agree to a ban on the use of soft money, the donations made to the parties but used for the campaigns. On that topic, Mr. Bush found no need to debate: he said he did not believe the Democrats would abide by such a deal.
 Andrew Sullivan reviews book The Golden Age by Gore Vidal; drawing (M) By Gore Vidal. By Gore Vidal. If the point of good historical writing is to help us imagine a past that might have been, then it is hard to beat Gore Vidal. His ambitious series of historical novels, a meditation on the meaning of America in seven novelistic parts, is essentially about an America in a parallel historical universe. In the latest, final production, ''The Golden Age,'' we follow the lives of the fictional Sanford family -- wealthy, well-connected men and women in the political, literary and entertainment worlds -- into the middle of the 20th century and eavesdrop by the miracle of historical fiction on the conversations that mattered and several that didn't. If you are at all amused by the possibility of hearing Leonard Bernstein's unrecorded asides or Harry Truman's offhand harrumphs, then much of the book is irresistibly diverting, if quite unreliable. This is where Vidal's idiosyncrasies ultimately wear thin. It is difficult to be seen as a tribune of the plebs when you never leave the social milieu of French chateaus, Georgetown mansions and New York theater openings. It is difficult to make a solid argument about America's imperial temptation when you willfully discount the darkening world that greeted the fledgling superpower in the 1930's and 40's. It is difficult to make an argument about American history when you write a novelistic account that makes grand claims about the American past, but then neither defends them by accountable historical methods nor disowns them as mere fiction. Vidal wants it every which way. In fact, he wants to be Shakespeare (Vidal draws the analogy himself). ''Why do you keep letting Shakespeare leak in upon us?'' Peter asks late in the novel. ''Why not?'' is the answer. ''He gives names to things, real and unreal. He understands how the actors -- the Roosevelts and the Trumans -- are simply spirits and once their scenes are acted out, they melt into air, into thin air, as we shall presently do, still hankering after what was not meant to be, ever.'' But Roosevelt and Truman didn't melt into thin air. They were not invented; and they didn't live long enough ago to be turned into enduring myths. They lived lives and made choices that deserve fearless scrutiny, not snooty, cynical attack. And, by any reckoning, they helped make the world what it now is -- a far freer, brighter place than anything concocted on the strange, orbiting planet called Gore Vidal.
 Phone conversation with author Gore Vidal, who comments on his latest book, The Golden Age; drawing (M) Since 1972, Gore Vidal has split his time between Ravello, in Italy, and a house in the Hollywood Hills -- which means, he likes to say, that arguably he no longer lives in the United States. He was here for the conventions, however, and returned last month for the revival of his play ''The Best Man'' at the Virginia Theater. The following conversation took place, by phone, when he was briefly back in Italy. Since 1972, Gore Vidal has split his time between Ravello, in Italy, and a house in the Hollywood Hills -- which means, he likes to say, that arguably he no longer lives in the United States. He was here for the conventions, however, and returned last month for the revival of his play ''The Best Man'' at the Virginia Theater. The following conversation took place, by phone, when he was briefly back in Italy. Because of what I had learned of history growing up with my grandfather, Senator T. P. Gore, in Washington, I was skeptical of official versions. The official narrator always has one story to tell and, often, a story to suppress. To look for what is not told is the adventure.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column says he was not planning to write any more about George W Bush's faulty arithmetic but is compelled to refute 'mind-blowing' misstatements on CNN's Moneyline program; corrects Bush's figures on budget surplus projections, Social Security and his proposed tax cut, asking why interviewer did not pick up errors (M) I really, truly wasn't planning to write any more columns about George W. Bush's arithmetic. But his performance on ''Moneyline'' last Wednesday was just mind-blowing. I had to download a transcript to convince myself that I had really heard him correctly. It was as if Mr. Bush's aides had prepared him with a memo saying: ''You've said some things on the stump that weren't true. Your mission, in the few minutes you have, is to repeat all of those things. Don't speak in generalities -- give specific false numbers. That'll show them!'' First, Mr. Bush talked about the budget -- ''There's about $4.6 trillion of surplus projected,'' he declared, which is true, even if the projections are dubious. He then went on to say: ''I want some of the money, nearly a trillion, to go to projects like prescription drugs for seniors. Money to strengthen the military to keep the peace. I've got some views about education around the world. I want to -- you know, I've got some money in there for the environment.'' Mr. Bush presumably wants to convey the sense that he's a compassionate guy who really cares about education, the environment and all that. But that doesn't excuse claiming to spend twice as much on these good things as the number given in his own budget. He continued: ''But there's still a quarter unspent, about $1.3 trillion [the size of Mr. Bush's tax cut]. I think we ought to send it back to the people who pay the bills.'' Alas, 4 times 1.3 is 5.2, not 4.6 -- and anyway, the full budget cost of that tax cut, including interest, is $1.6 trillion, more than a third of the projected surplus. Next came Social Security. Here a bit of explanation is needed. The reason Social Security is in trouble is that the system has a large ''hole'' -- basically a hidden debt -- because previous generations of retirees were paid benefits out of the contributions of younger workers. That hole also means that you can't justify privatizing Social Security -- which Mr. Bush advocates -- by comparing the rate of return that an individual could get by investing in government bonds and the implied rate of return on his Social Security contributions. That comparison ignores a multitrillion-dollar debt that somebody has to pay. Mr. Bush, wasting no time, went straight to that bogus comparison. ''But the safest of all safe -- of about 4 percent [a reference to government bonds] -- is twice what they get in the Social Security trust today.'' Is there any way to explain away Mr. Bush's remarks -- three major self-serving misstatements in the course of only a couple of minutes? Not that I can see. We're not talking questionable economic analysis here, just facts: what Mr. Bush said to that national television audience simply wasn't true. What is really striking here is the silence of the media -- those ''liberal media'' conservatives complain about. ''Moneyline'' would never let a C.E.O. get away with claiming to spend twice as much on research as the sum announced in the company's own press release. But when Mr. Bush declared that he would spend twice as much on new programs as the sum announced by his own campaign, the interviewer said nothing -- and nobody else picked up on it. As I said, I don't want to keep writing about this. But reporters seem to be too busy chasing rats and dogs to look at what the candidates say about their actual policy proposals. So someone has to point out that in an interview intended to showcase his economic program, Mr. Bush did it again: he vastly exaggerated  his spending plans, greatly understated the cost of his tax cut and misrepresented the issues on Social Security.
 Prof Charles Fried letter on Supreme Court justices praised by Al Gore and George W Bush; suggests that Gore victory might threaten Court's balance (S) In a Sept. 27 editorial, Gov. George W. Bush's casual remark that he admired Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas elicits a list of their most extreme dictums. It is implicit that if Mr. Bush is elected, the dictums would become law. Vice President Al Gore designated Justices William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall as favorites, but this leads your editorial to predict that he would appoint more moderate justices. In a Sept. 27 editorial, Gov. George W. Bush's casual remark that he admired Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas elicits a list of their most extreme dictums. It is implicit that if Mr. Bush is elected, the dictums would become law. Vice President Al Gore designated Justices William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall as favorites, but this leads your editorial to predict that he would appoint more moderate justices. Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush also named Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and David Souter, who support the present rule on women's right to choose abortion. The Rehnquist court has disciplined the excesses of the court when it was dominated by Justices Brennan and Marshall, while maintaining strong protections for free speech and taking a balanced approach on criminal law. A Gore victory threatens that balance.
 The proposals for offering drug coverage to the elderly are hard to compare, but analysts say Vice President Al Gore's plan includes more financing and a higher subsidy for premiums. Advisers to Gov. George W. Bush counter that his plan offers more flexibility and more choices. Officials in the Bush campaign said they did not believe that an employee of the campaign's advertising firm was involved in sending debate materials to the Gore campaign.
 Capacity 84 passengers; international cuisine.  Nov. 30 -- Eleven-night voyage from Tartus (Syria) to Alexandria, calling at Beirut, Limassol, Haifa and Ashdod. From $6,095 to $12,995, including hotel stay and shore excursions.  Dec. 8 -- Twenty-five-night voyage from Alexandria to Bombay, calling at Safaga, Djibouti, Salalah, Sur, Dubai, Ra's al Khaymah, Fujayrah, Muscat, Okha and Porbandar. From $9,995 to $17,995, including hotel stay and shore excursions.  Dec. 28 and Jan. 17 -- Sixteen-night voyages from Bombay to Madras, calling at Goa, Mangalore, Cochin, Tuticorin, Colombo and Galle (Sri Lanka). (Voyages in reverse direction on Jan. 7 and Jan. 27.) From $8,995 to $15,945, including hotel stay and shore excursions.  Feb. 11 -- Sixteen-night voyage from Bombay to Kuwait, calling at Porbandar, Okha, Sur, Muscat, Fujayrah, Ra's al Khaymah, Dubai, Al Manamah, Dammam and Bushehr. From $8,995 to $15,995, including shore excursions.
 Mr. Rogers has called Gov. George W. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut too big, and said he favored voluntary private investment of some Social Security taxes only if benefits, tax levels and retirement ages would not have to be altered. Each candidate has national issues to argue. On Wednesday, in the closest thing to a slap at Mr. Rogers, Ms. Byrum said: ''My opponent and George Bush believe we should have a large across-the-board tax cut. If you do that, you do not have any money to put into targeted tax cuts, to put into Social Security, to put into strengthening Medicare.''
 Campaign debate over prescription drugs for elderly has become confusing muddle of partisan charges and countercharges; health analysts say approaches of two presidential candidates are so different, and there are so many unknowns about Gov Geroge W Bush's plan, that it would be very difficult for average Medicare beneficiary to compare Bush and Gore plans and determine how much he would pay in premiums and co-payments and how much he would receive in benefits; given what is known, many analysts and consumer advocates consider Vice Pres Al Gore's plan to be more generous; experts note that none of drug benefits being proposed for Medicare are as generous as what many working people routinely receive; chart with major components of each candidate's plan (L) It is very difficult for the average Medicare beneficiary to sit down with the Bush and Gore plans and compare how much she would pay in premiums and co-payments and how much she would receive in benefits. That is because the approaches of the two candidates are so different, and there are so many unknowns about Gov. George W. Bush's plan. Given what is known, many analysts and consumer advocates consider Vice President Al Gore's plan to be more generous; he would devote much more money to it, they note, and he promises a higher federal subsidy for premiums. Mr. Bush's health care advisers counter that his plan offers more flexibility and more choices for older Americans. Mr. Gore, like other Democrats, has made the issue a centerpiece of his campaign, berating the pharmaceutical industry for putting profits ahead of people and reiterating his promise of relief with a 74-page campaign credo, ''Medicare at a Crossroads.'' He would add a prescription drug benefit to the traditional Medicare program. Mr. Bush, who spoke little about the issue in the primaries, has increasingly focused on prescription drugs as the campaign has progressed. His enemy, though, is not the drug industry but the prospect of ''big government'' intervention that could stymie innovation and force the elderly into a ''one-size-fits-all'' government plan. Like other Republicans, Mr. Bush would rely heavily on the private health insurance industry -- H.M.O.'s and other managed care companies -- to deliver drug benefits to the elderly. Mr. Bush takes a two-track approach. For the first four years, he would send $48 billion to the states to help low-income elderly people, including those with annual incomes up to about $14,600. This accounts for Mr. Gore's claim that the Bush plan would force the elderly into welfare offices for prescription drugs. Down the road, Mr. Bush sees drug benefits as an outgrowth of his proposal to transform Medicare, a fairly traditional government insurance program, into an arena for competing private health plans. (Only about 16 percent of Medicare beneficiaries are now in H.M.O.'s.) Those H.M.O.'s and other health networks, all vying for the business of Medicare beneficiaries, would be required to offer the elderly a ''high option'' plan that covers drugs. (So would the federal government, for those who choose to stay with traditional Medicare.) Mr. Bush promises a federal subsidy for those prescription drug premium costs of 25 percent -- more for the low-income elderly. And Mr. Bush would create a catastrophic benefit that would kick in when the elderly's out-of-pocket bills hit $6,000. Still, many of the details of this plan are left up to a future White House task force, the Congress and the private marketplace: for example, how much would the basic drug benefit be worth? What would the basic package look like in the Bush plan? What would be the deductibles, the co-payments and the like? Because of the emphasis on the private marketplace, said Ron Pollack, head of the consumer advocacy group Families USA, ''different people in the same state would have considerably different benefits and considerably different cost-sharing requirements.'' And, he added, Mr. Bush ''simply does not define what that would be.'' Sally Canfield, a health adviser to the Bush campaign, said, ''We did not want to hamstring the task force on how they wanted to set up the benefit.'' Democrats and their allies suggest another rationale: the Republicans are avoiding details that can be used against them, as they are now using the size of the Gore premium against the Democrats. Kenneth E. Thorpe, a professor of health policy at Emory University and a former top analyst in the Clinton administration, argued that the average premium under the Bush plan was bound to be substantially higher, in large part because Mr. Bush would provide a lower subsidy than Mr. Gore, and because private health plans would have higher administrative costs. In general, the price of Mr. Bush's Medicare proposal, including the restructuring proposals and prescription drugs, is $158 billion over 10 years, according to the Bush campaign. Mr. Gore proposes spending $338 billion on prescription drugs alone, according to Congressional Budget Office estimates, over that same period. Mr. Gore would offer a drug benefit under the traditional Medicare program, available to older Americans for an additional monthly premium, which would start at $25 a month in 2002 and double over the next decade. It would be a voluntary benefit; people could choose it or waive it. But if they sign up, Mr. Gore says, the federal government would subsidize half the real cost of the drug premiums. The Gore campaign offers the example of a widow with $610 of prescription drugs to buy each month, or $7,320 a year. It assumes she would receive a 10 percent discount (subtract $732) for being part of a drug plan. Medicare would pay half of the first $5,000 of her bills; she would pay the rest. After her bills reached $5,000, she would be responsible on her own until she reached the $4,000 cap on out-of-pocket drug costs. Advertising produced for the Republican National Committee refers to a $600 annual ''big government access fee,'' the yearly premiums for the Gore plan when it is fully implemented a decade from now. Republicans have noted that beneficiaries could pay more in premiums than they receive in benefits, although experts note that this is the case with all kinds of insurance. ''The notion that there is a plan that will meet everybody's needs is wrong,'' argues Dr. Gail Wilensky, a Bush health adviser.
 OF course, the cast had no diversity whatsoever: the core cast included too many Irishmen and Jews, no women, no Hispanics or Italians, only one African-American. So Mr. Florek got replaced by a black woman, S. Epatha Merkerson, who took on the role of Lieutenant Van Buren (she had previously appeared in a first-season episode as the mother of a perp, or a vic, or possibly both), and Mr. Dzundza got killed off to make room for Paul Sorvino. At first I thought I would resent these changes bitterly, but the show went on pretty much as before, and I came to like these two actors almost as much as their predecessors. Then Paul Sorvino gave way to Jerry Orbach -- O.K., I survived that too -- and Richard Brooks got replaced by a succession of pretty young women, each slightly more annoying than the previous one. (Actually, the current occupant of the assistant D.A. role, Angie Harmon, is vastly more annoying than either Jill Hennessy or Carey Lowell was; her voice is like fingernails on a blackboard, and her face registers only a single expression.) When Michael Moriarty got ousted by Sam Waterston, the show's condition was clearly terminal, but I held on for the sake of Chris Noth. It was only when Noth left -- later to reappear in the weirdest places, like HBO's ''Sex and the City'' and the Broadway revival ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man' '' -- that I knew my ''Law and Order'' no longer existed.
 But the race is often the lonely sound of one man running. At an opening of a Bush campaign office in Norwalk that night, Mr. Giordano enthused, ''I'm having a great time campaigning.'' Polite applause followed, but when a Republican in the back of the room was asked what he thought about Mr. Giordano's one-man mission, he answered with one word: ''Who?''
 Profile of Tipper Gore who, despite appearing footloose and upbeat, is more serious and timid than one might have thought; comments on her battle with depression, family history and husband, Vice Pres Al Gore; photos (L) Tipper Gore hopped off a New Orleans streetcar and boogied her way through the crowd, shimmying all alone to the music of a Dixieland band. Wacky, fun-loving Tipper was at it again. Just as in Los Angeles, where she had jammed on stage at the Democratic convention. Which was nothing compared with her performance four years ago in Chicago. That time, she jumped into Lake Michigan with her clothes on. Officially, she's the antidote to her stuffy husband, Lucy to his Ricky Ricardo, forever mugging and angling to play with the band. What will she think of next? Today, it's a one-woman line dance outside the local party headquarters, where she's supposed to cut a ribbon and give a speech. But there is something a little off, a little forced about the gaiety swirling around the laughing woman who is dancing as fast as she can while a small herd of TV camera guys closes in. It doesn't look like fun. The woman does have a raucous side and an authentic subversive streak. In fact, after an often unfun childhood, she has been fairly determined in that way. She regularly skips functions that sound boring and once greeted a female acquaintance at a very fancy Washington party with an undecorous pinch on the bottom. Yet she is also darker, smarter, tougher, more difficult and more complicated than the goofy cardboard cutout she likes to hide behind. She is not just unpredictable -- the first word her oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, chooses to describe her -- but erratic: expansive one day and down the next. A friend who has worked closely with her on mental health issues says, ''She struggles with her mood, but she doesn't want to be pitied'' just because it is public knowledge that she became clinically depressed after her son was hit by a car in 1989. Like her husband, she has a mostly interior nature, and like him too, she is devoted to the kind of family life neither of them had as kids. And she is even more private and press-shy than he is, especially since being worked over for her mid-80's campaign against explicit rock lyrics.When the news photographers start clicking away, she often pulls out her own camera and shoots back. Tipper Gore hopped off a New Orleans streetcar and boogied her way through the crowd, shimmying all alone to the music of a Dixieland band. Wacky, fun-loving Tipper was at it again. Just as in Los Angeles, where she had jammed on stage at the Democratic convention. Which was nothing compared with her performance four years ago in Chicago. That time, she jumped into Lake Michigan with her clothes on. Officially, she's the antidote to her stuffy husband, Lucy to his Ricky Ricardo, forever mugging and angling to play with the band. What will she think of next? Today, it's a one-woman line dance outside the local party headquarters, where she's supposed to cut a ribbon and give a speech. But there is something a little off, a little forced about the gaiety swirling around the laughing woman who is dancing as fast as she can while a small herd of TV camera guys closes in. It doesn't look like fun. The woman does have a raucous side and an authentic subversive streak. In fact, after an often unfun childhood, she has been fairly determined in that way. She regularly skips functions that sound boring and once greeted a female acquaintance at a very fancy Washington party with an undecorous pinch on the bottom. Yet she is also darker, smarter, tougher, more difficult and more complicated than the goofy cardboard cutout she likes to hide behind. She is not just unpredictable -- the first word her oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, chooses to describe her -- but erratic: expansive one day and down the next. A friend who has worked closely with her on mental health issues says, ''She struggles with her mood, but she doesn't want to be pitied'' just because it is public knowledge that she became clinically depressed after her son was hit by a car in 1989. Like her husband, she has a mostly interior nature, and like him too, she is devoted to the kind of family life neither of them had as kids. And she is even more private and press-shy than he is, especially since being worked over for her mid-80's campaign against explicit rock lyrics.When the news photographers start clicking away, she often pulls out her own camera and shoots back. When the music finally ends in New Orleans, Tipper Gore stops laughing and faces the small crowd hesitantly. Standing up on the porch of the old house that is being turned into a campaign headquarters, she twists the toe of one shoe into the floor as if she would like to tunnel out of there and says just a few words, in a barely audible voice: ''I'm going to cut the ribbon so we can get to work. How's that?'' Yet this, this is the Tipper Gore that the folks here have turned out to meet. The women -- and it is women, mostly -- who surround her at the little cake-and-tea reception that follows have either seen past all the light and motion or read it in a slightly different way. One of them remarks to a friend that there is no one else she would have waited two hours for, standing out in the hot sun. When I sit down with her in her New York hotel, Gore seems relaxed, sinking back into the couch and altogether comfortable in a loose-fitting black jacket and pants. When I ask whether she lobbies her husband on the issues, she tosses back, ''Not my thing.'' The most important issues in the race to her, she says, are the Supreme Court and health care. ''I'm not trying to cover all my bases here. I know it's supposed to be education.'' Everything important is personal with her. Health care, for example, is something she came to care about through her 76-year-old mother, Margaret Carlson Aitcheson, who has had recurring bouts of depression and lives in the Gores' pool house at the vice-presidential residence. ''My mother taught me about courage,'' Gore says with real pride. By which she means that her mother, who worked as an accountant, did the very best she could. There were good times -- times her mother took her to the symphony and to see ''The Seven-Year Itch'' on Broadway. ''Yet,'' Gore says, ''she also had the struggle of depression. She always wants me to say that, thank you very much, she did recover from it. I saw her rebuild time and time again. It was hard. They didn't have modern medication back then. But she didn't complain.'' And neither does her daughter. Did her mother talk to her about her illness? ''When she was able to,'' Gore says quietly. I tell her that when she talks about depression, it sounds nothing like the disease I'm pretty well acquainted with through a couple of people I love. She makes it sound so easy -- take a little something and boom, all's well. She doesn't argue, but says: ''My mission is to reach -- kind of like the presidential debates -- reach the maximum number I can and people who don't understand it at all. Particularly in the South, they believe you can pray your way out of it, or will your way out of it.'' Backstage last month at Al Gore's glitzy Radio City Music Hall fund-raiser, just a couple of minutes before the vice president was scheduled to go on, he was still mulling what to say to the crowd. Joe Lieberman and his wife, Hadassah, were holding hands and chatting with Tipper while they all waited, just beyond the curtain. But Al Gore had a laptop set up on a small table only a couple of feet out of view of the audience, and he was busy editing his remarks with his speechwriter, Eli Attie. Intent, furiously chewing gum, repeatedly mopping his forehead, Gore called his wife over and ran several bits of the speech past her. She was just as serious and very animated as she reviewed the remarks, repeatedly shaking her head no and making chopping motions with her hands. He asked, she answered, he nodded. Then the speechwriter nodded in turn. In the darkness, which was broken only by the glow of the computer and the small penlight Gore was using to read some notes, the moment felt much more intimate than the long kiss they shared in front of the crowd at the Democratic convention. After the Gores walked out on stage, I asked Attie about the scene. He was startled that I had seen it, but answered: ''He was going over the whole thing with her, asking her should I say this, should I say that. She's a big reality check for him, and she was telling him to keep it short. She's the person he trusts more than anybody.'' When Gore speaks of his wife, what comes through most clearly is his gratitude, his feeling that she rescued him emotionally and his appreciation for the price she paid to be the wife he needed her to be. Certainly, she never wanted the political life. And though she found work she cared about -- twice, in fact -- she never took her turn. First, she studied to become a therapist. Then, just as she was discovering her talent for photojournalism, her husband announced that he was running for Congress and needed a full-time partner. She gave up on some aspects of her college feminism many years ago, she says now, and no longer believes in having it all: ''You've got to have one strong person always there for the kids.'' Still, she tries to look at it like this: Hasn't she done more to destigmatize mental illness than she could ever have done in private practice? She does have Al, though -- and has since they met on the night of his senior prom, when she was 16 and he was 17. In between campaign stops in Ohio a couple of weeks ago, Gore told me that ''she brings excitement to my life that wouldn't be there otherwise. She sees things I don't see, understands things I don't understand. I've learned so much from her.'' She does not tend to get involved in policy matters, beyond those issues she has worked on personally, like mental health and homelessness. Though she gives her husband credibility on the issue of pop-culture nastiness and vulgarity, for example, she is not driving the Gore-Lieberman ticket's criticisms of Hollywood. But she is plenty involved in personnel and, effectively, has veto power over all major appointments. She was party to both the hiring and the departure of Tony Coelho as Gore's campaign chairman. Gore's staff tends to steer clear of her, as a surprising number of his aides have remarked in passing over the last year. They see her as high-maintenance and hard to please -- as demanding as he is. The advice given one new hire in his office was this: When she calls, say yes and keep moving. She is not at all uptight in some ways. A former baby sitter who went on vacation with the Gores when their four children were young remembers being embarrassed by her frank references to their apparently robust sex life. ''I had never been around an adult who talked openly like that,'' said the woman, Karen Spears, who was 18 at the time. And the vice president's wife didn't consider it any big deal when she played matchmaker to her two hairdressers: conveniently for her, the guy who cuts her hair in New York and the guy who cuts her hair in Washington are a couple now. But she can be awfully proper too. During the Radio City fund-raiser, when Bette Midler repeated the vulgarity that George W. Bush had used to describe the Times reporter Adam Clymer, her jaw literally dropped. And she can come off as imperious. At the end of our first interview, I said I hoped we would be talking again soon, and she said, very slowly, drawing out each word, almost as if imitating some monarch, ''Yes, I've decided you're an O.K. sort. I've decided I will speak to you again.'' When next we met -- she and Karenna had invited me to a private lunch at the residence, just the three of us -- she was quite chilly, which was odd under the circumstances. Yet when I saw her again, only a few days later, she could not have been more effusive in her warmth. Karenna, the 27-year-old new lawyer, new mom and big-cheese adviser to her father, sits down for coffee in her neighborhood on Manhattan's Upper East Side and says: ''So, 'All About My Mother.' Great movie.'' The Tipper Gore she describes is ''kind of a hippie.'' But one with lots of rules. ''When I was little, we'd go on marches and boycott things all the time'' -- Nestle Quik, for example. ''Then there was the thing that I couldn't watch Mighty Mouse. To her, pictures of naked people weren't bad because that was natural, but Mighty Mouse was bad because the girl mouse was always screaming to be rescued. Mighty Mouse was this charged figure for me. The ultimate for me was to watch Mighty Mouse while drinking Nestle Quik and eating Wonder bread -- she was big on whole wheat too.'' Karenna's sister Kristin, a comedy writer for the animated TV show ''Futurama,'' recalls that as a child she was mortified by the way her parents carried on in public: ''I remember being embarrassed at how affectionate they were, and they'd be kissing in a restaurant or she'd sit on his lap when my friends were over.'' And since their big kiss in California, she hates all the talk about how her mom ''humanizes'' her dad. ''That's insulting both to her and to him,'' she says. ''She's not a tool, and he's very human.'' Karenna says that ''Kristin growing up was probably a lot closer to my mom.'' Kristin told me that her earliest childhood memories of her mother ''are of being on her hip in the darkroom'' the Gores had in their home in Arlington: ''I remember thinking she was this magician, conjuring up these images, and I remember the smell'' of the chemicals she used. Their old baby sitter, Karen Spears, says Tipper was the one who did most of the actual work of parenting, at least when Spears was working for them, early in Gore's Congressional career. ''Al was for fun, but Tipper was the one who had everything under control,'' she says. ''Even on vacation, I remember her shooing the kids away from him, saying he had been working so hard he needed a week to decompress before dealing with them.'' But Kristin goes even further: ''I remember a distinct difference before my brother's accident and after. He was gone a lot before, always working, and my mother was always around. I remember wanting to fake being sick, not to watch 'Dukes of Hazzard' or 'Wonder Woman' but to hang out with her.''
 WHEN the Hartford Symphony takes the stage at the Bushnell this season, the programs may very well produce more than music. One of the eight guest conductors of the subscription programs will likely become the symphony's new music director. Edward Cumming was at the podium last weekend, while Andre Raphel Smith, the assistant conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra, arrives Oct. 17 and 18. Other conductors in the series include James Paul, Steven Smith, Leslie Dunner, Derrick Inouye, Enrique Arturo Diemecke and Ransom Wilson. Perhaps, however, the music director will be chosen from conductors coming into town for other parts of the symphony's season: Martin Fischer-Dieskau, in charge of two pops evenings; Peter Sacco and Randall Craig Fleischer, presiding over family matinees; Angel Gil-Ordonez and Joseph Silverstein, leading concerts by the Hartford Symphony Chamber Orchestra. The number to call for a list of programs and guest soloists is (860) 244-2999. WHEN the Hartford Symphony takes the stage at the Bushnell this season, the programs may very well produce more than music. One of the eight guest conductors of the subscription programs will likely become the symphony's new music director. Edward Cumming was at the podium last weekend, while Andre Raphel Smith, the assistant conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra, arrives Oct. 17 and 18. Other conductors in the series include James Paul, Steven Smith, Leslie Dunner, Derrick Inouye, Enrique Arturo Diemecke and Ransom Wilson. Perhaps, however, the music director will be chosen from conductors coming into town for other parts of the symphony's season: Martin Fischer-Dieskau, in charge of two pops evenings; Peter Sacco and Randall Craig Fleischer, presiding over family matinees; Angel Gil-Ordonez and Joseph Silverstein, leading concerts by the Hartford Symphony Chamber Orchestra. The number to call for a list of programs and guest soloists is (860) 244-2999.
 All concerts take place at 11 a.m. at The Bushnell. Free preconcert activities begin at 10 a.m. in The Bushnell's lobbies.
