 Conversely, at least one voter who favored Gov. George W. Bush in the presidential election said that preference would probably lead her to vote for Mr. Inslee, the Democrat, in the Congressional election.
 Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush is tightly embracing Ronald Reagan, quoting him more than ever before on campaign trail; Republican officials with ties to Bush campaign say Bush's best hopes in debates with Vice Pres Al Gore is to trump opponent with charm, conviction and aura of authentic and affable leadership, much as Reagan did (M) To make the case that a politician who supports more federal programs cannot also support more power for the middle class, Gov. George W. Bush said two weeks ago that voters did not simply have to take his word for it. To make the case that a politician who supports more federal programs cannot also support more power for the middle class, Gov. George W. Bush said two weeks ago that voters did not simply have to take his word for it. On Friday, giving a speech on energy, Mr. Bush quoted Mr. Reagan at even greater length, asserting that the same questions Mr. Reagan had raised about President Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential race applied this time around to Vice President Al Gore. Between those references, Mr. Bush summoned the memory of President Reagan, either directly or indirectly, at least four other times. More than ever before, Mr. Bush is tightly embracing Mr. Reagan and practically smothering him with affection and reverence. The timing is interesting. The coming series of debates, like the election itself, pits Mr. Bush, who has long assumed that he has a personality advantage, against Mr. Gore, who taps a seemingly greater command of policy details. Can anyone say Reagan-Carter in 1980, or Reagan-Mondale in 1984? Republican officials with ties to the Bush campaign can, noting that one of Mr. Bush's best hopes in the debates is to trump his opponent with charm, conviction and an aura of authentic and affable leadership, much as Mr. Reagan did. Mr. Bush, too, seems conscious of the parallels. In Orlando, Fla., a week ago, he derided what he said was the latest in a series of exaggerations and distortions by Mr. Gore with the phrase ''There he went again.'' It pointedly echoed a famous line Mr. Reagan used in a debate against Mr. Carter. In an interview with MSNBC around the same time, Mr. Bush responded to a question about why some people label him a lightweight by saying, ''I take great comfort in the fact that they said the same thing about President Ronald Reagan.'' And later, on CNN, Mr. Bush said: ''I remember what they did to Ronald Reagan. They belittled him and said, 'Oh, he can't possibly be smart enough to be president of the United States. He is simply an actor.' The man turned out to be a great president.'' Several of Mr. Bush's aides said there was no intricately plotted, overarching strategy at work. They said Mr. Bush had quoted Mr. Reagan in the speech two weeks ago because he was addressing a Republican gathering in California, where Mr. Reagan had been governor. And Mr. Bush quoted Mr. Reagan in the energy speech on Friday, they said, because Mr. Bush's argument against Mr. Gore was so much like the one Mr. Reagan had made against President Carter, who emphasized conserving energy over expanding the supply. ''We did, to some extent, want to raise, for the people who remembered it, the specter of what was going on in the late 1970's,'' the adviser said, referring to the energy shortages and long gas lines that helped undo Mr. Carter. Mr. Bush has used rising fuel costs to imply that the Clinton administration is bringing the country to the brink of similar woes. But several of Mr. Bush's advisers and other Republican strategists noted that there were additional reasons for him to refer to Mr. Reagan. Like Mr. Reagan, Mr. Bush is trying to persuade an electorate that does not necessarily prefer his positions and policies that he would be a better, more optimistic, more inspiring leader. Mr. Reagan talked about ''morning in America''; Mr. Bush occasionally quotes a Texas artist who talked about living on ''the sunrise side'' of the mountain. Like Mr. Reagan, Mr. Bush is selling a sweeping tax cut as economically healthy, and after President Reagan signed such legislation, the economy did improve. Mr. Bush has repeatedly credited that development as the wellspring of today's prosperity, neglecting to mention that federal debt ballooned. Of course, it is customary for a candidate who wants to be his party's leader in the future to talk about the party's leaders from the past, and Mr. Bush's choices from the last few decades are limited.
 Vice Pres Al Gore heads into October 3 debate with Gov George W Bush with reputation as one of most artful and combative political debaters in modern history and one of most practiced, having participated in 43 televised debates since he first ran for Senate in 1984; is uncommonly disciplined and will question opponent relentlessly to make point; is ruthless competitor and can be unflinchingly aggressive (M) Vice President Al Gore heads into Tuesday's debate with a reputation as one of the most artful and combative political debaters in modern history. He is certainly one of the most practiced, having participated in 43 televised debates since he first ran for the Senate in 1984. What is evident from a recent review of many of those encounters is that Mr. Gore is uncommonly disciplined. He will question an opponent relentlessly to make a point. A ruthless competitor, he can be unflinchingly aggressive. The vice president clearly took to heart a note his mother slipped to him before a 1988 debate: ''Smile, relax, attack.'' Vice President Al Gore heads into Tuesday's debate with a reputation as one of the most artful and combative political debaters in modern history. He is certainly one of the most practiced, having participated in 43 televised debates since he first ran for the Senate in 1984. What is evident from a recent review of many of those encounters is that Mr. Gore is uncommonly disciplined. He will question an opponent relentlessly to make a point. A ruthless competitor, he can be unflinchingly aggressive. The vice president clearly took to heart a note his mother slipped to him before a 1988 debate: ''Smile, relax, attack.'' Mr. Gore's experience leaves his opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, trying to bat down the impression that Mr. Gore is the more accomplished debater. But most of Mr. Gore's practice has come at the expense of fellow Democrats. In the 1988 presidential primaries, he debated members of his own party 26 times. In the 2000 primaries, he debated former Senator Bill Bradley nine times. His debates against Republicans -- Dan Quayle in 1992 and Jack F. Kemp in 1996 -- were for the vice presidency, and his 1993 debate with Ross Perot was limited to a single issue, Nafta. Tuesday's debate in Boston will be Mr. Gore's first at the presidential level. Mr. Gore likes to say that his opponent has never lost a debate -- Mr. Bush was in two before this campaign -- because he won the ensuing elections. Almost all of Mr. Gore's opponents have been weaker performers, unprepared to address issues or to fight back. In 1988, the field was so crowded (six or seven other Democrats) that it was hard for any participant to make a mark. Perhaps surprisingly, Mr. Gore's least effective performance came against Mr. Quayle, who was not expected to offer strong competition. Mr. Quayle was determined not to repeat his humiliating experience of 1988, when Senator Lloyd M. Bentsen told him, ''You're no Jack Kennedy.'' So Mr. Quayle ignored Mr. Gore and instead attacked Bill Clinton. Mr. Gore stuck resolutely to his message and did not defend Mr. Clinton, and wound up looking flat-footed -- and enraging Mr. Clinton. In an interview today, Mr. Gore said he had little recollection of that encounter and shrugged off the cumulative effect of Mr. Quayle's attacks. David Birdsell, who specializes in political communication and presidential debates at Baruch College, said: ''Overwhelmingly, Al Gore's principal quality as a debater is his ability to remain dead on message, from beginning to the end. This is invariant. Sometimes he is almost maniacally on message, repeating the same line so many times it sounds like a tape.'' In addition, Mr. Birdsell said: ''Gore is one of the most effective attackers in debates in the business. He plays the bully in the playground, like when he beat up on Bruce Babbitt in the primary debates in '88. He started the biggest attack on Babbitt, then everyone began to treat Babbitt as a comic character, and it was all set up by Al Gore. It works for him. It has the potential to backfire, but so far he's been able to walk that line very effectively.'' Spontaneity takes a holiday in Gore debates. He goes into these forums thoroughly versed in his opponent's record and ready to use it -- Mr. Bradley might say ready to distort it. When Mr. Bradley said in this year's Democratic primary that President Clinton should sign an executive order banning racial profiling, Mr. Gore countered sharply: ''Racial profiling practically began in New Jersey, Senator Bradley.'' But that exception proves the rule. Increasingly, Mr. Gore likes to show he is in complete control. As he and Mr. Bradley were at their lecterns waiting for a debate to begin last October, Mr. Gore asked the audience, ''Anybody have a question?'' Despite his command of the dialogue, Mr. Gore's body language tends toward the tense -- except when he is deliberately trying to look relaxed by putting his left hand in his pocket and wandering around the stage. More often than not, he opens with a planned surprise, offering his opponent some sort of deal -- a handshake to Mr. Bradley to eliminate television commercials, a joking suggestion to Mr. Kemp that if the former quarterback would refrain from using football metaphors, Mr. Gore would not mention ''any of my warm and humorous stories about chlorofluorocarbon abatement.'' These moves -- his critics call them gimmicks -- have added to Mr. Gore's reputation as a master at flummoxing the other side, to great amusement in his 1993 debate with Ross Perot. To brand Mr. Perot as a protectionist, Mr. Gore pulled out a picture of Reed Smoot and Willis C. Hawley, the dreary-looking authors of a famously misguided tariff, the 1930 Smoot-Hawley Act. He said he had it specially framed for Mr. Perot. Clearly irked, Mr. Perot grabbed the present and slammed it face down on his desk. William Kristol, editor of The Weekly Standard and Mr. Quayle's chief of staff, said that the best approach with Mr. Gore was to try to knock him off his script. ''Gore is like one of these well-oiled machines,'' Mr. Kristol said. ''If you let him get going and pick up momentum, he's relentless and very hard to stop. If you can get him off his game early and disrupt his plans, he doesn't adjust terribly well.'' In his least appealing moments, Mr. Gore can seem sanctimonious and condescending. He likes to show how much he knows. Some call it the Eddie Haskell effect; he appears to be the model student, pandering to the teacher, but when the teacher leaves the room, he turns around and annihilates his fellow students. With Mr. Gore, the wheels are always spinning, sometimes visibly. ''Let me take 10 seconds to finish my last answer,'' he frequently says. At a debate at Dartmouth College last fall, a woman asked Mr. Gore how to end school violence. ''Hmmmmmm,'' he said, as if hearing the question for the first time. ''Tell me about your family.'' In an overt effort to connect with the audience, Mr. Gore made a small joke about her family (''One daughter 17 months old and a husband -- which one do you have more trouble with?'') but then jumped the rails: ''First, a brief comment on the latest exchange.'' The audience laughed. Mr. Gore's visage grew stern at the laughter and he held up his hand in a command to stop. Mr. Gore almost never makes gaffes or utters one-liners that work against him or, for that matter, are particularly memorable. His speech patterns, characterized by unfailingly formal syntax and multiple subordinate clauses, are generally too complex for that. This has spawned concern in the Gore camp that the vice president needs to figure out better how to speak to ''real people.'' Mr. Gore is rather showily not cramming for these face-offs. Instead, his campaign has set up ''debate camp'' here with 13 ordinary citizens he met along the campaign trail. They will serve, he said, as his ''sounding board'' and ''reality check.'' The novel move is an implicit acknowledgment that Mr. Gore still has difficulty conveying his humanity to voters. Mr. Gore tends to get lost in mind-numbing, eye-glazing detail. Aides said that having ''real people'' at practice sessions will help him focus on condensing his thoughts into easily digestible nuggets. And in what has become a Gore tradition, he expects to have them at the debate in Boston. Analysts trace his success in the Iowa caucuses this year to his display of Chris Peterson, an Iowa farmer and flood victim, at a forum in Des Moines where he questioned Mr. Bradley's commitment to farmers and Mr. Bradley appeared not to know his own record. As Mr. Gore said the other day, he is hoping that his familiarity with issues -- and the fact that his positions are generally more popular with voters than Mr. Bush's are -- will win people over in a way that his personality might not. Asked if he was concerned he might win the debate on points and lose on style, Mr. Gore said: ''I think that it's the same question people ask about how people vote. Do they vote on the issues or on the person? Both. How do you separate them out? I mean, the way they think about somebody and they way they feel about somebody colors the way they interpret stands on the issues. But vice versa also -- the way the positions on the issues can have an impact on how they feel about somebody. So, I don't know. That's above my level of expertise. I just feel my way along.'' THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATES  Correction:  October 3, 2000, Tuesday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's performance in past debates referred incorrectly to strategy for the coming ones. It is Mr. Gore, not Gov. George W. Bush, who is trying to bat down the impression that the vice president is the more accomplished debater. Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's performance in past debates referred incorrectly to strategy for the coming ones. It is Mr. Gore, not Gov. George W. Bush, who is trying to bat down the impression that the vice president is the more accomplished debater.
 Michael Lind Op-Ed article says winner-take-all electoral system in presidential campaigns should be changed since it cheats Americans out of national debate; says Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, by obsessively courting undecided candidates in major electoral swing states, are pandering to interests of miniscule number of Americans while neglecting issues of concern to nation as whole; drawing (M) Those are the undecided voters in swing states with lots of votes in the Electoral College. Elementary math explains why both Al Gore and George W. Bush are paying much less attention to most of the South, New England and the Mountain West, as well as California, New York and Texas. These places are reliably Republican or Democratic, and there is not much point in contesting them. Those are the undecided voters in swing states with lots of votes in the Electoral College. Elementary math explains why both Al Gore and George W. Bush are paying much less attention to most of the South, New England and the Mountain West, as well as California, New York and Texas. These places are reliably Republican or Democratic, and there is not much point in contesting them. In some ways, Mr. Gore has proved more adept than Mr. Bush at aiming micro-messages at swing voters in swing states. The vice president's call for opening the strategic petroleum reserve and his attacks on Big Oil appeal to Midwestern voters worried about high heating bills this winter. His support for expanding Medicare to cover prescription drugs is intended to appeal to elderly voters in Florida, the one big Southern state in play. Earlier, Mr. Gore went after another important electoral bloc in Florida, Cuban-Americans, by disagreeing with the Clinton administration in the Elian Gonzalez case. Though usually outspoken on the environment, Mr. Gore has been careful not to stress this theme too heavily when he is in the Rust Belt, where it is not popular with manufacturing workers. He has just as carefully avoided making an issue of gun control, which is unpopular with many Reagan Democrats in the Midwest. While Mr. Bush is spending most of his time in swing states, too, he has not, like Mr. Gore, cobbled together an ad hoc platform that makes specific promises to specific swing voters. The one exception may be Latinos, whom Mr. Bush frequently addresses in Spanish. A number of big swing states have large Latino populations. For the same reason, a Democratic presidential candidate, instead of writing off Texas and even vilifying it, as Vice President Gore has done, would court the states' substantial minority of Democrats and independents. A candidate who stressed a few themes of national importance might rack up more electoral votes nationwide than a rival who focused on a few important states.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, known as one of most ferocious debaters in American politics, says he will try new tack and tone in his first televised encounter with Gov George W Bush on October 2, of keeping focus on his own proposals while trying to resist savaging opponent; says he expects to spew facts and figures and not barbs at Bush; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore, who is known as one of the most ferocious debaters in American politics, said today that he would try a new tack -- and tone -- in his first televised encounter with Gov. George W. Bush: keep the focus on his own proposals and try to resist savaging his opponent. Strolling in his bare feet along the beach in this resort community on the Gulf Coast near Sarasota, where he is preparing for the first general election debate, on Tuesday, Mr. Gore said he expected to spew facts and figures -- as he did at the Democratic convention -- and not barbs at Mr. Bush. Vice President Al Gore, who is known as one of the most ferocious debaters in American politics, said today that he would try a new tack -- and tone -- in his first televised encounter with Gov. George W. Bush: keep the focus on his own proposals and try to resist savaging his opponent. Strolling in his bare feet along the beach in this resort community on the Gulf Coast near Sarasota, where he is preparing for the first general election debate, on Tuesday, Mr. Gore said he expected to spew facts and figures -- as he did at the Democratic convention -- and not barbs at Mr. Bush. ''I'm looking at this one differently,'' Mr. Gore said in an interview that was repeatedly interrupted by well-wishers ambling up to him as the surf rolled in gently. ''I'll be communicating less on him and more on the people watching. That will be my single-minded focus.'' That focus is intended to blunt what Mr. Gore's advisers say may be his greatest liability in debates: he can come across as badgering and even mean-spirited. By inviting two reporters to walk with him on the beach, Mr. Gore was clearly trying to convey that he was in high spirits, and at ease with his debate preparations. In saying that his strategy would be positive and future-oriented, the vice president also might have been trying to throw off Mr. Bush as he prepared at his ranch in Crawford, Tex. Whatever the intention, Mr. Gore seemed to enjoy his late morning constitutional. He chuckled at the contrast between his gray shorts and polo shirt and the suit and wingtips Richard M. Nixon wore when he, famously, walked the beach. Mr. Gore looked so much like he was on holiday that one woman asked, ''Are you just on vacation?'' ''No, I've been preparing for the debates,'' Mr. Gore responded, laughing heartily and stretching out his arms. ''Can't you tell?'' Another beachgoer, Mort Goodman, handed the vice president a sealed envelope with the words, ''Memo For Debate Enclosed.'' That prompted Mr. Gore to say, ''This is better than finding seashells! Thank you.'' There was such an outpouring from bystanders that Mr. Gore observed, ''I'm beginning to think we planted these people.'' In seeking to break from his past as a basher in debates, Mr. Gore said that when he contrasted himself with Mr. Bush, he would focus more on their substantive differences, particularly the Texas governor's tax-cut plan. He said he would be less inclined to reach back and disparage  Mr. Bush's record in Texas, although the Democrats were doing that in television commercials. ''I will talk less about his Texas record and more about proposals that are relevant to the future -- his and mine,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I'll spend most of my time talking about mine.'' Another incentive for Mr. Gore to stick to issues, his aides said, was that polls showed that his positions were relatively popular while Mr. Bush's strength was his personality. Mr. Gore said he was buoyed by the response to his policy-laden speech at the Democratic National Convention, and he seemed comfortable with the idea that his selling point was his command of issues. ''As I said at the convention,'' he said, ''the presidency is not a popularity contest.'' Asked if it was hard to compete on personality with the affable Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore was not about to concede anything, saying, ''It's in the ear, and eye, of the beholder.'' Contending that Americans have had enough of ''sound bites and generalities,'' Mr. Gore said he did not expect to arrive in Boston on Tuesday armed with a batch of one-liners or ploys -- as in the primaries when he challenged Bill Bradley to eliminate television commercials. ''I'm not planning any gimmicks,'' Mr. Gore said. ''If something comes up that looks like a gimmick, you'll know it's spontaneous.'' As part of his campaign to show that he was of good cheer and more interested in the people than in his opponent, Mr. Gore was the host of a brunch of shrimp salad with 13 ''real people'' his campaign flew down here to watch him in a mock debate today and offer their tips. One of them, Matt Moseley, an Atlanta firefighter, advised Mr. Gore: ''Just have a conversation like we are. I don't envy you a bit trying to find that balancing between, I guess, the more technical side of the debate and the human side of the debate.'' Mr. Gore's aides said they recognized that in citing policy the vice president could come off as pedantic, not to say dull. When Mr. Gore ran through a practice debate Saturday night and again today, one aide said, a goal was to help him ''explain these complex policy ideas'' in a reasonable amount of time and ''do it in human terms.'' While he tried to convey a sense of openness in the interview, Mr. Gore was guarded in discussing how he was preparing for the debate and how he viewed his sparring partner. The vice president seemed to jump to Mr. Bush's defense when asked about how the governor sometimes mispronounced words, saying, ''I think more is made of it than should be made of it.'' Despite the display on the beach and the consultation with ordinary people, Mr. Gore retreated to serious practice sessions with a vanload of advisers. It was not lost on Mr. Gore that a stuffed shark graced their practice room at the Mote Marine Laboratory in nearby Sarasota. Yet even as he tried to play down his fiercely competitive nature, there was no doubt that he and his advisers were preparing for what could be a bitter encounter. Suggesting that the be-nice-to-Bush strategy could be canned in an instant, one aide who was advising Mr. Gore here said, ''If he whacks us, we're not going to sit and take it.'' Mr. Gore certainly must have appreciated the spirited words of Allison Frankel, 24, of Chapel Hill, N.C., when she walked up to him on the beach: ''We expect you to kick some butt.'' Mindful, perhaps, that he not sound too primed for battle, Mr. Gore replied, simply, ''I appreciate your best wishes.''
 As a Yale freshman George W. Bush was the only pledge in his fraternity who could stand up and recite the names of the other 49 pledges. In his first year at Harvard Al Gore was knocking on doors and shaking hands while running for freshman council. In ''The Choice 2000,'' a joint biography of the presidential candidates, these differences still define the men and their campaigns: Mr. Bush's cult of personality and Mr. Gore's marathon of perseverance. As a Yale freshman George W. Bush was the only pledge in his fraternity who could stand up and recite the names of the other 49 pledges. In his first year at Harvard Al Gore was knocking on doors and shaking hands while running for freshman council. In ''The Choice 2000,'' a joint biography of the presidential candidates, these differences still define the men and their campaigns: Mr. Bush's cult of personality and Mr. Gore's marathon of perseverance. The film is best at depicting their childhood years, partly because it is always arresting to see home movies and snapshots. There is the boy called Georgie playing ball in Midland, Tex. And there is Al Jr., son of Senator Albert Gore, at home in the stuffy Fairfax Hotel in Washington. Among the people interviewed is the son of the tenants on the Gore farm in Tennessee whose family young Al stayed with during school vacations; Gore Sr. insisted on these stints, which gave the boy a seasoning in hard work and useful political roots. Paradoxically, it was Mr. Bush's ancestors who were rich, blue-blooded Easterners, despite the down-home ease his Texas childhood conferred. As it goes back and forth contrasting the men's lives, ''The Choice'' gets progressively weaker, making the necessary, obvious stops. There is Mr. Bush's decision to stop drinking when he turned 40, and the natural political flair that led to his quick rise when he decided to run for governor. There is Mr. Gore's disappointment after his brief run for president in 1988 and the personal tragedies of his sister's death and his young son's serious car accident. But ''The Choice'' fails to do the very thing it should: connect all its biographical data to the ideas and styles that drive the campaigns. Only at the end does it ask, as a kind of farewell, whether Governor Bush is intellectually weighty enough to be president and Vice President Gore exciting enough to win. ''The Choice 2000'' does illuminate the shaky state of political biography on television. Recently ABC took a similar approach and did a more thoughtful, more revealing job of connecting biography and politics in a two-part prime-time special called ''Family Business.'' (It included the anecdotes about Mr. Bush's memory for pledges and Mr. Gore's freshman campaign; apparently there are only so many telling details in anyone's life.) But the fine ''Family Business'' was practically buried. It was not sent out for review; the second part was shown opposite the Olympics opening ceremony.
 Sen Tom Harkin letter on Thomas L Friedman's Sept 26 article hails Vice Pres Al Gore's energy program4 Thomas L. Friedman (column, Sept. 26) criticizes Al Gore for lacking a real program on energy, yet ignores Mr. Gore's ambitious plan proposed in June that would give American families energy choices, reduce our dependence on foreign oil and clean up our air and water. In contrast, George W. Bush's plan is basically the same old drill, drill, drill -- even in our few remaining pristine natural areas. Thomas L. Friedman (column, Sept. 26) criticizes Al Gore for lacking a real program on energy, yet ignores Mr. Gore's ambitious plan proposed in June that would give American families energy choices, reduce our dependence on foreign oil and clean up our air and water. In contrast, George W. Bush's plan is basically the same old drill, drill, drill -- even in our few remaining pristine natural areas. Mr. Gore would offer families tax incentives to purchase fuel-efficient cars, homes and home products. He would invest in light-rail systems, cleaner buses and high-speed trains that would cut traffic, reduce smog and end our dependence on foreign oil. He supports market-based approaches to clean up and increase the efficiency of our nation's aging power plants. And he has long backed renewable energy from biomass fuels, wind and solar power.
 Correction of October 1 photo credit for picture of Mark McKinnon, media adviser with Bush campaign A credit yesterday for a picture of Mark McKinnon, a media adviser with the Bush campaign, misspelled the photographer's surname in some copies. He is Mathew Sturtevant, not Sturevant. A credit yesterday for a picture of Mark McKinnon, a media adviser with the Bush campaign, misspelled the photographer's surname in some copies. He is Mathew Sturtevant, not Sturevant.
 Al Gore, who has appeared in 43 televised debates in his political career, has a reputation as a combative opponent. His style might be summed up by this advice from his mother: ''Smile, relax, attack.'' Al Gore, who has appeared in 43 televised debates in his political career, has a reputation as a combative opponent. His style might be summed up by this advice from his mother: ''Smile, relax, attack.''
 Excerpts from past debates involving Vice Pres Al Gore; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore often resists calls to be succinct. Here is an example from a debate with former Senator Bill Bradley in Durham, N.H., on Jan. 5, 2000. The moderator, Peter Jennings, asked for one-word answers. Q. Mr. Gore, has Mr. Bradley ever taken a vote or a quote of yours out of context?  GORE -- I haven't complained about any.  Q. Question was, has he?  A. I'd have to think. I haven't made a point of responding to that. I don't -- I won't accuse him of that.  Q. Interesting one-word answer, sir.  A. Well, I don't know that the answer is no, but if you want a no, I'll give you a no. Vice President Al Gore often resists calls to be succinct. Here is an example from a debate with former Senator Bill Bradley in Durham, N.H., on Jan. 5, 2000. The moderator, Peter Jennings, asked for one-word answers. Q. Mr. Gore, has Mr. Bradley ever taken a vote or a quote of yours out of context?  GORE -- I haven't complained about any.  Q. Question was, has he?  A. I'd have to think. I haven't made a point of responding to that. I don't -- I won't accuse him of that.  Q. Interesting one-word answer, sir.  A. Well, I don't know that the answer is no, but if you want a no, I'll give you a no. Mr. Gore likes interjections with an edge. Here he was in a Dec. 1, 1987, debate in Washington with ve other Democrats, including the Rev. Jesse Jackson. Mr. Gore was running as the Southern candidate. Mr. Gore can be especially persistent, as in this excerpt from a debate with ve other Democrats, including Representative Richard A. Gephardt, on Feb. 29, 1988, in Williamsburg, Va. Mr. Gore also thoroughly researches his opponent's positions and can be quick to unspool those positions. In his Oct. 9, 1996, vice-presidential debate with Jack F. Kemp in St. Petersburg, Fla., he did this after Mr. Kemp said that ownership of one's own home was afrmative action of the sort that Abraham Lincoln would have favored. Mr. Gore is also a master of the planned put-down, as he demonstrated in his Nov. 9, 1993, debate with Ross Perot on CNN's Larry King Live.
 Bush Returns to Tax Cut Plan  After months of burnishing his image as a new Republican with proposals for modest social programs, Gov. George W. Bush has gone into the final sprint of the presidential race by returning his ambitious across-the-board tax cut plan to the center of his campaign. Gore's Debate Reputation  Vice President Al Gore heads into tomorrow's presidential debate with a reputation as one of the most artful, combative and practiced political debaters in modern history. But most of his practice has come at the expense of fellow Democrats. Mr. Gore said he would try a new tack -- and tone -- in his first televised debate with Mr. Bush: keep the focus on his own proposals and try to resist savaging his opponent.
 But spokesmen for Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said the candidates had nothing to do with Mr. Nader's failed efforts to join the debates. ''The reality is that there are over 200 people running for president,'' said Jano Cabrera, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. At one point, Mr. Nader called Mr. Bush ''a corporation running for president disguised as a person.'' But his harshest attacks were reserved for the Democratic Party in general and Mr. Gore in particular. He mocked Mr. Gore's pledge to fight big oil, major pharmaceutical companies and health maintenance organizations.
 Republican presidential nominee Gov George W Bush, after months of burnishing image as new Republican with proposals for modest social programs, enters final sprint of presidential race by returning his ambitious across-the-board tax-cut plan to center of campaign; is presenting middle class families to audiences at stop after stop as way of talking about tax cuts, despite party's failure to excite voters with tax-cut proposals in recent years; carefully selects families that would save about $2,000 or more under his plan and much less under Vice Pres Al Gore's; says he trusts people to manage their own money, while Gore trusts 'thinkers and planners and plotters' in Washington; his emphasis on tax relief as one of core issues puts him at forefront of conservative thought and comes as Republicans in high-profile races have offered more modest proposals (M) After months of burnishing his image as a new Republican with proposals for modest social programs, Gov. George W. Bush has gone into the final sprint of the presidential race by returning his ambitious across-the-board tax-cut plan to the center of his campaign. At stop after stop -- despite his party's failure to excite voters with tax-cut proposals in recent years -- Mr. Bush presents individual middle-class families to his audiences as a way of talking about tax cuts. He carefully selects families that would save about $2,000 or more under his plan and much less under Vice President Al Gore's plan. After months of burnishing his image as a new Republican with proposals for modest social programs, Gov. George W. Bush has gone into the final sprint of the presidential race by returning his ambitious across-the-board tax-cut plan to the center of his campaign. At stop after stop -- despite his party's failure to excite voters with tax-cut proposals in recent years -- Mr. Bush presents individual middle-class families to his audiences as a way of talking about tax cuts. He carefully selects families that would save about $2,000 or more under his plan and much less under Vice President Al Gore's plan. Then he will say he trusts the people to manage their own money, while Mr. Gore trusts ''the thinkers and planners and plotters'' in Washington -- language that harks all the way back to conservative criticism of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal brain trust. Mr. Bush's emphasis on tax relief as one of his core issues puts him at the forefront of conservative thought and comes as Republicans in high-profile races, like the Senate candidates Rick A. Lazio in New York and George F. Allen in Virginia, have offered more modest plans instead of embracing Mr. Bush's. Mr. Gore has stepped up his assaults on Mr. Bush's proposal, arguing that it would reward the wealthy and hurt the economy. But the governor's aides say he will succeed in using tax cutting as a mainstay of his candidacy, where others have failed, in part because the size of the surplus has weakened arguments against tax relief. In addition, they say, Mr. Bush is pitching his plan in ways Republicans have not tried in the past. The tax cut is laced into a comprehensive package of issues that also includes Social Security, Medicare and education. Each issue is used to argue that Mr. Bush allows people to make their own choices in life, while Mr. Gore would increase the power and scope of the government. ''The tax cut becomes a surrogate for a broader discussion about values and the role of government,'' a Bush adviser said. And instead of portraying tax cutting in economic terms, Mr. Bush uses values-laden language. He speaks of ''fairness'' and right and wrong, words designed to blunt the traditional charge by Democrats that across-the-board tax cutting gives huge windfalls to upper-income Americans. So, for example, Mr. Bush will call his $1.3 trillion 10-year tax cut equitable because it reduces tax rates for all income brackets. And he brands Mr. Gore's smaller cut of just under $500 billion across 10 years social engineering because people get tax credits for certain social needs, like a college education, child care or long-term care for the elderly. ''I don't believe my job as the president is to say O.K., you're the right kind of person, you're the wrong kind of person,'' Mr. Bush frequently says. ''My job as president is to say O.K., if we're going to have tax relief, let's be fair, and everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief.'' Mr. Bush rarely dwells on the overall cost of his tax cut. ''Bush communicates taxes without using numbers,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster. ''You could criticize the Republican Party for not figuring this out before.'' The lack of emphasis on a figure also serves to reduce any disharmony with Congressional Republicans, according to party strategists. They note that even if Mr. Bush and Congressional candidates are not talking about the same size tax cut, they are hitting the same themes. ''We don't see it as a problem at all, because all of them say in one form or another they are embracing independent components of our plan,'' one aide to Mr. Bush said. In some ways, Mr. Bush had little choice but to campaign hard on his tax cut as a way of fighting Mr. Gore's claims that his opponent is for ''the powerful'' and he is for ''the people.'' Mr. Bush's aides acknowledge that the governor's proposals for overhauling Medicare, for creating a prescription drug benefit and for reshaping Social Security are complicated and can be difficult to explain in concrete ways. Since Mr. Bush's Medicare plan, for example, envisions competition between private insurers and the government Medicare program, his aides cannot say with any certainty what a monthly premium would be. But they can say how much money people would receive under Mr. Bush's tax-cut proposal. The idea of showcasing families to talk about tax cuts came from Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. The governor's aides say the couples, known inside the campaign as ''tax families,'' have two purposes. They help the governor excite the Republican base with tax cutting, and they come from the same income bracket as many of those voters who are viewed as undecided in this year's presidential race. It is precisely such perceptions that the Bush campaign is trying to dispel. So it is no accident that the governor often showcases couples whose income hovers around the $50,000 range. In addition, his chosen couples are ones who are ineligible for Mr. Gore's many tax credit proposals: they itemize their taxes and have no children in day care, no college tuition costs and few savings. Last week the Zells of Redwood City, Calif., were one of the couples on display. Mr. Bush said that by his count they would get a $2,175 tax cut under his plan and $100 under Mr. Gore's. Mr. Bush has focused on particular points to try to deride Mr. Gore's plan. He notes that under Mr. Gore's proposal to end the so-called marriage penalty -- the quirk in the tax law that makes some couples pay more taxes when they marry and file jointly than when they were single -- relief is available only to couples who do not itemize. A newly married couple who buy a house and deduct the mortgage interest get no marriage penalty relief, he points out, while those who rent do. The Gore campaign argues the case differently. Mr. Gore's tax-cut proposal would alleviate the marriage penalty by raising the standard deduction for married couples, which is taken only by relatively low-income people. In short, Mr. Gore's aides say, he is directing this particular tax benefit to the neediest. Democrats say they will trump Mr. Bush in the tax-cutting debate. They point to Senator John McCain, who beat Mr. Bush in the New Hampshire primary with a smaller tax-cut plan and the argument that Mr. Bush risked reopening deficits. Mr. Gore makes that same point nearly every day, and charges as well that Mr. Bush cannot afford to invest enough in programs like education or Medicare because of the scope of his tax cut. He and his aides also point to the tax breaks the wealthy would receive under Mr. Bush's plan. So last week, on a day when Mr. Bush was speaking of education, Ronald A. Klain, a Gore adviser, countered in a news release: ''George Bush says his priority is education, but his real priority is tax cuts for the wealthy. How can he really invest in education, when he spends so much of the surplus on tax breaks for the few?'' And on Friday, Mr. Gore called Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut ''a plan which spends $667 billion on a tax cut for the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans and would wreck our good economy in the process.'' Mr. Gore's staff has also analyzed how two hypothetical families who sound a lot like the Bushes and the Cheneys would fare under Mr. Bush's tax cut. A married couple from Wyoming earning $4.4 million a year, the Gore camp said, would get a $278,000 tax cut under Mr. Bush's proposal. A Texas family with one wage earner in state government but considerable additional income of $1.3 million annually would get a $60,000 reduction, the Gore staff said. But in the Republican Party, even onetime critics of Mr. Bush's tax-cut proposal approve of the way he is now campaigning on the issue. Rick Davis, who was Mr. McCain's campaign manager, said Mr. Bush must campaign hard on his tax cut because the election is likely in the end to turn on the economy. ''I think he's doing the right thing,'' Mr. Davis said. ''If you're going to run with this big tax cut, you'd better sell it.''
 Rick A Lazio declares that he supports FDA's approval of abortion-inducing drug RU-486, breaking from position taken by his party's presidential nominee, George W Bush; Republican candidate for Senate in New York says he is opposed to allowing government to pay for drug for poor women; Hillary Rodham Clinton, campaigning in black churches in Harlem, urges parishoners to vote on Election Day; plea signals importance she is attaching to high turnout of black voters; photo (M) Rick A. Lazio declared yesterday that he supported the F.D.A.'s approval of the abortion-inducing drug RU-486, breaking from the position taken by his party's presidential nominee, George W. Bush. But the Republican candidate for Senate in New York said he opposed allowing the government to pay for the drug for poor women. ''I disagree with him on this,'' Mr. Lazio said of Mr. Bush in explaining his support for the ruling by the Food and Drug Administration allowing the marketing of RU-486, or mifepristone. ''I think the F.D.A. signed off on safety. It ought to be available. And it's, again, another way a women can make a choice.'' Rick A. Lazio declared yesterday that he supported the F.D.A.'s approval of the abortion-inducing drug RU-486, breaking from the position taken by his party's presidential nominee, George W. Bush. But the Republican candidate for Senate in New York said he opposed allowing the government to pay for the drug for poor women. ''I disagree with him on this,'' Mr. Lazio said of Mr. Bush in explaining his support for the ruling by the Food and Drug Administration allowing the marketing of RU-486, or mifepristone. ''I think the F.D.A. signed off on safety. It ought to be available. And it's, again, another way a women can make a choice.''
 Candidate Lieberman has been criticized recently by black leaders who say they believe he is a tepid defender of their interests. But the Gore-Lieberman campaign has pointed out that Student Lieberman wrote more about racial injustice than any other subject.
 What would it mean if George Bush and Dick Cheney replaced Clinton-Gore; if Britain's William Hague and Michael Portillo swept Tony Blair and Gordon Brown out of office, and if Israel's Bibi Netanyahu and Arik Sharon took over from Ehud Barak and Ehud Barak? What would it mean if George Bush and Dick Cheney replaced Clinton-Gore; if Britain's William Hague and Michael Portillo swept Tony Blair and Gordon Brown out of office, and if Israel's Bibi Netanyahu and Arik Sharon took over from Ehud Barak and Ehud Barak? In the U.S., Bush has undergone a reversal of poll misfortune; if he strongly exceeds expectations in debate tomorrow, he will become the king of swing voters. Bush and Hague would have no such conflicts in their world views. Hague envisions an expansion of the North American Free Trade Agreement to the European Union, presumably with Britain as the fulcrum. That suits the U.S. more than the goal of a ''United States of Europe,'' dominated by Germany and France, that Clinton-Gore rhetoric tended to encourage. Clinton-Gore had prickly relations with Netanyahu. Recently, Clinton's ambassador to Israel, Martin Indyk, publicly called for the division of Jerusalem; his extreme statement stands as Clinton policy. Perhaps Gore would repudiate that position, long rejected by Netanyahu, if asked about it in tomorrow night's debate; Bush surely would. Pro-Israeli hard-liners have greater trust in Gore than Clinton, but when Gore adopts a favorite administration formulation -- that the U.S. should stand with Israel when Israel takes risks for peace -- the question arises, What about when those risks are too great? Would Bush twist Netanyahu's arm to make previously unthinkable concessions, as Clinton and Indyk did with Barak? The jury is out on that because the memory of his father's gurus, James Baker and Brent Scowcroft, still rankles. But when George W.'s national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, visited Israel last month, she seemed impressed with the strategic value of the Golan Heights. And if George Shultz continues to be the elder-statesman adviser to Bush the younger, White House arm-twisting on security would stop. Geopolitical realists will shorten the odds by choosing other combinations of right, left and third way-out: Bush-Blair-Barak, for example, or a gridlocks-and-eggs special of Gore-Hague-Netanyahu. Or are we headed toward no change at all -- the ancient Roman status quo vadis? We cannot ignore the possibility of the liberal's trilateral trifecta: Gore-Blair-Barak. I don't want to even think about that.
 Editorial in series, Campaign 2000, on issues in presidential campaign focuses on 'pronounced' differences between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore on energy policy; says sharp rise in oil prices has given energy new and unexpected prominence but that what ought to be serious debate has been marred by unedifying accusations about who deserves blame for allowing US to sink further into dependence on oil and has diverted attention from inconvenient truths about America's energy problem (M) The sharp rise in oil prices over the last few months has given energy issues new and unexpected prominence in the presidential campaign. But what ought to be a serious debate has been marred by unedifying accusations about who deserves blame for allowing America to sink further into ''dependence on foreign oil.'' Gov. George W. Bush says the Democrats have inhibited oil exploration with their environmental and tax policies. Vice President Al  Gore says the Republicans have allowed ''big oil'' to put profits ahead of the American consumer. All this has diverted attention from two inconvenient truths about America's energy problem. The sharp rise in oil prices over the last few months has given energy issues new and unexpected prominence in the presidential campaign. But what ought to be a serious debate has been marred by unedifying accusations about who deserves blame for allowing America to sink further into ''dependence on foreign oil.'' Gov. George W. Bush says the Democrats have inhibited oil exploration with their environmental and tax policies. Vice President Al  Gore says the Republicans have allowed ''big oil'' to put profits ahead of the American consumer. All this has diverted attention from two inconvenient truths about America's energy problem. The differences between the two candidates on energy issues are pronounced. Mr. Bush sought to narrow these differences in a major address on Friday, calling for $1.4 billion in tax credits over 10 years to encourage electricity generation from alternative fuels. He also said he would spend $2 billion over 10 years for ''clean coal'' technologies, aimed at exploiting the country's huge supplies of cheap but polluting supplies of coal. But his strategy still relies mainly on increasing supply, including uncontroversial ideas like streamlining regulatory restrictions on pipeline construction and hugely controversial ideas like opening the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to drilling. According to the latest government estimates, the mean estimate of economically recoverable oil in the plain is 3.2 billion barrels. Environmentalists and Mr. Gore do not think it is worth defacing a pristine wilderness for what amounts to about six months' worth of oil. For his part, Mr. Gore has offered a dizzying array of proposals aimed at increased energy efficiency. These include generous tax credits for more fuel-efficient buildings and factories, and for consumers who buy fuel-efficient vehicles and appliances. In addition, Mr. Gore proposes major federal investments in light rail systems and various public-private partnerships, including a Gore favorite, the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles, which is aimed at developing cars and trucks that run on batteries or fuel cells. In dollar terms, Mr. Gore's energy proposals would cost about $50 billion over 10 years, dwarfing Mr. Bush's $7.1 billion. But dollars do not accurately define this debate. Mr. Gore believes that consumption is the main problem. Mr. Bush thinks that production is the main answer. This is as clear a difference as one can find in this campaign.
 Joyce Purnick Metro Matters column contends that while public opinion polls are useful criteria in determining outcome of elections, they can be wrong, misinterpreted, biased, unable to catch up with changing electorate and possibly based on wrong data; polls involving Presidential election between Al Gore and George W Bush and New York State Senate campaign between Hillary Rodham Clinton and Repr Rick Lazio discussed (M) They can be wrong. (Some must be; otherwise, how to explain different polls showing both George W. Bush and Al Gore slightly ahead of each other, and Hillary Rodham Clinton beating Rick A. Lazio and in a dead heat with him?) They can be misinterpreted. They can be biased. They can fail to catch up with a changing electorate. They can be based on the wrong data. And they are not the election.
 But Gov. George W. Bush, on whose watch 144 prisoners have been executed, has insisted that every person put to death in Texas had ''full access to the courts'' and ''full access to a fair trial.'' Governor Bush may well believe that everybody executed in Texas was guilty, but he has only faith -- not the facts -- to guide him.
 Photo of Vice Pres Al Gore posing on beach with residents of Longboat Key, Fla, while taking break from preparing for debates with Gov George W Bush
