 * NADER-LaDUKE BENEFIT CONCERT, Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan, (212) 465-6741. Independent-minded artists turn out to support the third-party candidate who is fighting to join the debates with Al Gore and George W. Bush. Ralph Nader and his running mate, Winona LaDuke, will stump, but music fans may be equally excited by a rare acoustic performance by Eddie Vedder of Pearl Jam and sets by Ani DiFranco and Ben Harper. Also rallying will be the actors Susan Sarandon and Tim Robbins, the comedian Bill Murray and the filmmaker Michael Moore. Phil Donahue is the M.C. The event is general admission, which is an interesting experiment for the Garden; come early for the best view. Tonight at 8; admission is $20 (Powers).
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column appraises second debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; says Gore managed to let Bush hold him to draw on international affairs, even supported Bush's goopy generalities about being humble, but strong, nation and following golden rule; says campaign is no longer between 'class brain' and 'class clown'; says now both are shooting for gentleman's C (M) POP QUIZ: During the debate on Wednesday night, Al Gore looked: POP QUIZ: During the debate on Wednesday night, Al Gore looked: There is no joy in Goreville. At the very moment when the American people realize that they need a president who knows what he's doing in foreign policy, Mr. Gore managed to let George W. Bush hold him to a draw on international affairs. He even allowed the governor of Texas to beat him in this week's round of the hard-to-pronounce-name-dropping competition. The best news of the night for the Gore campaign was that since most undecided voters are not political junkies, the only swing votes watching this debate were the ones in the CNN focus group. POP QUIZ II: During the debate on Wednesday, George W. Bush looked: It's easy, given the way Mr. Gore seemed intellectually AWOL, to overestimate Mr. Bush's performance. This is a man who, when asked how he would exercise the ''enormous power'' of the presidency, basically said he would consult Dick Cheney. Talking about foreign policy, Mr. Bush volunteered: ''It's also important to keep a strong ties in the Middle East with credible ties because of the energy crisis we're now in. After all, all the energy is produced from -- from the Middle East. And so I -- I appreciate what the administration is doing. I -- I hope to get a sense of, should I be fortunate enough to be the president, how my administration will react to the Middle East.'' Not long after, the moderator asked Mr. Gore how he and Mr. Bush differed in their approach to the Middle East. ''I haven't heard a big difference,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Gore has spent the last few days trying to live down the devastating ''Saturday Night Live'' parody of his performance in Debate No. 1, as the guy begging for permission to give two answers to the question. His staff made him watch it, presumably under the assumption that what their candidate needed was a bracing dose of utter public humiliation. Mr. Gore couldn't resist a temptation to sidle up to his opponent, to join hands in support of all the goopy generalities Mr. Bush was tossing into the hopper. Among the important points on which Mr. Gore felt compelled to agree: When Mr. Gore wasn't agreeing, he was trying to explain what he wasn't. The moderator asked him to define the differences between himself and Mr. Bush on gun control. The old, mean Al Gore would have pointed out that he was the only candidate at the table who did not favor allowing people to carry concealed weapons into church. Gore Lite began with, ''Well, I'm not for registration. . . .'' When the talk turned to pollution, Mr. Gore executed a double-capitulation, managing to simultaneously agree with Mr. Bush and announce that he was not for something. (''He's right that I'm not in favor of energy taxes.'') One of Mr. Bush's favorite lines on the Balkans is that the U.S. ought to get ''our European friends to become the peacekeepers.'' He used it twice on Wednesday night. The new Gore was too polite to point out that they already provide more than 80 percent of the troops and 90 percent of the cost of the peacekeeping operation.
 Editorial says Gov George W Bush's confident performance at second presidential debate rested in part on skillful way he portrayed differences between himself and Vice Pres Al Gore; says Gore let pass several opportunities to rebut Bush's characterizations; says there are stark differences between two; holds that Gore may need to do more to emphasize such differences in final weeks of campaign Gov. George W. Bush's confident performance at the presidential debate on Wednesday night rested in part on the skillful way he portrayed the differences between himself and Vice President Al Gore. On issues ranging from hate crimes to prescription drugs, the environment and education, he spoke as if he and Mr. Gore were pursuing the same goals by somewhat different means. The new, subdued Al Gore let pass several opportunities to rebut Mr. Bush's characterizations. That may be a smart tactic, but it does little to clarify the policy record of the campaign. There is nothing ''fuzzy,'' to use the governor's words, about many differences between the two candidates. The vice president roused himself at the end of the debate to note that the issue did not concern Mr. Bush's ''compassion'' or ''heart,'' but his priorities. The governor has become effective at declaring his support for schools, the environment and defense, but his $1.3 trillion tax cut, heavily weighted toward the wealthy, would soak up almost all of the non-Social Security and non-Medicare budget surplus, leaving little or no room for any significant increases in spending in these areas. Gov. George W. Bush's confident performance at the presidential debate on Wednesday night rested in part on the skillful way he portrayed the differences between himself and Vice President Al Gore. On issues ranging from hate crimes to prescription drugs, the environment and education, he spoke as if he and Mr. Gore were pursuing the same goals by somewhat different means. The new, subdued Al Gore let pass several opportunities to rebut Mr. Bush's characterizations. That may be a smart tactic, but it does little to clarify the policy record of the campaign. There is nothing ''fuzzy,'' to use the governor's words, about many differences between the two candidates. The vice president roused himself at the end of the debate to note that the issue did not concern Mr. Bush's ''compassion'' or ''heart,'' but his priorities. The governor has become effective at declaring his support for schools, the environment and defense, but his $1.3 trillion tax cut, heavily weighted toward the wealthy, would soak up almost all of the non-Social Security and non-Medicare budget surplus, leaving little or no room for any significant increases in spending in these areas. On Social Security, Mr. Bush's proposal to divert a sixth of the Social Security taxes out of the system and into investment accounts for future retirees might be welcomed by young people -- until they realized that draining off that money would impose substantial risk for both retirees and the system itself. Mr. Bush proclaimed his support for the environment and even said that he cared about global warming. Mr. Gore used the debate to reiterate support for partnerships with industry to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels, while Mr. Bush falsely described the Kyoto agreement by asserting that it forced the United States to go it alone on making environmental changes. In fact, the agreement was signed with the understanding that in the future, developing countries like China and India would be persuaded to be a part of it, with help from the West in developing new technologies. The difference between the two contenders was the difference between ignoring a major problem and confronting it with analysis and painstaking negotiations. Money makes the difference between the two candidates' proposals especially acute in the health sphere and education. Mr. Gore's proposals do not constitute a giant step toward universal coverage, but the money he would spend would get the country there faster than Mr. Bush's. The governor also misstated reality when he said that the percentage  of people with health insurance was going up in Texas but down in the United States at large. In fact, between 1998 and 1999, both percentages rose, after falling for several years. For schools, Mr. Bush says he wants to increase accountability, but he does not provide much money to help local districts get there. The governor said he was tolerant of gays, but he apparently regards anti-discrimination protections for them as ''special rights.'' As Mr. Gore noted, Mr. Bush did nothing to support a hate-crimes bill for gays in Texas. On gun control, Mr. Bush said he favored ''instant background checks'' for guns purchased at gun shows, but he opposes a three-day waiting period that would give law enforcement agencies the time to do more thorough checks. Taken together, these are stark differences that Mr. Gore may need to do more to emphasize in the final weeks of the campaign.
 Rapidity with which consensus developed among many commentators and news organizations that Gov George W Bush 'won' second presidential with Gov Al Gore raises questions about whether pundits' views are shared widely by people outside insular circle of media and politics; Kathleen Hall Jamieson, news media expert, advised viewers to avoid post-debate commentary as meaningless and dangerous (M) ''Bush Scores in Second Debate'' said the front-page headline in The New York Daily News. ''Bush Scores in Second Debate'' said the front-page headline in The New York Daily News. ''Bush Beat Gore'' was the elegantly simple banner on Slate, the political Webzine. ''I do think Bush won,'' declared William Kristol, a conservative Republican commentator on CBS's ''Early Show.'' ''Al Gore was Samson after the haircut.'' It was not a unanimous verdict, of course, as some reports mentioned misstatements by Gov. George W. Bush or his response to questions about poor health care in Texas. But in the immediate aftermath of the debate on Wednesday night in North Carolina, a consensus rapidly developed among commentators and news organizations across the nation: not only had Governor Bush performed better than in the Boston debate a week earlier, but he had also out-and-out defeated his subdued rival, Vice President Al Gore. ''All the polls tonight show that he won,'' George Stephanopoulos said on ''Nightline,'' a mere hour after the debate. Indeed, the comprehensive daily pulse-taking of the news media by Hotline, the online political journal, showed that the pattern in newspaper and television coverage was national. ''It definitely leaned Bush,'' said Chuck Todd, Hotline's editor. As an example, Mr. Kohut pointed to the disparity last week between the news media and the public in their reactions to the Boston debate. ''At least for a while, the pundits were saying Gore won,'' Mr. Kohut said. ''But the subsequent polling showed that he lost support, because when people focused on the candidates, they personally liked Gore less.'' In the hours after the second debate, writers and television commentators frequently concentrated on the toning down of Mr. Gore's debating style, and contrasted it with the seemingly more confident Mr. Bush. On ''The Early Show'' yesterday, an interview taped after the debate showed the reporter Bill Plante asking Mr. Gore, ''What do you make of the fact that all the snap polls showed you losing tonight?'' ''Not much,'' Mr. Gore replied, adding, ''Last week they all showed me winning, and then within a few days the pundits kind of took a different view. I think that snap polls are not really worth that much.'' On the same program, Mr. Bush was told by another reporter, Bill Whitaker, that the polls Wednesday night gave him the advantage and, ''What do you think accounts for it?'' ''Gosh, I don't know, Bill,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I guess, maybe it's because of the format. Spent a lot of time on foreign policy, and I think I might have surprised some people about my ability to converse in foreign policy.'' Among them were groups organized in Washington State by The Seattle Post-Intelligencer and in Michigan by The Detroit News. At least they did not reflect any lockstep tendencies. While Mr. Bush was the choice of seven of the eight college debaters assembled by the Post-Intelligencer, Mr. Gore was the favorite of seven of the nine Oakland County undecided voters selected by the News.
 Intensifying conflict in Israel and Palestinian lands places foreign policy at center of American presidential race; Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush call for Yasir Arafat to take lead in ending cycle of violence; Bush puts his support behind Clinton administration, saying nation must speak with one voice at this time; Bush and Gore each demand that anyone who attacked American Navy destroyer in Yemen be held accountable (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each demanded today that anyone who attacked an American Navy destroyer in Yemen be held accountable, as intensifying conflict in Israel and the Palestinian lands placed foreign policy at the center of the presidential race. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each demanded today that anyone who attacked an American Navy destroyer in Yemen be held accountable, as intensifying conflict in Israel and the Palestinian lands placed foreign policy at the center of the presidential race. Mr. Gore canceled several interviews to return to Washington, and Mr. Bush said it was a moment when America's leaders should ''speak with one voice.'' Mr. Gore said the Palestinian leader, Mr. Arafat, should ''issue instructions to those who have been perpetrating this violence to cease and desist,'' adding, ''It is a time to start building again on the relative progress of the previous two days -- and that can still be done -- to end the violence and damp down the tensions'' in order to restart the Middle East peace process. Governor Bush, the Republican nominee, put his support behind the Clinton administration. ''It's time for our nation to speak with one voice,'' he told reporters in Winston-Salem, N.C. ''I appreciate the administration's efforts to bring calm to that troubled part of the world.'' ''It's time for him to be a statesman,'' Mr. Bush added. In their debate, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to a large extent agreed on the nation's approach to the Middle East and the Balkans but differed over when they would commit troops overseas and what kinds of crises they would deem threats to national interests. Today, they almost echoed each other's words. Mr. Bush said he was ''saddened and angered'' by the attack in Yemen and added: ''I hope that we gather enough intelligence to figure out who did the act and take the necessary action. There must be a consequence.'' Mr. Gore also began a campaign event at a packed Milwaukee park by asking the crowd ''for a moment of silence and prayer'' for the American sailors who were killed. He drew cheers when he promised retaliation if the sailors had been victims of a terrorist attack, and declared, ''We will defend our country and we will defend our democracy.'' Over the summer, Mr. Bush received the traditional intelligence briefing given by the Central Intelligence Agency to presidential nominees. A White House official said that Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, spoke today to Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, on the day's events.
 John Tierney column holds that roles seem to be reversed in typical American household when it comes to spending federal surplus; maintains that men want to do it themselves, to judge from their support for tax-cutting Republicans, but women are supporting Democrats at expense of household budget; contends that expense is striking in New York area because so many middle-class families there do not qualify for 'middle-class tax cuts' proposed by Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton; notes that New Yorkers earn relatively high salaries and they would be prime beneficiaries of broad tax cuts proposed by George W Bush and Rick A Lazio; holds that Bush is not making more headway among women because of way Republicans are packaging their tax cuts (M) The expense is striking in the New York area because so many middle-class families here do not qualify for the ''middle-class tax cuts'' proposed by Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton. The Democrats focus on families making less than $60,000 per year, a sum that buys a reasonably comfortable middle-class lifestyle in the typical American community. But that standard of living would cost about $85,000 in the New York suburbs, and $135,000 in the city. Middle-class New Yorkers earn relatively high salaries, which mean high tax brackets, so they would be prime beneficiaries of the broad tax cuts proposed by George W. Bush and Rick A. Lazio. In all, New York State residents would get back $11.1 billion annually from the Bush tax cuts, versus $3.5 billion from the Gore tax plan, according to a report released Wednesday by Edmund J. McMahon Jr., a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, a conservative group. Mr. McMahon's report points to the case of a family of four making the median income in Westchester County, $83,100, and itemizing deductions. The family would get no automatic tax break from the Gore plan, although it could save $1,210 if it was paying at least $10,000 a year in college tuition. It could also, by setting aside $3,000 in a retirement account, qualify for a $1,000 tax credit that would be locked in that account. Under the Bush tax plan, the Westchester family would save $2,628 per year, Mr. McMahon calculates. He also cites the example of a single person making $62,970 a year, the average wage in Manhattan. That person would save $1,180 under the Bush plan, but nothing under the Gore plan. Why, then, isn't Mr. Bush making more headway among women? One answer may be in the packaging of tax cuts. ''Democrats have personalized the tax cuts,'' Mr. McMahon said. ''They've targeted them at college students, children in day care, retired people. Maybe that appeals more to women than broad tax cuts. But in most cases Bush will give even bigger tax cuts to those people, and he'll give everyone else tax cuts, too.'' Yesterday, Mr. Moynihan said he was not surprised to hear of the new calculations on New York's savings from the Bush tax cuts. But he was not, of course, endorsing the opposition's plan.
 Editorial says Clinton administration must respond firmly but carefully to attack on Navy destroyer Cole in Yemen; says Washington must work to uncover who is to blame and what appropriate response to make, and Navy must tighten its security procedures for refueling stops and port calls, especially in Middle East; says Pres Clinton is also struggling to keep conflict between Israel and Palestinians from flaring into wider war, and it is unclear how much cooperation he can expect from Prime Min Ehud Barak and Yasir Arafat; says Barak seems prepared to do what he can to halt bloodshed, but Arafat has shown no such inclination recently, even though he can break cycle of conflict; says Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush must continue to avoid exacerbating tensions as they maneuver for advantage in presidential race During this difficult time, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush must continue to avoid exacerbating tensions as they maneuver for advantage in the presidential race. Mr. Bush responded to yesterday's events in a measured way, expressing appreciation for the Clinton administration's efforts to calm the situation in the Middle East and support for Israel. Mr. Gore broke off from campaigning to return to the White House to meet with Mr. Clinton and his top aides.
 Some House Democrats express disappointment with Vice Pres Al Gore's performance in second presidential debate; hold he missed chances to strike back at Republican-controlled Congress and help Democrats regain control of House (M) Seeds of concern over Vice President Al Gore's campaign appear to be developing among House Democrats, some of whom said today that they were disappointed with his performance Wednesday night in the second presidential debate. Seeds of concern over Vice President Al Gore's campaign appear to be developing among House Democrats, some of whom said today that they were disappointed with his performance Wednesday night in the second presidential debate. With an eye on independent voters, Mr. Gore has been speaking above the partisan fray. On the campaign trail, he tends to avoid direct references to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, whom he calls ''my opponent,'' or to the Republicans, whom he calls ''the other side.'' He rarely blames them for foiling administration initiatives and he rarely tries to rally audiences to send local Democrats to Washington. To some degree, Gore supporters see the vice president as tripped up either way. His performance in the first debate with Mr. Bush was faulted as too aggressive, a criticism he tried to respond to with Wednesday's lower-keyed approach. But now he is perceived as having overcompensated, raising concern among House Democrats that he is not doing enough to help the party, even as such concern detracts from a serious evaluation of Mr. Bush. As Representative Jose E. Serrano, a Bronx Democrat, put it: ''Gore was told by the world not to be aggressive. But now, if he's not aggressive, that's the criticism. The other guy can do whatever he pleases.'' Indeed, some Democrats on Capitol Hill said today that in Wednesday's debate, Mr. Gore seemed to take the notion of bipartisanship too far. They worried that if he does not paint differences more starkly, Democrats will stay in the minority. Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan, said, ''I think Al Gore should have been a little more aggressive.'' Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio, said Mr. Gore's strengths were evident when he went into details on health care, education and economic policy issues. But, Mr. Kucinich said, ''At the beginning, he was tentative, and he's not at his best when he's tentative.'' Representative Carrie P. Meek, Democrat of Florida, said: ''In terms of substance, Gore did very well. But I was a little disappointed in his assertiveness. I think he should have nailed Governor Bush more. But he was constrained and just didn't go for it.'' Representative Jim McDermott, Democrat of Washington, said Democrats were not abandoning Mr. Gore but wanted him to remember it was Democrats whose votes for a balanced budget in 1993 -- helping to bring about the economic boom -- cost the party the House in 1994. Surveys show that voters loathe the partisanship that has consumed Capitol Hill. And some voters are content with divided government, thinking that Washington could inflict as little damage as possible if it was gridlocked. On the Republican side, Governor Bush has severed himself from the Beltway battles. And he said Mr. Gore had done much to unify the party by promoting targeted tax cuts and paying down the debt that most Democrats were comfortable with, unlike Mr. Bush, whose tax-cut proposal has been spurned by House Republicans.
 Sen John McCain, busy making commercials for Republican Congressional candidates and stumping for them in their districts, has made no commercials or appearances for Gov George W Bush since early Aug; many Republicans are urging Bush to use former rival more aggressively on campaign trail; note he is popular with kind of independent and swing voters who could decide race's outcome; McCain aides cite his offers to help Bush; photo (M) So, one might ask, how many commercials has Mr. McCain appeared in for the man at the pinnacle of his party's ticket, Gov. George W. Bush? The answer is: zero. And how many surrogate speaking engagements has he done for Mr. Bush? Zero again. So, one might ask, how many commercials has Mr. McCain appeared in for the man at the pinnacle of his party's ticket, Gov. George W. Bush? The answer is: zero. And how many surrogate speaking engagements has he done for Mr. Bush? Zero again. Ever since he campaigned with Mr. Bush in early August, Mr. McCain has maintained what many Republicans consider a perplexingly low profile on the presidential trail. And though he is scheduled to campaign with Mr. Bush in Florida and New Hampshire later this month, Mr. McCain plans to devote the last crucial week of the campaign to Republican Congressional candidates, not Mr. Bush. Now, with the race heading toward what political analysts predict will be a photo finish, many Republicans are saying that Mr. Bush would be wise to use his former rival more aggressively on the campaign trail. Mr. McCain, they argue, remains too popular a commodity not to be exploited. ''If I were making the decisions for Bush, I'd be asking him to go everywhere,'' said John Nevin, campaign manager for Mike Rogers, a Congressional candidate from the Lansing, Mich., area, who has asked Mr. McCain to campaign with him. ''But I don't know that he wants to do that.'' A senior Republican official on Capitol Hill said he was bewildered  ''that the Bush people aren't using him more.'' Advisers to Mr. Bush offered an array of reasons that the two camps had not worked more closely together. Some said it was simply due to scheduling conflicts. Others said Mr. McCain's recent treatment for skin cancer had restricted his activities. Still others argued that it would seem strange to give anyone other than Mr. Bush's running mate a prominent role in the campaign. ''You can overdo these things,'' one Bush adviser said. But the adviser also acknowledged that ''McCain has the ability to be more helpful to us than maybe anybody else'' in certain states. Aides to Mr. McCain contend that they have done almost everything Mr. Bush's campaign has asked, with one exception: they turned down a request to appear at the first presidential debate in Boston, arguing that there were plenty of other ''spinners'' available to help Mr. Bush. They also say they offered to campaign with Mr. Bush for seven days this month but were asked to do only five. And they have expressed surprise that the Bush campaign had not asked them to make radio or television commercials in Michigan or New Hampshire, closely contested states where Mr. McCain won the presidential primaries by substantial margins. One senior Republican official who has advised Mr. Bush said ''hubris'' on the part of both men and their top aides had made cooperation difficult. ''Campaigns and candidates have corporate egos,'' the Republican said. ''The McCain corporate ego is such that the folks around him won't meet the Bush campaign halfway. The Bush corporate ego is such that they won't bend any further than that. They won't be magnanimous winners and say, 'What days are you available?' '' Whatever the reasons, Mr. McCain and Mr. Bush often seem like boats passing in the night. Today, both men were in Michigan: Mr. Bush in Grand Rapids for a rally this evening, Mr. McCain in Lansing, about a two-hour drive away, for a televised town meeting late this afternoon. Yet there was no effort to have the two men's paths cross. And there are no plans right now for Mr. McCain to campaign with Mr. Bush in Michigan, though he may appear with Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate. Mr. McCain has not always been an effusive supporter of the Republican ticket during his appearances. On ''Larry King Live'' last week, Mr. McCain offered equal praise to Mr. Cheney and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential candidate. And he did not mention Mr. Bush. On the Democratic side, former Senator Bill Bradley has also spent little time campaigning on behalf of the man who beat him in the primaries, Vice President Al Gore. But unlike Mr. Bradley, who did not win a single state, Mr. McCain won seven primaries, and some polls suggest that he remains one of the most popular politicians in the country. Some Republicans argue that it would be risky for Mr. Bush to use Mr. McCain extensively in the waning days of the campaign because the Arizona senator can be so unpredictable and outspoken, particularly on issues on which the two men disagree, like campaign finance reform. ''I'd be saying to John McCain: 'I'll give you whatever it takes -- a plane, a staff, whatever,' '' said the senior Republican adviser to the Bush campaign. ''But I guess that's not the view from Austin, Tex.''
 In Wednesday night's debate at Wake Forest University, both presidential candidates spoke out firmly against racial profiling, the police practice of stopping cars because of the race of their drivers. ''I can't imagine what it's like to be singled out because of race and stopped and harassed,'' George W. Bush said. ''That's flat wrong.'' Asked by the moderator, Jim Lehrer, if he would support a federal law to stop racial profiling, Mr. Bush said yes. Al Gore was more specific. Not only would he issue an executive order to stop racial profiling in federal law enforcement, he said, but if he were to win the presidency, a federal ban on racial profiling would be ''the first civil rights act of the 21st century.'' In Wednesday night's debate at Wake Forest University, both presidential candidates spoke out firmly against racial profiling, the police practice of stopping cars because of the race of their drivers. ''I can't imagine what it's like to be singled out because of race and stopped and harassed,'' George W. Bush said. ''That's flat wrong.'' Asked by the moderator, Jim Lehrer, if he would support a federal law to stop racial profiling, Mr. Bush said yes. Al Gore was more specific. Not only would he issue an executive order to stop racial profiling in federal law enforcement, he said, but if he were to win the presidency, a federal ban on racial profiling would be ''the first civil rights act of the 21st century.''
 Critics of Texas's capital punishment system have faulted Gov George W Bush for defending system that executes inmates who are mentally retarded, who committed slayings as juveniles and who, in many cases, have been represented by court-appointed lawyers regarded as inadequate; Bush has sought to play down issue in his presidential campaign, but during his second debate with Vice Pres Al Gore he bluntly invoked death penalty when asked his views on hate crimes laws; Bush noted that three white men convicted of dragging death of black man have been sentenced to death; Bush's campaign later concedes that Bush had facts wrong--two of three defendants have been sentenced to death (M) Halfway through the presidential debate on Wednesday, after Vice President Al Gore expressed support for hate crimes legislation and cited the 1998 slaying of a black Texas man, James Byrd Jr., the moderator Jim Lehrer turned to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and asked his views on hate crimes laws. Mr. Bush did not mince words. Halfway through the presidential debate on Wednesday, after Vice President Al Gore expressed support for hate crimes legislation and cited the 1998 slaying of a black Texas man, James Byrd Jr., the moderator Jim Lehrer turned to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and asked his views on hate crimes laws. Mr. Bush did not mince words. The moment was noteworthy for two reasons. First, as his campaign later conceded, Mr. Bush had his facts wrong -- two of the three defendants were sentenced to death, the third received life in prison. But by seeming to endorse the executions, he also violated his own policy as Texas governor of maintaining his silence and impartiality about pending death penalty cases until court appeals are exhausted and the cases reach his desk. Whether his segue from hate crimes to the death penalty was spontaneous or a calculated response was a matter of speculation today. The Gore campaign accused Mr. Bush of trying to deflect attention from his unwillingness to push for an enhanced 1999 hate crimes bill named for Mr. Byrd that died in the State Senate. And Mr. Byrd's daughter, Renee Mullins, who lobbied Mr. Bush in 1999 to help pass that bill, said in an interview today that the governor pointedly told her that he would not work to do so. ''I pleaded with him,'' Ms. Mullins recounted of her meeting with Mr. Bush. Ms. Mullins said she did not watch the debate on Wednesday but that she was offended when she learned that Mr. Bush expressed support for hate crimes legislation. ''He's not practicing what he's preaching,'' she said. ''I just went to him last year and he didn't support me. So how could he support one?'' Dan Bartlett, a Bush campaign spokesman, attributed the governor's inaction on the Byrd bill in 1999 to several factors. He said Mr. Bush often did not get involved with bills that were not part of his own legislative package. He also noted that critics of the Byrd bill, which calls for stiffer penalties for crimes motivated by race, gender, religion and sexual orientation, argued that it might weaken a statute in effect since 1993. That statute says that penalties can be enhanced if a crime is committed out of bias or prejudice, but it does not specify which groups are protected. By so bluntly invoking the death penalty, Mr. Bush brought attention to an issue that he had sought to play down in the campaign. Since taking office in 1995, Mr. Bush has presided over 146 executions, including 33 this year, by far the most of any governor in the nation. As governor, Mr. Bush's powers to stop an execution are limited. He can grant clemency only with the approval of the state parole board, though he does appoint its members. Otherwise, he can either grant an inmate a 30-day reprieve or approve the execution. Critics of the Texas capital punishment system have faulted Mr. Bush for defending a system that executes inmates who are mentally retarded, who committed slayings as juveniles and who, in many cases, have been represented by court-appointed lawyers regarded as inadequate. This year, Mr. Bush has interrupted his campaign to preside over the high-profile execution of Gary Graham, who was convicted of murder on the word of one eyewitness. Mr. Bush also granted the first reprieve of his tenure to Ricky McGinn to allow additional DNA testing in the case. The tests later confirmed his guilt and Mr. McGinn was subsequently executed. Mr. Bush's blunt endorsement of the executions of the defendants in the Byrd case -- even though the appeals process has only begun -- brought a swift response from some legal scholars and other critics who say the comments undermine the legal principle of due process. The seriousness with which Mr. Bush's undertakes his obligations toward the death penalty has been questioned before in the campaign. In an interview in Talk Magazine, Gary Bauer, the conservative who was then a Republican presidential candidate, criticized Mr. Bush for appearing to mock Karla Faye Tucker, the Texas killer of two, for pleading for her life in a television interview. Mr. Bush campaign aides said his comments were misinterpreted. Ms. Tucker was executed in 1998. In early March, in a Republican primary debate in Los Angeles, Mr. Bush laughed when a questioner asked about a case in which a Texas lawyer fell asleep while representing an inmate who later received the death penalty. Mr. Bartlett said the response was not laughter but an expression of incredulity at the question. He also said that Mr. Bush regards his review of death cases as ''his most important duty'' and addresses them in a very serious and factual way.
 Michael W Hovey letter says George W Bush's remarks during debate on death penalty in Texas raise questions about presidential candidate's claim to be 'compassionate conservative' Gov. George W. Bush's statement in Wednesday night's debate that all three men convicted of the brutal murder of James Byrd will be executed in Texas, when in fact only two will be, is far more serious than his previous gaffes, and gives voters reason to question Mr. Bush's claim that he is a ''compassionate conservative'' (front page, Oct. 12). Gov. George W. Bush's statement in Wednesday night's debate that all three men convicted of the brutal murder of James Byrd will be executed in Texas, when in fact only two will be, is far more serious than his previous gaffes, and gives voters reason to question Mr. Bush's claim that he is a ''compassionate conservative'' (front page, Oct. 12). Mr. Bush's rush to judgment only underscores his evidently unreflective embrace of capital punishment at a time when increasing numbers of Americans are questioning the validity and effectiveness of the death penalty. It also confirms worries about his inattention to detail on other serious matters facing our country.
 George W. Bush and Al Gore have been so enthusiastic about the strong economy that they have overlooked the weakening economic reality all around them (front page, Oct. 12). George W. Bush and Al Gore have been so enthusiastic about the strong economy that they have overlooked the weakening economic reality all around them (front page, Oct. 12).
 Presidential candidates return to swing states as Vice Pres Al Gore steps up his assault on George W Bush's record as governor of Texas and Bush campaign exults in what it characterizes as turning-point moment in 2000 campaign, Bush's ability to survive prolonged questioning about foreign policy, his biggest weakness, in second debate; Gore's campaign chairman, William M Daley, predicts that instant polls that showed Bush had won debate would prove meaningless; recalls that instant polls favored Gore after first debate, until news reports focused on Gore's factual mistakes and poll numbers quickly turned toward Bush; photo (M) With two debates down and one to go, the presidential candidates returned to swing states today as Vice President Al Gore stepped up his assault on George W. Bush's record as governor of Texas and the Bush campaign exulted in what it characterized as a turning-point moment in the 2000 campaign. Mr. Gore opened a two-front offensive while campaigning today in Wisconsin. As the vice president accused Mr. Bush of misplacing his priorities in Texas, particularly on health care, his campaign chairman sought to focus attention on the governor's misstatement in the debate about the racially motivated murder of James Byrd Jr. in Jasper, Tex. With two debates down and one to go, the presidential candidates returned to swing states today as Vice President Al Gore stepped up his assault on George W. Bush's record as governor of Texas and the Bush campaign exulted in what it characterized as a turning-point moment in the 2000 campaign. Mr. Gore opened a two-front offensive while campaigning today in Wisconsin. As the vice president accused Mr. Bush of misplacing his priorities in Texas, particularly on health care, his campaign chairman sought to focus attention on the governor's misstatement in the debate about the racially motivated murder of James Byrd Jr. in Jasper, Tex. Mr. Bush, meanwhile, traveled to Pennsylvania, where he accused Mr. Gore of making ''fear, division and misrepresentation'' the hallmarks of the final stage of his campaign. The mood of the Bush campaign was ebullient after Wednesday's debate in which aides felt that Mr. Bush had survived prolonged questioning about foreign policy, his biggest weakness. The confidence seemed to exceed the traditional post-debate spin. About an hour after the debate ended, an ABC News producer overheard Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, speaking on the telephone to another aide who was with Mr. Bush, about instant polls showing that Mr. Bush had won the debate. Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, William M. Daley, predicted that the instant polls would prove meaningless. He pointed out that such polls favored Mr. Gore after the first debate last week in Boston, but that the numbers quickly turned toward Mr. Bush as news reports focused on Mr. Gore's factual mistakes. If Mr. Gore was concerned about the debate, he showed no public signs of it today. He delivered a vigorous speech before a large crowd in Milwaukee, and joked in an interview with the NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw about his subdued performance. ''I put all my sighs in a lock box,'' he said. The third and final debate will be on Tuesday in St. Louis. In perhaps the ultimate demonstration of the political power of incumbency, Mr. Gore cut short his schedule in Milwaukee this afternoon and returned to Washington to monitor events in the Middle East and, in the process, to reinforce the notion of his foreign policy expertise. Mr. Gore did not cancel any public events; he had been planning to fly to  Washington this afternoon to attend a high school football team dinner with his son, Albert. ''He's vice president, he's part of the national security team, and a situation like this requires that the full team be in place,'' said Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. A vice-presidential spokesman, Jim Kennedy, said this evening that Mr. Gore did attend the dinner with his son. Earlier in Milwaukee, Mr. Gore spoke to several thousand people under brilliant skies in Cathedral Square. His wife, Tipper, was at his side as he offered one of his most cogent explanations of the choice to be made in the 2000 election. Mr. Gore argued that Mr. Bush's record as Texas governor provided voters with ''an important window on to what his priorities are.'' And he said that record was particularly relevant because Texas enjoyed a large surplus at the beginning of Mr. Bush's first term, just as the federal government does now. ''If you were governor of the state that ranked dead last, 50 out of 50, in health insurance for families,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and all of a sudden you found that you had the biggest surplus in the history of your state, wouldn't it occur to you to use some of that surplus to maybe move up in the rankings on health care for families from 50 to 45 or 40 or even better? That's not what happened there.'' Mr. Gore's aides have promised an intensified attack on Mr. Bush's record on health care, the environment, gun control and the minimum wage. But they had left the impression that the burden would be carried by television advertising, surrogates and Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who campaigned today in Texas. But today, Mr. Gore spoke for himself. ''This is not a question about my opponent's heart,'' he said, referring to Mr. Bush's assertion in the debate that the vice president seems to consider him a hard-hearted person.  ''It's a question about his priorities. His priorities are different from mine and I think they're different from yours.'' Mr. Gore said he readily acknowledged that his proposed menu of middle-class tax cuts, worth about $500 billion over 10 years, was far smaller than Mr. Bush's plan for a $1.3. trillion across-the-board tax cut. Shortly before Mr. Gore spoke, Mr. Daley held a conference call with reporters to argue that Mr. Bush should be held accountable for his misstatement in last night's debate in the same way that Mr. Gore's factual errors were scrutinized last week. Mr. Bush, during a discussion of hate crimes legislation, said that all three men who were convicted of murdering Mr. Byrd, who was dragged to his death in 1998, were ''going to be put to death.'' In fact, one of the three was sentenced to life in prison, and all three are in the early stages of their appeals. Mr. Daley and other Gore representatives, including a Harvard Law School professor, Laurence H. Tribe, also maintained that Mr. Bush's assertion as the chief law enforcement official in Texas could be found prejudicial to judges or juries that consider the cases in the future. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, acknowledged that Mr. Bush had erred. In a packed gymnasium at Neshimany High School in Langhorne, Pa., Mr. Bush spoke about ''the greatest generation'' and focused on his plans to change Social Security and overhaul Medicare by coaxing people into private insurance plans, some of which could include a prescription drug benefit. When Mr. Gore asserts that the Bush plan would fail to guarantee drug benefits to all of the elderly, it amounts to scare tactics, Mr. Bush said. ''As the election nears, he has fallen back on a familiar strategy: fear, division and misrepresentation,'' Mr. Bush said. Mr. Gore, he said, ''represents the party of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, but all he has to offer is fear itself.'' Mr. Bush also criticized the Clinton administration for rejecting the recommendations of a bipartisan Congressional commission that proposed to reform Medicare by encouraging private insurers to compete with government coverage plans. ''That's exactly why the time has come for a new administration,'' he said. ''On Social Security and on Medicare, the routine of the Clinton-Gore administration is so predictable, so tired and so partisan.''
 Second debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush was watched by fewer people than any previous presidential debate except one, second debate between Pres Clinton and Bob Dole four years ago; pollsters point to lack of compelling issues in current race (M) Wednesday night's debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was watched by fewer people than any previous presidential debate except one, the second debate between President Clinton and Bob Dole four years ago, according to figures released yesterday by Nielsen Media Research. This week's debate, the second of three between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, was seen by about 37.6 million people on commercial broadcast networks and all-news cable channels, the Nielsen figures show. That is almost 10 million fewer people than the 46.6 million who watched their first presidential debate on Oct. 3. Wednesday night's debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was watched by fewer people than any previous presidential debate except one, the second debate between President Clinton and Bob Dole four years ago, according to figures released yesterday by Nielsen Media Research. This week's debate, the second of three between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, was seen by about 37.6 million people on commercial broadcast networks and all-news cable channels, the Nielsen figures show. That is almost 10 million fewer people than the 46.6 million who watched their first presidential debate on Oct. 3. Frank Newport, editor in chief of the Gallup Poll, said the one bit of empirical data he had on the debate was that ''apparently far fewer Gore supporters than Bush supporters decided to tune in the debate.''
 Margaret Campbell letter on grin that spread over George W Bush's face when he explained Texas's use of death penalty; says that whatever one's position is on capital punishment it hardly calls for glee (S) I was stunned during the debate when Gov. George W. Bush explained the punishment that awaits the men convicted of murdering James Byrd in Texas (front page, Oct. 12). With a grin spreading across his face, Mr. Bush said: ''Guess what's going to happen to them? They're going to be put to death.'' In fact, as you report, only two received the death penalty, and one was sentenced to life in prison. I was stunned during the debate when Gov. George W. Bush explained the punishment that awaits the men convicted of murdering James Byrd in Texas (front page, Oct. 12). With a grin spreading across his face, Mr. Bush said: ''Guess what's going to happen to them? They're going to be put to death.'' In fact, as you report, only two received the death penalty, and one was sentenced to life in prison. Still, Mr. Bush's delight at the prospect of putting Texans to death shows him to be an inhumane chief executive. No matter what one's opinion of capital punishment is, surely Americans can all agree that unnatural death is never a cause for the sort of glee that Mr. Bush evinced.
 In Wednesday night's debate, Jim Lehrer, the moderator, asked both candidates to justify the name-calling in their ads -- Bush ads calling Al Gore a ''serial exaggerator'' and Gore ads calling Mr. Bush a bumbler (transcript, Oct. 12). Both acted as if they were unaware that these words had been used in their ads. Are we to believe, then, that if they don't know what is going on inside their own campaigns, they won't know what is going on inside their administrations? Will they simply pass the buck and say they were unaware? In Wednesday night's debate, Jim Lehrer, the moderator, asked both candidates to justify the name-calling in their ads -- Bush ads calling Al Gore a ''serial exaggerator'' and Gore ads calling Mr. Bush a bumbler (transcript, Oct. 12). Both acted as if they were unaware that these words had been used in their ads. Are we to believe, then, that if they don't know what is going on inside their own campaigns, they won't know what is going on inside their administrations? Will they simply pass the buck and say they were unaware?
 Joey Fishkin letter criticizes George W Bush's position, in campaign debate, opposing US intervention in places where most of black people on earth live (S) When George W. Bush suggested in the debate that he didn't think intervening to stop genocide in Africa was necessarily in America's strategic interest, I was glad that he at least went on to list other places that he thought were important (transcript, Oct. 12). When George W. Bush suggested in the debate that he didn't think intervening to stop genocide in Africa was necessarily in America's strategic interest, I was glad that he at least went on to list other places that he thought were important (transcript, Oct. 12). But he listed as more important almost the entire remainder of the populated surface of the earth: the Middle East, Europe, the Far East and ''our own hemisphere.'' When Governor Bush went on to say that intervention in Haiti was a mistake, he left me with the distinct and disturbing impression that he has written off -- as uniquely outside our strategic interest -- most of the black people on earth.
 You know, this whole issue is one where I have gone well beyond the letter of the law. We've put up on our Web site everything that our charitable foundation has given to. We've given information on what we've paid in taxes and what our deductions are. We filed a Senate ethics report which tells everyone what my assets are and what I'm going to spend on. You know, we've gone well beyond what Governor Bush or Secretary Cheney have done, and I don't hear the same kind of complaint coming out of my opponent with regard to their disclosure.
 I watched both debates. Yes, this time, Al Gore did not sigh or roll his eyes. Yes, George W. Bush knew a few names of world leaders and could pronounce them. But did he know one more name besides those he memorized and articulated? I doubt it. I watched both debates. Yes, this time, Al Gore did not sigh or roll his eyes. Yes, George W. Bush knew a few names of world leaders and could pronounce them. But did he know one more name besides those he memorized and articulated? I doubt it.
 Mr. Bush may not know anything about peacekeeping, but Mr. Gore knows better and is responsible for depriving the public of a rare discussion of the realities of ''humanitarian intervention'' in the 21st century.  LINCOLN P. BLOOMFIELD  Cohasset, Mass., Oct. 12, 2000
 The two candidates also tussled over Social Security. Mr. Corzine accused Mr. Franks of wanting to ''dismantle'' the Social Security system because he supported Gov. George W. Bush's plan to allow individuals to divert a small part of their payroll taxes to investments in the stock market. Mr. Franks replied that Mr. Corzine's idea of letting the government invest Social Security Trust Fund money in the stock market, perhaps through the Federal Reserve System, was ''dangerous.'' Mr. Franks said the Clinton administration lacked a cogent energy policy. But he said he, like Mr. Corzine and Vice President Al Gore, opposed opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for oil exploration.
 Although the Gore-Bush debate on Wednesday night was informative (front page, Oct. 12), I am still frustrated by the total exclusion of third-party candidates. Because they are left out, many important issues are completely ignored by the two major parties, which are controlled by every special interest in the world. Although the Gore-Bush debate on Wednesday night was informative (front page, Oct. 12), I am still frustrated by the total exclusion of third-party candidates. Because they are left out, many important issues are completely ignored by the two major parties, which are controlled by every special interest in the world.
 An article yesterday about the debate on Wednesday between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas misattributed a quotation in some copies. It was Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us. If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us.'' An article yesterday about the debate on Wednesday between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas misattributed a quotation in some copies. It was Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us. If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us.''
 Scott A Dergance letter on second presidential debate says Al Gore's handlers and media critics did him a disservice by criticizing his confronational style in first encounter with George W Bush (S) Despite the substantive and personal accord of the second presidential debate, I saw two sharply contrasted candidates. While George W. Bush seemed to reaffirm and strengthen his character and substance from the first debate, Al Gore seemed an altogether different person. Despite the substantive and personal accord of the second presidential debate, I saw two sharply contrasted candidates. While George W. Bush seemed to reaffirm and strengthen his character and substance from the first debate, Al Gore seemed an altogether different person. Mr. Gore's handlers and media critics did him a disservice by railing against his confrontational style. His stylistic overcorrection into an almost absurdly congenial debater reinforced the fact that no one can discern the real Al Gore. The criticism from the media, echoed by a shift in the polls, forced Mr. Gore into a box and allowed Mr. Bush to take command of the debate and the race.  SCOTT A. DERGANCE  New York, Oct. 12, 2000
 Length of official day: Gore, 11 1/2 hours; Bush, 12 hours States visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 2 Towns/Cities visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 3 Official Events: Gore, 1; Bush, 2 Diners visited/drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush, 1 Press conferences: Gore, 1; Bush, 0 Oval office meetings on the Middle East: Gore, 1; Bush, 0 Main message: Gore, the Texas governor's misplaced priorities; Bush, commitment to the ''greatest generation''
 The explosion came at the height of the American presidential race. Along with the violence in Israel, it immediately eclipsed the campaign debate. Vice President Al Gore returned to Washington from the campaign trail to participate in meetings at the White House about both crises. His Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, called for a vigorous, united approach on both fronts. ''Let's hope we can gather enough intelligence to figure out who did the act and take the necessary action,'' Mr. Bush said of the supposed attack. ''There must be a consequence.''
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, vice presidential candidate, visits industrial city of Odessa, Tex, to drive home Democrats' accusation that Gov George W Bush, as president, would pose national environmental threat; Lieberman sympathizes with local residents who talk about their foul-smelling air and water and their worry that health problems are linked to nearby industrial plants; Bush campaign spokesman says state's environmental problems long preceded Bush's tenure, and that he has taken significant steps to address them (M) Senator Joseph I. Lieberman visited this industrial city today to drive home the Democrats' accusation that Gov. George W. Bush, as president, would pose a national environmental threat. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman visited this industrial city today to drive home the Democrats' accusation that Gov. George W. Bush, as president, would pose a national environmental threat. Norma Nunez, 39, told of surviving thyroid cancer and pituitary cancer, and of seeing several family members suffer from cancer and other severe illnesses. She said of Mr. Bush, ''Him being the governor, being over the environment of Texas, he hasn't done nothing for us.'' Mr. Lieberman said, ''The record here shows Governor Bush has failed to lead.'' He cited federal reports ranking Texas as allowing the highest level of toxic industrial emissions into the air and the third-highest rate into the water, and he noted Houston's status as nation's smog capital. A Bush campaign spokesman, Dan Bartlett, said the state's environmental problem long preceded Governor Bush's tenure, ''and he has taken significant steps to address it.'' The poor neighborhood Mr. Lieberman visited is near a petrochemical plant, one of hundreds of older factories in Texas that are the subject of a long-running environmental dispute. Mr. Bush's detractors and supporters say the plants are central to his environmental record. Plants built before the 1970 Clean Air Act are largely exempt from federal emissions standards, but states can impose their own rules. For three years, Mr. Bush has promoted voluntary emissions reductions for most older plants, and last year that approach was used in a law written partly by industry officials. Mr. Bartlett said that under Mr. Bush, toxic industrial air emissions had declined -- a drop traceable to newer plants -- but toxic emissions have declined nationally as well. Meanwhile, ozone levels have risen in Houston and other Texas cities.
 Vice President Al Gore stepped up his assault on Gov. George W. Bush's record, and the Bush campaign called Wednesday's debate a turning point. Vice President Al Gore stepped up his assault on Gov. George W. Bush's record, and the Bush campaign called Wednesday's debate a turning point.
 Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each said the United States should take steps to find and punish those responsible. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each said the United States should take steps to find and punish those responsible. Bush Camp Hails Debate; Gore Hits at Texas Record  The candidates campaigned in swing states. Vice President Al Gore pressed his attack on George W. Bush's record as governor of Texas, and the Bush campaign exulted in what it saw as a pivotal moment in the race -- Wednesday's debate. The Bush campaign sparred with the Gore campaign and advocates of hate crime legislation over a Texas hate crime bill and Mr. Bush's misstatement regarding one case. Mr. Bush's accusation in the debate that I.M.F. aid money had lined the pockets of former Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia was rejected by the fund and by Mr. Chernomyrdin. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, visiting Odessa, Tex., to drive home the Democrats' charge that Mr. Bush would pose an environmental threat as president, listened to residents tell of foul-smelling air and water and fear that their health problems are tied to nearby industrial plants. Some House Democrats were disappointed with Mr. Gore's debate performance and expressed concern about his ability to help Democrats regain control of the House.
 Russia continues to be significant supplier of conventional arms to Iran, despite 1995 secret agreement Vice Pres Al Gore signed with Viktor S Chernomyrdin, then Russian prime minister, calling for end to such sales by end of 1999; sales have continued beyond deadline despite repeated complaints to senior Russian officials by Gore, Secretary of State Madeleine K Albright and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott; in exchange for Russian promises in 1995 pact, United States pledged not to seek penalties against Russia under 1992 law that requires sanctions against countries that sell advanced weaponry to countries, like Iran, that are on State Dept's list of state sponsors of terrorism; 1992 law was co-sponsored by then-Sen Al Gore and Sen John McCain; McCain says he was unaware of 1995 deal that Gore struck with Chernomyrdin; says if Clinton administration acquiesed in Russian sale of arms to Iran, it violated intent and letter of 1992 law; photos (M) In June 1995, Vice President Al Gore signed a secret agreement with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, then the Russian prime minister, calling for an end to all Russian sales of conventional weapons to Iran by the end of 1999. But the deadline passed with no sign of a halt to such sales, despite repeated complaints late last year and this year to senior Russian officials by Mr. Gore, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott. Moscow continues to be a significant supplier of conventional arms to Tehran despite the Gore-Chernomyrdin deal, the Central Intelligence Agency reported in August. In June 1995, Vice President Al Gore signed a secret agreement with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, then the Russian prime minister, calling for an end to all Russian sales of conventional weapons to Iran by the end of 1999. But the deadline passed with no sign of a halt to such sales, despite repeated complaints late last year and this year to senior Russian officials by Mr. Gore, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott. Moscow continues to be a significant supplier of conventional arms to Tehran despite the Gore-Chernomyrdin deal, the Central Intelligence Agency reported in August. Though Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin mentioned an arms agreement in general terms at a news conference the day it was signed, the details have never been disclosed to Congress or to the public. The Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement appeared to undercut a 1992 law, the Iran-Iraq Arms Nonproliferation Act, known as Gore-McCain after its principal sponsors, Mr. Gore, then a senator from Tennessee, and Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican. The law was rooted in concerns about Russian sales to Iran of some of the same weapons that the Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement expressly allowed. Senator McCain said this month that he was unaware of the deal that Mr. Gore struck with Mr. Chernomyrdin, which was codified in a document stamped ''Secret'' and signed in Moscow on June 30, 1995. Mr. McCain said a ''strong case can be made'' that the Russian delivery of arms, especially the submarine, should have triggered sanctions against Moscow under the provisions of the Gore-McCain law. Mr. Gore's chief foreign policy adviser, Leon Fuerth, said the deliveries were not subject to sanctions because they did not meet the 1992 act's definition of ''advanced conventional weapons'' and did not significantly change the balance of power in the Persian Gulf. But, he said, Mr. Gore brandished the threat as leverage to induce the Russians to sign the agreement, in part to learn more about what arms Moscow was sending to Tehran. ''We deliberately used the Gore-McCain law as a fulcrum to negotiate an understanding with Russia to put constraints on their exports to Iran,'' Mr. Fuerth said, by setting a cut-off date of Dec. 31, 1999. Mr. Gore and Mr. McCain specifically cited the submarine and its deadly long-range torpedoes as one reason the 1992 nonproliferation act was needed, according to the Congressional Research Service. Critics in Congress who have become aware of the 1995 deal, conceived in secrecy and at best only partly successful in achieving its goals, said it is symptomatic of flaws in Mr. Gore's approach to handling relations with Russia. President Clinton entrusted his vice president with an extraordinary degree of authority to manage one of the most important accounts in American diplomacy. Mr. Gore used that authority to pursue a broad agenda on issues from arms control to the environment to cooperation in space. Much of that work was carried out in a channel known as the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission, which was established in 1993 and which met twice a year until Boris N. Yeltsin, the former president, dismissed Mr. Chernomyrdin in March 1998. Mr. Gore has cited the work of the commission as among his signal achievements as vice president and an important part of his resume for the presidency. Some critics in Congress, as well as Governor George W. Bush's foreign policy advisers, say that Mr. Gore placed too much faith in his close personal relationship with Mr. Chernomyrdin, and that this led Mr. Gore to turn a blind eye to strong evidence of corruption by Mr. Chernomyrdin and associates, who appear to have profited handsomely from the rapid privatization of Soviet state enterprises. Mr. Bush himself touched on this criticism during his debate Wednesday night with Mr. Gore when he said in a discussion of Washington's world role: The vice president and his advisers respond that the Gore-Chernomyrdin channel produced scores of agreements on a wide range of topics in part because of the strong bond between the men. Mr. Gore was fully aware of the allegations of corruption against Mr. Chernomyrdin, Mr. Fuerth said, but he also believed that the prime minister was dedicated to reform and had the clout to cut through the bureaucracy. The vice president's office has produced a catalog of Mr. Gore's achievements in Russia policy: the removal of nuclear weapons from Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan, trade deals on steel and poultry, diversion of Russian weapons scientists to peaceful pursuits, increased cooperation on corruption and money-laundering, joint efforts on the international space station. But critics respond that Mr. Gore's eagerness to pile up agreements led, in some cases, to bad deals. For example, E. Wayne Merry, former director of the political section of the American Embassy in Moscow, said in Congressional hearings earlier this year that the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission had required hundreds of hours of busywork to pad its list of achievements, racking up piles of ''taxpayer-supplied evidence of American good will regardless of Russian performance, honesty or even desires.'' ''It was one more of these strange deals that Gore and Chernomyrdin had that were kept from people,'' said Mr. Oehler, now a vice president with the Science Applications International Corporation in La Jolla, Calif. ''If this had been disclosed to Congress, the committees would have gone berserk, absolutely. But the larger problem is, if you have these under-the-table deals that give the Russians permission to do these things, it gives the signal that it's O.K. to do other things.'' The 1995 arms agreement between Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin was just one of more than a dozen during a three-day meeting in Moscow, the fifth session of the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission, but it was not included in a list of accords released by the White House. Still, the men mentioned it in passing at a news conference at the end of their meeting. Mr. Chernomyrdin said the Iran accord was the product of ''difficult and lengthy talks.'' Mr. Gore indicated that deliveries of conventional arms to Iran would end within a few years. ''This is significant, very significant,'' Mr. Gore said at the news conference. ''I would say that this has been resolved in a specific, mutually agreed fashion that does not leave any uncertainty or open ends that would create problems.'' Such undertakings between executive branch officials do not carry the force of law or treaty, which require legislative ratification; either party can unilaterally withdraw from executive agreements without notice or penalty, an aide to Mr. Gore said. The Gore-McCain law provides for waivers of its penalties, but the administration did not seek a waiver from Congress because, in its view, the types and numbers of military hardware Russia planned to send did not cross the threshold of sanctionable items. In June 1993 Senator McCain, alarmed at reports that Russia was delivering Kilo-class submarines to Iran without a forceful response from the administration, introduced amendments to Gore-McCain to stiffen sanctions against Russia for such sales. The amendments failed. Because of frustration with the administration's apparent unwillingness to penalize Russia, Congress amended Gore-McCain in 1996. The new law required sanctions for any supplier of arms to nations that sponsor terrorism, not just weapons sales that upset regional stability, as specified in the 1992 law. But the new law has not been invoked, administration officials said, because sanctions laws cannot be applied retroactively. He said Russia has blatantly violated the Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement and other pacts and continues to be a major sponsor of Iran's arms buildup. In January Secretary Albright sent a classified message to Igor S. Ivanov, Russia's foreign minister, complaining that Moscow was not abiding by terms of the Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement. Russia has not provided a required accounting of the arms shipped to Iran and those still in the pipeline, she complained, and she referred to a statement by Mr. Ivanov that it would take a decade for Russia to complete its weapons contracts with Iran. The same week that Dr. Albright's message was sent to Mr. Ivanov, Russia delivered the first of five heavy military helicopters to Tehran, according to Itar-Tass, the official Russian news agency. The helicopters are not on the list of permitted military deliveries contained in the annex to the Gore-Chernomyrdin deal.
 The local premiere of a solo, ''Commencement'' (1995), benefits from Ms. Childs's star presence. High-waisted black pants by Ronaldus Shamask and Suzanne Gallo give her an elegant exoticism as she moves back and forth within a short diagonal, bending while swinging an arm ferociously forward. Zygmunt Krauze's score uses a harpsichord, as does ''Concerto,'' a 1993 group work seen here in 1994. Set to Henryk Gorecki's score, it moves its dissolving patterns swiftly along. They are rich, with the seven dancers moving along autonomous paths.
 In Michigan, long the heart of nation's labor movement, unions are making all-out push to give Vice Pres Al Gore the edge in pivotal state where presidential race is neck and neck; dozens of union members take leaves from their jobs to do full-time, union-paid campaign work for six weeks; Michigan's--and nation's--labor leaders are making major effort to rouse enthusiasm for Gore among union members, many of whom were ambivalent or hostile toward him just few months ago; Gore's often-frosty relations with labor unions stem from his support of trade deals that unions opposed; but labor leaders now say that differences are so stark between Gore and Bush on other matters that they are lining up behind Gore, even beginning to feel enthusiastic toward him; photo (M) From a purple trailer emblazoned with the Service Employees International Union name, 18 corrections officers at a computerized telephone bank were calling 1,500 union members an hour this week to tell them that Al Gore is a friend of working families. In Flint, 50 miles east of here, Jessie Cloman, a city housing inspector, was setting up a ''mentoring'' program in which 190 shop stewards have each been assigned 100 union members who have voted only once in the last six years. The mentors' responsibility: make sure their 100 people vote this November, preferably for Mr. Gore. From a purple trailer emblazoned with the Service Employees International Union name, 18 corrections officers at a computerized telephone bank were calling 1,500 union members an hour this week to tell them that Al Gore is a friend of working families. In Flint, 50 miles east of here, Jessie Cloman, a city housing inspector, was setting up a ''mentoring'' program in which 190 shop stewards have each been assigned 100 union members who have voted only once in the last six years. The mentors' responsibility: make sure their 100 people vote this November, preferably for Mr. Gore. And in Detroit today, Don Smith, president of the Teamsters' local once headed by Jimmy Hoffa, chatted up dozens of dock workers and drivers at a Yellow Freight terminal to tell them Vice President Al Gore, not Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, was good for the working man and woman. In Michigan, long the heart of the nation's labor movement, unions are making an all-out push to give Mr. Gore the edge in a pivotal state where the presidential race is neck and neck. Dozens of union members have taken leaves from their jobs to do full-time, union-paid campaign work for six weeks. And the state's unions plan to send more than two million pieces of mail in support of Mr. Gore and other Democratic candidates. The state's -- and the nation's -- labor leaders are making a major effort to rouse enthusiasm for Mr. Gore among union members, many of whom were ambivalent or hostile toward him just a few months ago. Mr. Gore has often had frosty relations with labor unions, which resent his support of the China trade deal and the North American Free Trade Agreement. Several unions have also been tempted to support Ralph Nader, the Green Party presidential candidate and a fierce opponent of Nafta and the deal to liberalize trade with China. But union leaders said the differences were so stark between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush on tax cuts, privatizing Social Security, raising the minimum wage and other issues that most union members have lined up behind Mr. Gore and even begun feeling enthusiastic toward him. ''The labor movement's strength is the percentage of our more than one million members and retirees who will vote for Gore,'' Mr. Gaffney said. ''That means educating these members and retirees and getting them to the polls.'' Both candidates consider Michigan's union membership crucial. Mr. Bush, who plans to visit a General Motors plant in Pontiac on Friday, is  making a play for the state's ''Reagan Democrats'' who drifted into the Republican fold in the 1980's. But union leaders here say they are confident that this time around, most of these voters will support Mr. Gore, who plans to hold a rally with thousands of union members in Detroit on Saturday. ''But there's a fundamental problem with labor leaders trying to push Al Gore over the top,'' Mr. Hills said, ''And that is we have a lot of inroads with working men and women frankly because Al Gore is not good for the auto industry. Remember, he once said that the internal combustion engine is the single greatest threat to mankind.'' The A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s internal polls show that Michigan union members favor Mr. Gore over Mr. Bush, 60 percent to 23 percent. Michigan's 50 labor unions, with about 900,000 members, are seeking to maximize both the number of union members who vote and the percentage who back Mr. Gore. To this end, unions have undertaken their biggest voter registration drive ever, with the U.A.W. boasting that it has registered more than 10,000 new voters in Michigan alone. In mounting their pro-Gore offensive, unions have pushed aside a thorny issue, trade. That issue caused the mighty U.A.W. and Teamsters, both livid about the Clinton administration's support of the China trade bill, to delay endorsing Mr. Gore. ''On one hand, union members are critical of the administration on the China trade issue,'' said John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. ''But on the other hand, they recognize the contrast between the two candidates is so great. They realize that Gore by far will be much better for working families.'' For labor leaders, one big worry has dissipated. Several months ago, Mr. Nader reached 8 percent in some state polls, partly because many workers liked his views on trade. This made union leaders worry that Mr. Gore would lose the state, but new polls show that Mr. Nader's support has fallen sharply. One problem for Mr. Gore is that some union members believe that President Clinton has done too little for labor. In the lunchroom of the Yellow Freight terminal in Detroit, Tim Brochue, a truck driver who supports Mr. Bush, said, ''These Democrats haven't done anything for the unions. Clinton was a liar, and Gore was right at his side.'' Across the long lunch table, Doug Ray, a fellow Teamster, disagreed, saying, ''I'm voting for Gore. Bush is mostly for the rich people. The only reason he's running is to help big money and big business.''
 For his part, Mr. Roye said he ''had to do a bit of an Al Gore'' and defend his boss's record.
 Floyd Norris column says budget debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush assumes there will be trillions in surpluses over next devade, but there is no discussion on just how closely those surpluses have been tied to continuation of bull market; Hoeing & Co chief economist, Robert J Barbera, says budget forecasters assume high income tax payments, reflecting capital gains and taxes on profits from stock options, will keep on coming; graph (M) But just as investors are unprepared for the notion that stocks can go down and stay down, so are the folks in Washington. The great budget debate being conducted by Al Gore and George W. Bush assumes there will be trillions in surpluses over the next decade that they can divvy up in tax cuts and spending. There is no discussion of just how closely those surpluses have been tied to the bull market.
 Gov George W Bush's accusation that aid money from International Monetary Fund lined pockets of former Russian prime minister, Viktor S Chernomyrdin, is denied by monetary fund and by Chernomyrdin, raising questions about Bush's pointed charge during second presidential debate with Vice Pres Al Gore; Gore's campaign cited dispute over accuracy of Bush's statement as proof that Bush does not meet 'presidential standards' in foreign policy (M) Gov. George W. Bush's accusation that aid money from the International Monetary Fund lined the pockets of a former Russian prime minister was denied today by the monetary fund and the former Russian official, raising questions about Mr. Bush's pointed charge in Wednesday's otherwise cordial discussion of foreign policy issues. Gov. George W. Bush's accusation that aid money from the International Monetary Fund lined the pockets of a former Russian prime minister was denied today by the monetary fund and the former Russian official, raising questions about Mr. Bush's pointed charge in Wednesday's otherwise cordial discussion of foreign policy issues. Vice President Al Gore's campaign cited the dispute over the accuracy of Mr. Bush's statement as proof that the Texas governor ''does not meet presidential standards'' in foreign policy. The Clinton administration has defended the I.M.F. as vital in financial emergencies. Mr. Bush on Wednesday named Russia as an ''egregious'' example of misspent aid. He said Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister, had personally profited from I.M.F. lending. Some of the agency's money ''ended up in Viktor Chernomyrdin's pocket,'' Mr. Bush said. The barb was clearly aimed at Mr. Gore, who has had a prominent role in managing relations with Russia and reached numerous agreements with the longtime prime minister. Mr. Chernomyrdin issued a statement in Moscow today denying the accusations and threatening to sue Mr. Bush for slander. ''I think Mr. Bush Jr. should be getting ready for a court hearing on the issue,'' Mr. Chernomyrdin said. The Bush campaign said today that Mr. Bush stood by his statement. But Mr. Bush himself softened his tone today in an interview with Fox News. The governor said it was ''general knowledge'' that people in Russia had taken I.M.F. aid, but he raised the possibility that Mr. Chernomyrdin might have taken some other kind of aid money. ''It might not have been; it might have been another aid,'' Mr. Bush said when asked if he had evidence to support his earlier accusation.
