 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush take part in final televised presidential debate, town-meeting-style exchange, St Louis; Gore, criticized as too brash in first debate and too restrained in second, is feisty, without seeming too combative; Bush adopts earnest and subdued demeanor; their exchanges are often spirited and intense, with Gore citing his experience in White House and Congress and trying to underscore differences with Bush; Bush seeks to portray Gore as big spender beholden to special interests; event opens with moment of silence for Missouri Gov Mel Carnahan, who died in plane crash; photos (M) In their final confrontation before the nation's voters last night, Vice President Al Gore cited accomplishments throughout his public career as evidence that he is a champion of working Americans, while Gov. George W. Bush cast himself as a leader from outside Washington with a record of uniting Republicans and Democrats. The candidates recalibrated their approaches from the first two debates as they prowled a red-carpeted stage at Washington University in St. Louis and fielded questions from ordinary voters. Mr. Gore, who had been criticized even by his own supporters as too brash in the first debate and too restrained in the second, was newly feisty but stopped himself from appearing too combative. In their final confrontation before the nation's voters last night, Vice President Al Gore cited accomplishments throughout his public career as evidence that he is a champion of working Americans, while Gov. George W. Bush cast himself as a leader from outside Washington with a record of uniting Republicans and Democrats. The candidates recalibrated their approaches from the first two debates as they prowled a red-carpeted stage at Washington University in St. Louis and fielded questions from ordinary voters. Mr. Gore, who had been criticized even by his own supporters as too brash in the first debate and too restrained in the second, was newly feisty but stopped himself from appearing too combative. Mr. Bush, who seemed to have less to prove in this debate, adopted a more earnest and often subdued demeanor as he tried to play the statesman. Still, the 90-minute event was briskly paced and the exchanges were often spirited and intense. Whether the topic was education or the bloodshed in the Middle East or family farms, Mr. Gore often weaved in his experience in the White House and in Congress. In contrast to the debate last week, when the two men agreed more often than not, Mr. Gore repeatedly tried to underscore their differences. ''If you want someone who will fight for you,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and who will fight for the middle-class families and working men and women who are sick and tired of having their parents and grandparents pay higher prices for prescription drugs than anybody else, then I want to fight for you.'' Mr. Bush sought use many of his answers as opportunities to portray the vice president as a big spender beholden to special interests. ''If this were a spending contest, I'd come in second,'' Mr. Bush said. At another point, he looked at his rival and sought to link Mr. Gore to liberals of the past, saying: ''He proposed more than Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis combined. You know, this is a big spender. He is. And he ought to be proud of it. It's part of his record. We have a different philosophy.'' [Transcript, Page A26.] The event opened on a somber note, with a moment of silence for Gov. Mel Carnahan of Missouri, who was killed in a plane crash on Monday night. Mr. Carnahan, a Democrat, had been in a neck-and-neck race for the Senate with the incumbent, John Ashcroft. Mr. Gore canceled a rally in Kansas City on Wednesday, where he was to have stumped with Mr. Carnahan. The most attention -- and perhaps pressure -- last night was on Mr. Gore, who is lagging just slightly in national surveys. His more aggressive posture seemed to fit his place in the race: as a slight underdog. Mr. Gore's most brazen move came early on after Mr. Bush said he, too, favored a nationwide bill of rights for patients, and cited one he supported in Texas that he said demonstrated how he united Democrats and Republicans. That prompted Mr. Gore to stride within inches of Mr. Bush with a challenge. He pressed him about why he did not favor the national rights bill sponsored by Representatives John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and Charlie Norwood, Republican of Georgia. Mr. Bush appeared momentarily startled by the invasion of his space, which was reminiscent of Representative Rick A. Lazio's confrontation of Hillary Clinton in their first Senate debate in New York. Mr. Bush responded by speaking of the differences in their approaches. ''I can get something positive done on behalf of the people,'' Mr. Bush said. ''That's what the question in this campaign is about.'' Mr. Gore, who has conducted scores of town meetings since he was a House member from Tennessee -- and has promised to hold them regularly if he is elected president -- seemed particularly comfortable with the format and strolled about the stage. Mr. Bush at times stood awkwardly, and did not always seem to know what to do with his arms. But at other times he seemed at ease, and even winked at the audience as Mr. Gore was scolding him. No candidate tossed a surprise or made a stunning pronouncement. Even so, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore  tried to seize opportunities to present different philosophies of how they would govern. One of the more heated exchanges was over reducing the cost of prescription drugs. Mr. Bush said the elderly were entitled to government programs that encouraged health insurance plans to help with the costs of prescription drugs. Such programs cannot pass, Mr. Bush said, until there is change in Washington. ''There's a lot of bickering in Washington, D.C.,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's kind of like a political issue as opposed to a people issue. So what I want to do is I want to call upon Republicans and Democrats to forget all the arguing and finger pointing and come together and take care of our seniors.'' But he said he was against government-imposed price controls on drugs. ''I think price controls would hurt our ability to continue important research and development,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The best thing is to reform Medicare.'' Mr. Gore responded harshly. ''Here we go again,'' he said, trying to depict Mr. Bush as too close to drug companies. Pointing to Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore said that for voters who wanted a candidate who ''supports legislation supported by the big drug companies, this is your man.'' The two also tangled over a national health care program. Mr. Gore said the country should move ''step by step toward universal health coverage.'' But he said he did not favor the government as the sole provider. ''We have a big difference on this,'' he said, turning to Mr. Bush. ''I am absolutely opposed to a national health care plan,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I don't want the federal government making decisions for patients or providers.'' In the last debate, Mr. Bush was criticized by some people for appearing to grin briefly when he talked about death penalty cases. Responding to a question last night, he said he was not proud of the fact that Texas had imposed the death penalty on more people than any other state in recent years. ''The death penalty is very serious business,'' he said. But, Mr. Bush said, the death penalty is appropriate when a defendant is guilty of a capital crime and has had full access to the courts. While not boasting of the number of executions, Mr. Bush said: ''I'm proud of the fact that violent crime is down in the state of Texas.'' Mr. Gore said he supported the death penalty ''in the most heinous cases.'' But, he said, it has to be administered fairly, with attention to DNA evidence. Mr. Bush was perhaps most passionate when he discussed education, an issue he has devoted much time to as governor. Asked how he would get parents more involved in the education of their children, he said, ''It's hard to make people love one another.'' Mr. Gore said he would offer hiring bonuses to help schools hire 100,000 teachers in the next four years. He said he would work for universal preschool programs. And he said Mr. Bush supported vouchers that could be used by parents to send their children to public or private schools. Such vouchers would take money from public schools, Mr. Gore said. ''Governor Bush is for vouchers,'' Mr. Gore said, ''and in his plan, he proposes to drain more money, more taxpayer money, out of the public schools for private school vouchers than all of the money that he proposes in his entire budget for public schools themselves.'' Mr. Gore offered his remedies about how to improve schools but turned the issue to Mr. Bush's tax proposals. He said that Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan would make it difficult for the federal government to provide any increased aid to schools. ''He proposes spending more money for the wealthiest 1 percent than he does spending on education, health and national defense combined,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Bush replied that under his plan, the wealthiest taxpayers would pay 64 percent of the total tax payment, compared with 62 percent that he asserted they now pay. ''This is a fair plan,'' Mr. Bush said. Gesturing at Mr. Gore, he said, ''This is a big spender.'' When Mr. Gore said that independent journalistic analyses showed that his evaluation of the Bush tax plan was correct, Mr. Bush dismissed journalists as irrelevant. Mr. Gore said they were the ''keepers of the record'' of what was accurate. ''If you want a man emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the wealthy, here is your man,'' he said turning to Mr. Bush. ''But if you want someone to fight for the middle class,'' he said,  choose the Gore-Lieberman ticket. The debate veered to foreign policy when Mr. Bush was asked what would make him the best leader to deal with the Middle East. In the absence of further elaboration, Mr. Bush said the United States had to be ''credible, strong.'' ''Israel's our friend,'' Mr. Bush said, quickly adding that he would reach out to Arab nations also. Whatever he did, Mr. Bush said, he would do with an eye on what is right, not what is popular at the moment. For his part, Mr. Gore said he envisioned ''a future when the world is at peace, with the United States of America promoting values of democracy and human rights and freedom all around the world.'' Mr. Bush said that ''government ought to stand on the side of parents teaching their children right from wrong and the message is often undermined by pop culture. We can work with the entertainment on things like family hour.'' Mr. Gore recalled how his wife, Tipper, who was in the audience, once discovered that one of their daughters brought home a record with lyrics he described as awful and she ''hit the ceiling.'' He noted that Mrs. Gore then began a successful campaign to have records labeled for content. When a sixth-grade teacher said his students wanted him to ask the candidates if they would keep their pledges, Mr. Gore said, ''Yes,'' producing a ripple of laughter at his terseness. But it was only momentary as he added: ''I am a person who keeps promises and you know we've heard a lot about not being done much in the last eight years. I think the record shows otherwise.'' Mr. Bush quickly picked up that theme, saying that the Clinton-Gore administration had promised many things. ''You were promised that Medicare would be reformed,'' he said. In addition, he said that there were promises to reform social security and provide a tax cut for the middle class. ''It didn't happen,'' he said.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush display dislike of each other in their body language during presidential debate; format, which unshackles them from lectern or table and lets them roam, gives them more freedom to communicate in nonverbal fashion; Gore strides about with ardor, while Bush seems muted, apparently gambling that voters will prefer folksy, sometimes shuffling politician to one with strains of stridency; photo (M) It was body language, and one of its messages was unmistakable: Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore do not like each other one bit. It was body language, and one of its messages was unmistakable: Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore do not like each other one bit. Mr. Gore never actually verbalized this. But he strayed from his stool on the red-carpeted stage at one point and literally claimed Mr. Bush's territory as his own, shooting daggers at the Texas governor as Mr. Bush implied that the vice president was too partisan a politician to get anything done. Mr. Bush never verbalized it, either. But one look at the tightness of his smile and the exasperated shrug of his shoulders whenever he believed that Mr. Gore was going overboard made his view of the vice president clearer than even the spiciest adjective could. Mr. Gore's ardor seemed bottomless. He strode this way and that, arms outstretched, head tilted forward, eyes ablaze. Mr. Bush's desire seemed muted, sometimes curiously so, as he kept his hands closer to himself, covered less physical ground and let his features go slack, as if he were musing out loud rather than making a vigorous case. It was as obvious tonight as at any previous point during the campaign that Mr. Bush was betting heavily that voters, in a time of prosperity, preferred a folksy, sometimes shuffling politician to one with any strains of stridency. Indeed, Mr. Bush spoke so softly at times that he seemed to be on the verge of slumber, and his answer to Mr. Gore's laser-beam stare was a wizened mien of bemusement. He also sought to direct voters' attention to what he clearly saw as an empty theatricality in the vice president by suggesting that Mr. Gore was too busy performing to provide the required, relevant responses. ''One reason people are skeptical,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to American's relationship to their government, ''is because people don't answer the questions they've been asked.'' What voters perhaps saw tonight, more vividly than in the first or second debate, were the divergent degrees of intensity that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush bring to the presidential contest. What voters were left to decide is which style will give them the kind of government they want. Mr. Gore's was heavier, the result of a slight disadvantage in several of the most recent polls and withering criticisms of his previous two debate performances -- overcooked the first time around and underdone the second. Mr. Gore managed to mention that all four of his children had come, of their own volition, to the debate tonight. He managed to recite the entirety of his foreign-policy resume. ''I didn't do the most or run the gravest risk by a long shot,'' Mr. Gore said, ''but I learned what it was like to be an enlisted man in the United States Army.'' Mr. Bush seemed intent above all on not committing any errors, which meant staying relaxed, and he probably made a special effort in that direction, given what happened to his father eight years ago. Unnerved by precisely the kind of town-hall format that was used tonight, former President Bush stole glances at his wrist watch, to disastrous effect. ''One thing about insurance that's a Washington term,'' Mr. Bush said at one point, despite the fact that there is really no other word for it, and his proposals for people on Medicare involve precisely that. Talking to a teacher in the audience about the way in which federal regulations sometimes hamper local schools, Mr. Bush said, ''I don't know if you have to be a paperwork filler-out-er.'' Mr. Gore unfurled statistic upon statistic, putting his knowledge on full and self-conscious display. Mr. Bush leaned harder on generalities, answering a question about how parents could be made to take greater responsibility for their children's education by saying that he wished he could write and pass a law that would make people love each other. He sometimes sounded like a greeting card. Mr. Gore occasionally sounded like the denizen of a think tank.
 Voters Ask the Questions In Last of Three Debates  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush met in St. Louis for their third and final planned debate, a 90-minute town-meeting format. Voters Ask the Questions In Last of Three Debates  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush met in St. Louis for their third and final planned debate, a 90-minute town-meeting format.
 Tomorrow, Archbishop Egan will step into national view when he presides over a venerable political event, the annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner, a charity fund-raiser at the Waldorf-Astoria sponsored by the archdiocese. The occasion represents the restoration of local tradition: for the first time in 12 years, the dinner will be attended by the presidential candidates of both major parties, in this case, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. In 1992, a presidential debate was scheduled on the same night as the dinner, and President George Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton declined the invitation. Four years ago, the dinner's organizers invited neither President Clinton nor Senator Bob Dole because, some officials in the archdiocese said, Cardinal O'Connor was angered by Mr. Clinton's veto of a bill that would have banned a late-term abortion procedure.
 High school debate teams like Ms. Martin's, which won several rounds before being eliminated last weekend, have long trained the nation's elite in critical thinking and public presentation. Although aides to Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who debated on national television last night, said the candidates had not been on their high school teams, many politicians and public speakers cut their oratorical teeth in high school tournaments.
 Gallup Organization chose 131 uncommitted St Louis area voters for Commission on Presidential Debates to question Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush in town-hall style setting; they submitted their questions in writing to Jim Lehrer, debate moderator, who picked representative ones and determined order in which to ask them; they comment; photo (M) Leo Anderson was surprised to be called on. He rose, waited for a microphone to be handed to him and slowly unfolded his crumpled index card. Then he put it to George W. Bush. Leo Anderson was surprised to be called on. He rose, waited for a microphone to be handed to him and slowly unfolded his crumpled index card. Then he put it to George W. Bush. It was perhaps the most direct question of the 90-minute session, and it elicited a direct response. ''No, I'm not proud of that,'' Governor Bush said, adding, ''If you think I was proud of it, I think you misread me.'' After the debate ended, Mr. Anderson had another direct response. ''I didn't like it at all,'' he said of Mr. Bush's answer. Mr. Anderson was one of 131 people chosen by the Gallup Organization to question Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore in the town hall meeting here that served as the third and final presidential debate of the election season. Janet Brown, spokeswoman for the Commission on Presidential Debates, said the questioners were selected ''because they were uncommitted voters.'' Roughly one-third were truly undecided, while another third leaned toward Mr. Gore and another third leaned toward Mr. Bush. But, like others, Mr. Kosberg said afterward that he was still undecided on a presidential pick. The most useful part of the evening, he said, was that while he leaned Democratic, ''I'm pleased to realize that Governor Bush would make a wonderful leader.'' The format did not allow the candidates to be overly chatty with the questioners. After the first question, Mr. Gore said in response, ''Mr. Hankin, I don't feel good about it.'' But later, when Mr. Gore tried to engage Mr. Kosberg, the teacher, by asking what grade he taught,  Mr. Lehrer swiftly stopped him, saying, ''That's a violation of your rule.'' Mr. Gore afterward resisted his inclination to to try to engage people by asking them personal questions. On the subject of tax cuts, he said, ''Now, I doubt anybody here makes more than $330,000 a year. I won't ask you. But if you do, you're in the top 1 percent. If you don't -- -- '' Mr. Gore conceded, ''I'm not going to ask.'' Mr. Bush stuck to the rules and engaged his questioners by confining himself to simple hellos. ''Hi, Angie,'' he said when Angela K. Pettig, who asked a question about education, was introduced. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE PARTICIPANTS  Correction:  October 21, 2000, Saturday  An article on Wednesday about Gov. George W. Bush's criticism of Vice President Al Gore's economic plans misstated a question Mr. Bush was asked at the presidential debate on Tuesday. The moderator, Jim Lehrer, asked him to respond to Mr. Gore's criticism that the governor's proposed tax cut ''benefits the top 1 percent of the wealthiest Americans.'' Mr. Bush responded: ''Of course it does. If you pay taxes, you're going to get a benefit.'' Mr. Lehrer did not ask whether the proposal would benefit ''mainly'' that group. An article on Wednesday about Gov. George W. Bush's criticism of Vice President Al Gore's economic plans misstated a question Mr. Bush was asked at the presidential debate on Tuesday. The moderator, Jim Lehrer, asked him to respond to Mr. Gore's criticism that the governor's proposed tax cut ''benefits the top 1 percent of the wealthiest Americans.'' Mr. Bush responded: ''Of course it does. If you pay taxes, you're going to get a benefit.'' Mr. Lehrer did not ask whether the proposal would benefit ''mainly'' that group.
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Vice Pres Al Gore's running mate, makes surprise trip to St Louis to attend Gore's debate with Gov George W Bush (M) Vice President Al Gore's camp was hoping to add a little unexpected drama to a confrontation already freighted with import in a race that is excruciatingly close. His advisers were also hoping that having Mr. Lieberman around, as the person with the greatest stature schmoozing the press, might dominate the pre- and post-debate spin sessions that have become a fixture of the debates. The senator strolled into the media center here an hour before the debate, and about 50 members of the news media, starved for something to report, mobbed him. He proceeded to say the same things -- about Mr. Gore's intending to outline sharp differences between him and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- that he has said a dozen times before.
 In the presidential race, the Times poll showed Vice President Al Gore leading Gov. George W. Bush of Texas by 15 points, with 49 percent to Mr. Bush's 34 percent. Ralph Nader was supported by 8 percent of New Jersey voters, and Patrick J. Buchanan was favored by 1 percent.
 HIGH-TECHNOLOGY POLITICS -- Both parties have aggressively courted the computer industry this year, with Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman arguing that they are the ticket with the best understanding of the new, high-technology economy and its needs. Mr. Gore even took some controversial credit at one point for helping develop the Internet. ''I wouldn't be here without Al Gore having done everything he's done in the last 25 years,'' said one of the most prominent in the group, Marc Andreessen, a founder of Netscape. HIGH-TECHNOLOGY POLITICS -- Both parties have aggressively courted the computer industry this year, with Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman arguing that they are the ticket with the best understanding of the new, high-technology economy and its needs. Mr. Gore even took some controversial credit at one point for helping develop the Internet. ''I wouldn't be here without Al Gore having done everything he's done in the last 25 years,'' said one of the most prominent in the group, Marc Andreessen, a founder of Netscape.
 Plane-crash death of Mel Carnahan, Democratic Missouri governor who was in tight Senate race with Sen John Ashcroft, has thrown already tumultuous politics of key swing state into disarray, making Ashcroft's election likely and thus lessening Democrats' chances of regaining Senate; brings halt to much of state's frenetic and often negative campaigning; Ashcroft pulls his television ads indefinitely and cancels day of campaigning; Democratic National Committee stops running its television ads in state; Vice Pres Al Gore cancels rally, Kansas City, that Carnahan planned to attend; death of state's most powerful and popular Democrat could dampen Democratic turnout, hurting Gore and party's gubernatorial candidate, Bob Holden; Missouri law requires Carnahan's name remain on ballot as Democratic candidate because death came within month of election (M) With the exception of the third presidential debate in St. Louis tonight, Mr. Carnahan's death brought a halt today to much of the state's frenetic and often negative political campaigning. Mr. Ashcroft ordered his aides to pull his television advertisements indefinitely and canceled a busy day of campaigning. The Democratic National Committee also stopped running its television commercials in the state, while Vice President Al Gore canceled a Thursday rally in Kansas City that Mr. Carnahan had been scheduled to attend on Thursday. And both the Democratic and Republican candidates for governor suspended their campaigning and television commercials today. But beyond that, analysts said, the loss of the Missouri's most powerful and popular Democrat could also dampen Democratic turnout at the polls, hurting Mr. Gore and the party's gubernatorial candidate, State Treasurer Bob Holden. ''Without Carnahan, the Senate race now becomes an asterisk,'' said Stuart Rothenberg, editor of the Rothenberg Political Report, a nonpartisan newsletter. ''You have to wonder whether that affects the Democrats' mood. There's a potential that it will hurt Gore.'' A senior Gore adviser also said the party might have to spend more money in Missouri to turn out Democratic voters who might be dispirited by Mr. Carnahan's death. But Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager, said it was too early to determine the effect of Mr. Carnahan's death on the broader landscape of the national races. ''I don't know how you know the impact of something like this,'' Mr. Fabiani said. ''People here are in a state of shock. They don't know which end is up.'' There are also questions about what Mr. Carnahan's campaign should do with the money it still has in the bank, which campaign officials said was probably less than $1 million. Some Democrats contended that that money should go into continuing the campaign in his name, but others said that money would be well spent helping either Mr. Holden or Mr. Gore. Mr. Carnahan's death could even affect the fate of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democratic nominee for vice president who is simultaneously running for re-election in Connecticut. Some Democrats have called on Mr. Lieberman to drop out of the Senate race before Oct. 27 so that the state's popular Democratic attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, can get on the ballot. Those Democrats are concerned that if Mr. Gore wins, Mr. Lieberman will resign from the Senate, allowing Gov. John G. Rowland, a Republican, to name his replacement.
 Transcript of presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, moderated by Jim Lehrer; photo (L) Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night at Washington University in St. Louis between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS. MR. LEHRER -- Good evening from the field house at Washington University in St. Louis. I'm Jim Lehrer of The NewsHour on PBS. And I welcome you to this third and final Campaign 2000 debate between the Democratic candidate for president, Vice President Al Gore, and the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Let's welcome the candidates now. Before we begin, a correction from last week's debate. I was wrong when I said Vice President Gore's campaign commercials had called Governor Bush a bumbler. That specific charge was made in a press statement by Gore campaign spokesman Mark Fabiani, not in a TV ad -- MR. LEHRER -- Time is up. Two minutes response, Governor Bush. MR. GORE -- -- in the Congress. And I specifically would like to know whether Governor Bush will support the Dingell-Norwood bill which is the main one pending. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, you may answer that if you'd like. But also I'd like to know how you see the differences between the two of you, and we need to move on. MR. LEHRER -- All right, another -- the next question also on a health issue. It's from, it will be asked by Marie Payne Clepey and it goes to Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- All right, another health question, it comes from Vicki French and it's for you, Vice President Gore. Vicki French, where are you? Oh there she is. Yes. Now, we have a big difference on this. And you need to know the record here. Under Governor Bush, Texas has sunk to be 50th out of 50 in health care -- in health insurance for their citizens. Last week he said that they were spending $3.7 billion -- or $4.7 billion on this. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? Now, I said there was a contrast. Governor Bush is for vouchers. And in his plan he proposes to drain more money -- more taxpayer money out of the public schools for private school vouchers than all of the money that he proposes in his entire budget for schools themselves. And only one in 20 students would be eligible for these vouchers. And they wouldn't even pay the full tuition to private school. I think that's a mistake. I don't think we should give up on the private schools and leave kids trapped in failing schools. I think we -- I think we should make it the No. 1 priority to make our schools the best in the world -- all of them. MR. GORE -- Well, the program that he's proposing is not the one that he just described. Under your plan, Governor Bush, states would be required to pay vouchers to students to match the vouchers that the federal government would put up. Now, here's -- and the way it would happen is that, under his plan, if a school was designated as failing, the kids would be trapped there for another three years and then some of them would get federal vouchers and the state would be forced to -- to match those -- that money. MR. LEHRER -- So no vouchers under -- in a Gore administration? MR. LEHRER -- Andrew Kossberg has a related question on education that's right on this subject. Mr. Kossberg, where are you? There you are and it's for Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- That's a violation of your rule, Vice President Gore. And then, I want to make sure that we have job training on top of that and lifelong learning. But it all starts with the public school teachers. My proposal gives $10,000 hiring bonuses for those teachers who are -- who get certified to teach in the areas where they're most needed. Now, accountability? We basically agree on accountability. My plan requires testing of all students. It also requires something that Governor Bush's plan doesn't -- it requires testing of all new teachers, including in the subjects that they teach. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, is the governor right when he says that you're proposing the largest federal spending in years? MR. GORE -- Absolutely not. Absolutely not. I'm so glad that I have a chance to knock that down. Look, the problem is that under Governor Bush's plan $1.6 trillion tax cut, mostly to the wealthy. Under his own budget numbers he proposes spending more money for a tax cut just for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new money that he budgets for education, health care and national defense combined. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. GORE -- Look, this isn't about Governor Bush, it's not about me. It is about you. And I want to come back to something I said before. If you want somebody who believes that we were better off eight years ago than we are now and that we ought to go back to the kind of policies that we had back then, emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the wealthy, here is your man. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- Speaking of keepers of the scorecard, that's what I'm trying to do here, Mr. Vice President and Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- We're going to -- we're going to move on, we're going to have to move on. All right, there were 12 questions on foreign and military matters and the first one that we're going to ask will be directed to -- to you, Governor Bush. And David Norwood is going to ask it. Mr. Norwood, where are you? There you are. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? When I went to the United States Senate, I asked for an assignment to the Armed Services Committee. And while I was there, I worked on a bipartisan basis -- as I did in the House; I worked with former President Reagan on the modernization of our strategic weaponry. In the Senate, I was one of only 10 Democrats, along with Senator Joe Lieberman, to support Governor Bush's dad in the Persian Gulf War resolution. And for the last eight years I've served on the National Security Council -- MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, another kind of gun question. It'll be asked by Robert Lutz. Mr. Lutz? Q. -- Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Steve Luker has a question and it is for Vice President Gore. Mr. Luker. There you are. Q. -- Vice President Gore, the family farms are disappearing and having a hard time even in the current positive economic environment. What steps would you or your administration take on agricultural policy developments to protect the family farms for this multi-functional service they perform? MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- A quick thing on the inheritance tax. There is a difference between the two of you on this. Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- New issue. And the question will be asked by Joyce Cleamer of Governor Bush. Joyce Cleamer, there you are. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- All right. Vice President Gore, the next question is for you and it will be asked by Steven Cusman. Mr. Cusman, where are you, sir? Right behind me as well. There we go. Governor Bush opposes it. I wish that he would consider changing his mind on that. Because I think that the special interest have too much power and we need to give our democracy back to the American people. Let me tell you why. Those issues you mentioned -- Social Security, prescription drugs. The big drug companies are against the prescription drug proposal that I've made. The H.M.O.'s are against the patient's rights bill, the Dingell-Norwood bill that I support and that Governor Bush does not support. The big oil companies are against the measures to get more energy independence and renewable fuels. MR. LEHRER -- Time. Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, Norma Kirby has the next question and it's for you. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- The question is for you, Vice President Gore, and Lisa Key will ask it. Lisa Key, where are you? There we go, sorry. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- All right. Next question is for you, Vice President Gore. And Thomas Fisher will ask it. Mr. Fisher. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, you're first. You have two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. Thank you, Vice President Gore, Governor Bush. From St. Louis, I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you and good night. Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night at Washington University in St. Louis between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS. MR. LEHRER -- Good evening from the field house at Washington University in St. Louis. I'm Jim Lehrer of The NewsHour on PBS. And I welcome you to this third and final Campaign 2000 debate between the Democratic candidate for president, Vice President Al Gore, and the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Let's welcome the candidates now. Before we begin, a correction from last week's debate. I was wrong when I said Vice President Gore's campaign commercials had called Governor Bush a bumbler. That specific charge was made in a press statement by Gore campaign spokesman Mark Fabiani, not in a TV ad -- MR. LEHRER -- Time is up. Two minutes response, Governor Bush. MR. GORE -- -- in the Congress. And I specifically would like to know whether Governor Bush will support the Dingell-Norwood bill which is the main one pending. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, you may answer that if you'd like. But also I'd like to know how you see the differences between the two of you, and we need to move on. MR. LEHRER -- All right, another -- the next question also on a health issue. It's from, it will be asked by Marie Payne Clepey and it goes to Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- All right, another health question, it comes from Vicki French and it's for you, Vice President Gore. Vicki French, where are you? Oh there she is. Yes. Now, we have a big difference on this. And you need to know the record here. Under Governor Bush, Texas has sunk to be 50th out of 50 in health care -- in health insurance for their citizens. Last week he said that they were spending $3.7 billion -- or $4.7 billion on this. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? Now, I said there was a contrast. Governor Bush is for vouchers. And in his plan he proposes to drain more money -- more taxpayer money out of the public schools for private school vouchers than all of the money that he proposes in his entire budget for schools themselves. And only one in 20 students would be eligible for these vouchers. And they wouldn't even pay the full tuition to private school. I think that's a mistake. I don't think we should give up on the private schools and leave kids trapped in failing schools. I think we -- I think we should make it the No. 1 priority to make our schools the best in the world -- all of them. MR. GORE -- Well, the program that he's proposing is not the one that he just described. Under your plan, Governor Bush, states would be required to pay vouchers to students to match the vouchers that the federal government would put up. Now, here's -- and the way it would happen is that, under his plan, if a school was designated as failing, the kids would be trapped there for another three years and then some of them would get federal vouchers and the state would be forced to -- to match those -- that money. MR. LEHRER -- So no vouchers under -- in a Gore administration? MR. LEHRER -- Andrew Kossberg has a related question on education that's right on this subject. Mr. Kossberg, where are you? There you are and it's for Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- That's a violation of your rule, Vice President Gore. And then, I want to make sure that we have job training on top of that and lifelong learning. But it all starts with the public school teachers. My proposal gives $10,000 hiring bonuses for those teachers who are -- who get certified to teach in the areas where they're most needed. Now, accountability? We basically agree on accountability. My plan requires testing of all students. It also requires something that Governor Bush's plan doesn't -- it requires testing of all new teachers, including in the subjects that they teach. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, is the governor right when he says that you're proposing the largest federal spending in years? MR. GORE -- Absolutely not. Absolutely not. I'm so glad that I have a chance to knock that down. Look, the problem is that under Governor Bush's plan $1.6 trillion tax cut, mostly to the wealthy. Under his own budget numbers he proposes spending more money for a tax cut just for the wealthiest 1 percent than all of the new money that he budgets for education, health care and national defense combined. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. GORE -- Look, this isn't about Governor Bush, it's not about me. It is about you. And I want to come back to something I said before. If you want somebody who believes that we were better off eight years ago than we are now and that we ought to go back to the kind of policies that we had back then, emphasizing tax cuts mainly for the wealthy, here is your man. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- Speaking of keepers of the scorecard, that's what I'm trying to do here, Mr. Vice President and Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- We're going to -- we're going to move on, we're going to have to move on. All right, there were 12 questions on foreign and military matters and the first one that we're going to ask will be directed to -- to you, Governor Bush. And David Norwood is going to ask it. Mr. Norwood, where are you? There you are. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? When I went to the United States Senate, I asked for an assignment to the Armed Services Committee. And while I was there, I worked on a bipartisan basis -- as I did in the House; I worked with former President Reagan on the modernization of our strategic weaponry. In the Senate, I was one of only 10 Democrats, along with Senator Joe Lieberman, to support Governor Bush's dad in the Persian Gulf War resolution. And for the last eight years I've served on the National Security Council -- MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, another kind of gun question. It'll be asked by Robert Lutz. Mr. Lutz? Q. -- Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Steve Luker has a question and it is for Vice President Gore. Mr. Luker. There you are. Q. -- Vice President Gore, the family farms are disappearing and having a hard time even in the current positive economic environment. What steps would you or your administration take on agricultural policy developments to protect the family farms for this multi-functional service they perform? MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- A quick thing on the inheritance tax. There is a difference between the two of you on this. Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- New issue. And the question will be asked by Joyce Cleamer of Governor Bush. Joyce Cleamer, there you are. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- All right. Vice President Gore, the next question is for you and it will be asked by Steven Cusman. Mr. Cusman, where are you, sir? Right behind me as well. There we go. Governor Bush opposes it. I wish that he would consider changing his mind on that. Because I think that the special interest have too much power and we need to give our democracy back to the American people. Let me tell you why. Those issues you mentioned -- Social Security, prescription drugs. The big drug companies are against the prescription drug proposal that I've made. The H.M.O.'s are against the patient's rights bill, the Dingell-Norwood bill that I support and that Governor Bush does not support. The big oil companies are against the measures to get more energy independence and renewable fuels. MR. LEHRER -- Time. Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, Norma Kirby has the next question and it's for you. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- The question is for you, Vice President Gore, and Lisa Key will ask it. Lisa Key, where are you? There we go, sorry. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- All right. Next question is for you, Vice President Gore. And Thomas Fisher will ask it. Mr. Fisher. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, you're first. You have two minutes. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. Thank you, Vice President Gore, Governor Bush. From St. Louis, I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you and good night.
 Editorial holds Vice Pres Gore dominated third presidential debate with Gov George W Bush; holds he offered tighter, more cogent presentation of his policies, recapturing some of passion of his Democratic convention speech Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush dropped the pleasantries of their previous debate last night and held their most spirited confrontation to date while outlining their disagreements over tax cuts, health care, schools, campaign finance and other subjects. Taking questions this time before a ''town meeting'' audience, both the candidates put in vigorous performances, but it was Mr. Gore who dominated their exchanges. He offered a tighter, more cogent presentation of his policies and for the first time in weeks recaptured some of the passion of his Democratic convention speech. The Texas governor responded by promising to bring a new tone of bipartisan cooperation to Washington, but he seemed less at ease than in last week's debate in engaging the budgetary and legislative details laid out by Mr. Gore. Though most opinion polls show a close race, Mr. Bush has been running ahead of Mr. Gore in recent days. The difference has been magnified by their recent demeanor, with Mr. Bush looking more confident on the campaign trail and Mr. Gore seeming tentative and off his game. Last night, however, Mr. Gore dropped the almost phlegmatic manner he adopted last week, paced the large stage area and repeatedly challenged the governor directly with his answers. ''All right, here we go again,'' he said before dissecting Mr. Bush's first answer on drug prices, and that set the style for an evening marked by Mr. Bush's complaints that Mr. Gore was not following the debate ground rules. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush dropped the pleasantries of their previous debate last night and held their most spirited confrontation to date while outlining their disagreements over tax cuts, health care, schools, campaign finance and other subjects. Taking questions this time before a ''town meeting'' audience, both the candidates put in vigorous performances, but it was Mr. Gore who dominated their exchanges. He offered a tighter, more cogent presentation of his policies and for the first time in weeks recaptured some of the passion of his Democratic convention speech. The Texas governor responded by promising to bring a new tone of bipartisan cooperation to Washington, but he seemed less at ease than in last week's debate in engaging the budgetary and legislative details laid out by Mr. Gore. Though most opinion polls show a close race, Mr. Bush has been running ahead of Mr. Gore in recent days. The difference has been magnified by their recent demeanor, with Mr. Bush looking more confident on the campaign trail and Mr. Gore seeming tentative and off his game. Last night, however, Mr. Gore dropped the almost phlegmatic manner he adopted last week, paced the large stage area and repeatedly challenged the governor directly with his answers. ''All right, here we go again,'' he said before dissecting Mr. Bush's first answer on drug prices, and that set the style for an evening marked by Mr. Bush's complaints that Mr. Gore was not following the debate ground rules. On education, Mr. Gore dismissed the governor's proposals for testing with a wave of the hand and added that Mr. Bush's voucher plan would drain the public schools. On health care, he pointed at Mr. Bush and declared that if the voters wanted a program embraced by the drug companies, ''this is your man.'' Mr. Bush answered those thrusts with thematic responses depicting Mr. Gore as an exponent of big government. ''If this were a spending contest,'' he said, ''I'd come in second.'' Over all, however, Mr. Gore was the aggressor and pace-setter. After last week's much-criticized performance he seemed willing, almost eager, to risk the possibility of some people's finding him unlikable. By being less reluctant to unleash a torrent of facts he seemed to throw Mr. Bush off balance, though the governor closed with a well-formed argument for sending a change agent to Washington. Mr. Bush's principal theme once again was that the vice president wanted to exploit issues for political gain rather than solve problems. He played down the policy differences between their two health plans, saying simply that the real ''difference is that I can get it done.'' But for the first time in their debates, Mr. Gore dwelled on the economic accomplishments of the last eight years and invited voters to ponder the risks of changing leadership. The contrast between the two candidates on tax policy was especially sharp in an exchange over the estate tax. Mr. Gore said he favored removing the tax for most farm families and small businesses, but not the most wealthy. Mr. Bush was forced to argue for fairness for the very rich, and accused Mr. Gore of leaving 50 million Americans with no tax relief. Even on the issues of violence, pornography in popular culture and the death penalty -- traditional issues for Republicans -- Mr. Gore was more muscular in his response than Mr. Bush, who looked awkward when he gave a defensive answer about whether he was excessively keen on imposing the death penalty. It may take several days before voters evolve a firm sense of who won the debate, but Mr. Gore's forces were sure to be energized by his return to form. He laid the groundwork for a final campaign push on the issue of Social Security by getting Mr. Bush to acknowledge that the $1 trillion program for private investment accounts for young working people would be taken from the Social Security surplus in coming years. The vice president is sure to keep the issue alive by charging that this money will not then be available for future retirees. But the biggest contrast could be seen in the way each candidate addressed the issue of trust. For Mr. Bush, trust was a question of who could end the bickering in Washington. Mr. Gore's more potent formulation was that Americans could trust him to ''fight for you'' against special interests. The next three weeks will determine which choice is preferred by voters.
 Gov George W Bush, in presidential debate, presents self as champion of patients' bill of rights in Texas; Bush was rarely regarded as leader on issue in state, and his record is mixed (M) In tonight's presidential debate, Gov. George W. Bush presented himself as a champion of a patients' bill of rights in Texas, saying he ''brought Republicans and Democrats together to do just that in the state of Texas.'' He made the same assertion in television commercials during the Republican primaries. But Mr. Bush was rarely regarded as a leader on the issue in Texas, and his record is mixed. In tonight's presidential debate, Gov. George W. Bush presented himself as a champion of a patients' bill of rights in Texas, saying he ''brought Republicans and Democrats together to do just that in the state of Texas.'' He made the same assertion in television commercials during the Republican primaries. But Mr. Bush was rarely regarded as a leader on the issue in Texas, and his record is mixed. In 1995, the State Legislature approved a patients' protection bill that would have required annual report cards for health maintenance organizations and would have forced them to provide necessary emergency-room care. Mr. Bush vetoed the measure, but he did instruct the state's insurance commissioner to draft rules covering some aspects of the bill, earning praise from some consumer advocates who had criticized his veto. In 1997, lawmakers again pushed for a patients' bill of rights. In the debate, Mr. Bush spoke of supporting a provision that would make Texas the first state to allow patients to sue any H.M.O. for malpractice if it denied necessary care. But during the 1997 legislative session, Mr. Bush was not initially so supportive of the lawsuit provision. He warned of a veto and came into  conflict with the bill's sponsor, Senator David Sibley, one of his staunchest Republican allies. Mr. Sibley even complained on the Senate floor about the governor's staff. ''I can't make them happy no matter what I do, unless I completely gut the bill,'' said Mr. Sibley, who now credits Mr. Bush for being supportive of other patients' protection measures in 1997. Many Democrats described Mr. Bush as having little involvement on the overall bill. Representative Patricia Gray, a Democrat, sponsored a bill requiring H.M.O.'s to allow women direct access to their obstetrician-gynecologists without having to see a ''gatekeeper'' doctor first. Mr. Bush mentioned the provision in the debate, but Ms. Gray has said he and his staff did little to help the bill. The Legislature approved the lawsuit provision by a wide margin. Mr. Bush allowed the provision to become law without his signature.
 Among the diverse political, cultural and religious leaders to throw their weight behind debt relief recently are Pope John Paul II; Pat Robertson, the Republican televangelist; Bono, singer of the Irish pop group U2, and George W. Bush. Their support tipped the balance in the Republican-led Congress, which had not previously offered much support for calls by developing countries for debt relief. Republicans came under pressure this month from Mr. Bush, who championed debt relief in his second debate with Vice President Al Gore. Vice President Gore has been a strong supporter of the administration's debt-relief plan.
 Her debut also came on the same night that the Yankees were on the verge of a Subway Series and George W. Bush and Al Gore had a third presidential debate, in St. Louis.
 Gov George W Bush seeks in presidential debate to portray Vice Pres Al Gore as big spender, holding Gore's spending plans are far bigger than those proposed by earlier Democratic presidential candidates; Gore holds government would shrink under his leadership, with spending, as percentage of total economy, on track that would leave it at lowest level in 50 years; Gore charges Bush's tax-cut plan would leave little or no money for other priorities (M) Gov. George W. Bush tried to paint Vice President Al Gore tonight as a traditional big-spending Democrat whose proposals would lead to a bigger, more intrusive federal government. Mr. Gore's spending plans, Mr. Bush asserted, are far bigger than anything proposed by President Clinton when he was running for office, and put even Walter F. Mondale and Michael S. Dukakis to shame. Gov. George W. Bush tried to paint Vice President Al Gore tonight as a traditional big-spending Democrat whose proposals would lead to a bigger, more intrusive federal government. Mr. Gore's spending plans, Mr. Bush asserted, are far bigger than anything proposed by President Clinton when he was running for office, and put even Walter F. Mondale and Michael S. Dukakis to shame. As is often the case when it comes to fiscal policy, there are different ways of evaluating Mr. Bush's claims. Looking at it one way, Mr. Bush has a point. Looking at it another way, Mr. Gore's response that government would actually shrink under his leadership is also credible. ''This is a big spender,'' Mr. Bush said of his rival, ''and he ought to be proud of it.'' Using his own figures, Mr. Gore has proposed about $1 trillion in new spending over the next decade. By the Bush campaign's estimate, Mr. Clinton's spending proposals when he first ran for president amounted to $800 billion over 10 years. But Mr. Clinton was running when the federal budget deficit was hitting a record high, and both parties were constrained from proposing new programs. Mr. Gore is running against a backdrop of surpluses outside the Social Security system projected to be $2.2 trillion in the next decade. In any case, Mr. Gore suggested that the better way to look at spending levels was relative to the size of the total economy. By that measure, he said, his proposals would put spending on a track that would leave it at its lowest level in 50 years. Mr. Gore also said that under the Clinton administration, civilian government employment had fallen by 300,000. The number is actually closer to 400,000. But according to figures in the administration's most recent budget documents, most of the reduction -- 286,000 -- has come from the Pentagon, and is associated with the slimming of the military following the end of the cold war. ''Absolutely not,'' Mr. Gore replied when asked whether he was a big spender. The debate over spending tonight was part of the campaign-long debate over how best to allocate the projected surpluses. Mr. Gore pressed his attack that Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan would leave little or no money for other priorities, including increased financing for education. ''Because the governor has all this money for a tax cut, mostly to the wealthy, there is no money left over, so schools get testing and lawsuit reform and not much else,'' Mr. Gore said. Moreover, Mr. Gore said, Mr. Bush would not allocate as much money as he would to paying off the national debt. Mr. Gore has pledged to pay off the $3.4 trillion debt in a dozen years. Mr. Bush said his tax cut would benefit the wealthy, since they pay the most taxes. But he said lower- and middle-income people would get proportionately more, a claim that is correct in percentage terms but not in dollar terms. And he suggested that the alternative to sending excess revenues back to taxpayers was to unleash a flood of new spending. ''If this were a spending contest, I'd come in second,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I readily admit, I'm not going to grow the size of the federal government like he is.''
 Mr. McCollum did gain attention as one of the House impeachment prosecutors who made the case for conviction of President Clinton before the Senate. And at one point he was expected to receive a lift from the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, brother of Florida's governor, Jeb Bush, and initially considered the solid favorite to lay claim to the state's 25 electoral votes. But  the Bush campaign has had to fight hard to try to hold off a strong Florida effort by Vice President Al Gore. Mr. McCollum concedes that he would have been helped had Mr. Bush led strongly throughout the race and then gone on to win here ''by 10 or 12 points.'' But, he adds, he never planned to run on Mr. Bush's momentum. Mr. Nelson readily acknowledges that he has been helped, and his opponent hurt, by Mr. Gore's good fortunes here. ''This was going to be a walk for Bush,'' Mr. Nelson said, and if that had happened, ''I knew it was going to be difficult. It makes me a little more comfortable knowing Al Gore is doing so well.'' Mr. Nelson and Mr. McCollum side with their parties' presidential nominees on most issues: the environment, the economy, education, abortion and more. Mr. McCollum backs  Mr. Bush's plan to apply a big part of the federal budget surplus to a $1.3 trillion tax cut; Mr. Nelson favors a $500 billion cut similar to the one proposed by Mr. Gore.
 But put me in an age-encrusted Irish pub some evening, among those unfailingly sociable and hospitable people, with the smell of peat hanging in the air, and I'll ask for a couple of fingers of Jameson. If I see Redbreast or Bushmills Malt behind the bar, I'll go for that in a nanosecond. Nothing, except maybe a pint of Guinness or Beamish, fits the time and place so well. Midleton is also the site of the only large working distillery in the Irish Republic.  There's a much smaller upstart called Cooley's at Kilbeggan, County Clare, which makes three single malts -- Tyrconnell, Connemara and Knappogue Castle, the last a rich, creamy, vanilla-scented dream -- and a second big distillery at Bushmills, County Antrim, in Northern Ireland -- the world's oldest licensed distillery, in fact, chartered by James I in 1608. A bit of background may be in order here. The brands most familiar in the United States, like Jameson and Bushmills, are produced by the same company, Irish Distillers, which since 1988 has itself been part of Pernod Ricard, the big French spirits group. Irish Distillers also makes Midleton Very Rare, Paddy and Powers, which is much the largest seller in Ireland but not as well known outside this country. The brands differ sharply in formula and hence in flavor, and they command fervent followings, sometimes for reasons of taste, sometimes for political reasons (I know some fiercely patriotic Irishmen who won't drink Bushmills because of its connections with Ulster, and hence with Britain), sometimes for reasons of regional loyalty (former Prime Minister Jack Lynch, a Cork man, always ordered Paddy, originally a Cork whiskey, and expected those drinking with him to do likewise). Single-malt Scotch -- that is, the unblended product of a single distillation -- and single-barrel and small-batch bourbon have achieved much greater currency than single-malt Irish. Irish Distillers produces only one, at Bushmills. It is available in both 12- and 16-year-old versions. A Bushmills Malt 16-year-old, matured in three woods, had a nutty nose and a thoroughly pleasant malty taste, all of a piece from start to finish. Powers is the local favorite for making Irish coffee because of its hefty, honeyed flavor. Bushmills, smooth and unusually oaky in flavor, may be the best all-round standard brand, good on the rocks. Midleton Very Rare, made from casks individually selected by the master distiller, like a single-barrel bourbon, has a floral, herbal bouquet, a taste marked by notes of fruits and almonds and a velvety finish. The standard brands of Irish whiskey -- Jameson, Bushmills and Midleton -- can be found in good liquor stores. More unusual bottles can often be found in Manhattan at Park Avenue Liquors, 292 Madison Avenue at 40th Street, and Crossroads Wine and Liquor, 55 West 14th Street.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column, citing need for United States to run very big budget surpluses now, holds politicians like Al Gore alienate voters by using half truths to try to sell them fiscal responsibility, while those like Gov George W Bush appeal to people with fiscal irresponsibility (M) But how do you explain that long view to the public? The truth is that our leaders never really tried. Instead, even politicians who were trying to be responsible resorted to half-truths. All that business about putting Social Security and Medicare in ''lockboxes'' is an attempt to sell fiscal responsibility to the voters without really trying to explain why it is necessary. So maybe we should not be surprised that we have ended up with the worst of all worlds. On one side the public feels, correctly, that politicians like Al Gore, who use those half-truths to push for half-responsible policies, are talking down to them. On the other side the public feels, quite wrongly, that politicians like George W. Bush, who tell them that they can have their cake and eat it too, are men of the people. Mr. Bush's willingness to trust in the public's innumeracy continues to boggle the mind. In the second debate he offered possibly the biggest misrepresentation yet, this time declaring about his tax plan that ''most of tax reductions go to the people at the bottom end of the economic ladder.'' (That sound you hear is the giggling of millionaires and the guffawing of multimillionaires.)
 James Roosevelt Jr letter backs Vice Pres Al Gore's proposals for saving Social Security system Federal workers invest in their Thrift Savings Plan atop a solid foundation of Social Security as it is currently financed, as well as the Federal Employees Retirement System. That foundation would be seriously weakened by the withdrawal of 2 percentage points of the current 12.4 percent payroll tax, as Mr. Marron and George W. Bush propose. Al Gore's plan to pay down the publicly held debt and transfer the interest savings to the Social Security Trust Fund would extend its solvency to 2054 and allow some equity adjustments for elderly women. With small additional adjustments, the system could reach full 75-year solvency. Mr. Gore's plan would strengthen Social Security. That of Mr. Marron and Mr. Bush would hasten its demise and replace it with an erratic alternative.
