 Most political commentators adopt wait-and-see attitude after third presidential debate, mindful that after first debate, when they declared Vice Pres Al Gore the easy winner, Gov George W Bush gained in polls (M) Doing the post-mortems after Tuesday night's debate, Peter Jennings on ABC referred to ''the sink-in factor'' that would develop over the next days and George Stephanopoulos said people in the Gore camp ''believe they will win the second-day spin.'' On CNN, Bernard Shaw compared the debate to yeast that needs time to rise, and on CBS, Gloria Borger chimed in with the night's most unfortunate, unctuous metaphor. ''This has to marinate,'' she said, as if waiting for the Gore and Bush kabobs to be ready for the grill. (Substituting food for sports metaphors suits the cozy Oprah-to-Regis circuit the candidates have been prancing through, but they are no improvement.) Doing the post-mortems after Tuesday night's debate, Peter Jennings on ABC referred to ''the sink-in factor'' that would develop over the next days and George Stephanopoulos said people in the Gore camp ''believe they will win the second-day spin.'' On CNN, Bernard Shaw compared the debate to yeast that needs time to rise, and on CBS, Gloria Borger chimed in with the night's most unfortunate, unctuous metaphor. ''This has to marinate,'' she said, as if waiting for the Gore and Bush kabobs to be ready for the grill. (Substituting food for sports metaphors suits the cozy Oprah-to-Regis circuit the candidates have been prancing through, but they are no improvement.) Though most commentators gave the edge to Vice President Al Gore, their wait-and-see caveats showed that they had learned something after the first debate, when pundits declared Mr. Gore the easy winner but Gov. George W. Bush gained in the polls. Yet the longer view points to a more fundamental question: why have debates diminished as major television events? Ratings were weak and the three debates failed to galvanize viewers because television itself has changed. Debates are now simply one part of a process that includes snap polls and focus groups, clips and interviews on morning shows the next day and pundits dissecting each camp's spin for days. Unless a candidate makes a catastrophic blunder (the flub-prone Mr. Bush might have but did not, everyone agreed) it is hard to argue for a debate's singular importance when viewers are bombarded with 24-hour cable news and candidates popping up in daytime, prime time and late night. Over the next 24 hours, the debate's true significance revealed itself, as clips and interviews demonstrated the difference between watching in real time and seeing the debate shaped by repeated snippets. One clip instantly became the most frequently shown: Mr. Gore marching into Mr. Bush's space as if he were a bull ready to charge. In context, the sudden move reeked of contrivance, begging to be the clip of the day. Snipped out of context, the contrivance disappears and the visual image of strength takes over, as was intended. The reverse happened with Mr. Bush's closing statement, when he raised his hand and mimed taking the presidential oath. The gesture was also clearly planned, an image meant to be lifted as a news bite. But each time it was replayed afterwards, Mr. Bush looked less presidential and more like a Star Trek character offering a greeting. Both candidates appeared on the ABC, CBS and NBC morning shows, in separate interviews taped soon after the debate. Each man reinforced the night's message in miniature.  Mr. Bush's code words were ''smaller government'' and Mr. Gore's ''fight for you.'' And on both CNN and ABC, Mr. Gore repeated what he called his Goldilocks interpretation of his debate performance. In the first he was too hot, in the second too cold and this time just right, he said. (It is a solid assessment but not original; after the second debate Ted Koppel had wondered how Mr. Gore could find a ''Goldilocks solution.'') Tuesday night's so-called Town Hall format was not really that. The candidates could not engage each other in conversation or address the questioners in the audience. Though Mr. Bush once chastised Mr. Gore for breaking the rules and speaking out of turn, it was when the candidates stepped outside the lines that the debate came to life. Yet in the end, the format seemed less influential than the campaign strategists' orders. ''They came out fighting,'' as Bill Plante reported on the CBS ''Early Show'' the next morning. Mr. Gore's energetic display was meant to counter criticism that he had been too timid last time; Mr. Bush's demeanor, which several commentators called ''sleepy,'' seemed intended to play it safe and protect his slight lead. The debates were lackluster, yet the Bush campaign's rejected proposals would have been worse. Imagine those meetings, moderated by Larry King (the king of softball questions) and Tim Russert (whose self-aggrandizement at the Hillary Clinton-Rick Lazio debate made him a performer rather than a moderator.) With Mr. King too cool, Mr. Russert too hot and Mr. Lehrer too lukewarm, where is Goldilocks when you need her?
 Sen Joseph I Lieberman, campaigning in Wisconsin, says he and Vice Pres Al Gore would be good stewards of nature, while Gov George W Bush would spoil it; Lieberman says belief in God leads to environmentalism; statement could be taken as dig at Gov George W Bush, who is avowedly religious but who Democrats say is no friend of the environment (M) Once again citing religion as a foundation for policy, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said today that he and Vice President Al Gore would be good stewards of nature, while Gov. George W. Bush would spoil it. ''For Al Gore and me, this begins, if you will, by our faith,'' Mr. Lieberman told more than 1,000 people in a park here. ''If you believe in God, I think it's hard not to be an environmentalist, because you see the environment as the work of God.'' Once again citing religion as a foundation for policy, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said today that he and Vice President Al Gore would be good stewards of nature, while Gov. George W. Bush would spoil it. ''For Al Gore and me, this begins, if you will, by our faith,'' Mr. Lieberman told more than 1,000 people in a park here. ''If you believe in God, I think it's hard not to be an environmentalist, because you see the environment as the work of God.'' With a lake as a backdrop, Mr. Lieberman spoke of a long list of environmental successes over the last generation and the role Mr. Gore has played in many of them. And he attacked Mr. Bush's environmental record in Texas, a regular theme of his speeches. ''When it comes to the environment and so much else, do we want to keep moving forward, or are we going to move backward?'' Mr. Lieberman asked. ''The record makes clear that George Bush and Dick Cheney will take America backwards.'' He noted that Texas has the highest rate of toxic industrial air emissions of any state, the worst smog, and the third-highest rate of toxic water emissions. ''Given the chance to stand with people, families, or side with the polluters, Governor Bush has too often chosen to side with the polluters,'' Mr. Lieberman said. The Bush campaign has noted, in response to such criticism, that Texas' environmental problems predate the governor, and has argued that he is making headway on them. Environmental groups say that Mr. Bush's record on the issue is weak, and that he had little to do with the advances that Texas has made. And Mr. Lieberman's statement that belief in God should lead to environmentalism could be taken as a dig at Mr. Bush, who is avowedly religious, but who the senator and other Democrats say is no friend of the environment. This week, Mr. Lieberman has repeatedly presented his and Mr. Gore's policies as a broad vision growing out of basic values.
 Former first lady, Barbara Bush, campaigns for her son, Gov George W Bush, in Lansing, Mich, one of several stops on bus trip across southern Michigan; she says she will manage two to three days a week on trail from now to Election Day; Bush campaign officials say former Pres Bush will also start popping up at campaign stops; photo (M) It is a sure sign that Election Day is around the corner when the big guns come out, and today the Bush campaign unleashed its silver-haired, pearl-draped howitzer. The former first lady, Barbara Bush, hit the trail, pressing her outsized and enduring popularity into the service of Gov. George W. Bush's aspirations. Mrs. Bush said voters should not expect this kind of effort too often. It is a sure sign that Election Day is around the corner when the big guns come out, and today the Bush campaign unleashed its silver-haired, pearl-draped howitzer. The former first lady, Barbara Bush, hit the trail, pressing her outsized and enduring popularity into the service of Gov. George W. Bush's aspirations. Mrs. Bush said voters should not expect this kind of effort too often. Mrs. Bush said she would manage two to three days a week on the trail from now through Nov. 7, and officials with the Bush campaign said that President George Bush would also start popping up here and there. The former first lady's appearances today -- the first time that the Bush campaign had marketed her so aggressively -- dovetailed with a theme built around the middle initial in the Texas governor's name and an effort to bridge the gender gap. The governor's wife, Laura Bush, was side by side with her mother-in-law. Michelle Engler, the wife of Gov. John Engler of Michigan, played tour guide. Condoleezza Rice, the Bush campaign's foreign policy adviser, and Lynne V. Cheney, the wife of Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, were also part of a morning rally in Grand Rapids, then took off in their own bus for their own events before reconnecting with the Bushes in Southfield tonight. And they returned time and again to the issue of integrity, until one of Barbara Bush's principal purposes came into focus: She was out here to remind voters of an administration without the stain of sexual scandal and to vouch for the character of the Republican presidential nominee. The two Mrs. Bushes were due in the Philadelphia suburbs on Thursday morning. On Monday, the tour was scheduled to resume in Wisconsin without Barbara Bush but with Cindy McCain, the wife of Senator John McCain of Arizona. Barbara and Laura Bush seemed to be enjoying it, but then they were also still basking in evident satisfaction over Tuesday night's debate. In an interview on their bus, they made clear that they thought that Vice President Al Gore had gone several paces too far, especially when he moved to within a few inches of Mr. Bush to stare him down. ''I thought he literally was going to hit him,'' Barbara Bush said, adding that her husband, who had watched the television broadcast with her, had exclaimed, ''My God!'' They were not the only Bushes disturbed by Mr. Gore's stratagems. Laura Bush said that one of her twin 18-year-old daughters felt insulted by Mr. Gore's overt reference to his four children being at the debate. The Bush daughters, Barbara and Jenna, were not there. They have always maintained a careful distance from the campaign, to the occasional dismay of their father. But Laura Bush said the couple's daughters had tuned in to every debate, and she said that when Jenna, who is more difficult to impress, gave her father a rave review, he cried. Part of today's project was to talk about the softer side of the Texas governor, and the two Mrs. Bushes at times preferred that to policy. After fielding several questions about abortion, Barbara Bush interjected, ''Is there any other subject you're interested in?'' But Barbara Bush hinted that her son is no ideologue on the matter. ''George has said he's not going to have a litmus test,'' Mrs. Bush said, referring to her son. ''By coincidence, neither did his father.'' She went on to note that one of the two Supreme Court justices whom President Bush appointed, David H. Souter, turned out not to be so conservative after all. Laura Bush said there were issues above and beyond abortion that women cared about, a point she emphasized at news conferences. In Lansing, she said that her husband's proposals would help women care for elderly parents in need. Barbara Bush took mock offense, dramatically muttering, ''I'll never speak to her again!'' It was a fleeting star turn on a day when, in some senses, the torch was being passed. Laura Bush got the featured speaking position and last word at joint rallies. She also conducted the news conferences. Not that Barbara Bush lacked for adoration. People lined the hallways or streets she walked, dazzled to be near her. Mrs. Cheney introduced her in Grand Rapids as ''the most admired woman in the entire United States.'' Mrs. Engler introduced her in Lansing as ''the greatest first lady of the United States so far.''
 This is the town where a young Philip Johnson built his famous Glass House. The town was also home to the four other architects who, with Johnson, were known as the Harvard Five: Marcel Breuer, Eliot Noyes, John M. Johansen and Landis Gores.
 Analysis: Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush entered three presidential debates with stikingly different objectives; for Bush, it was to persuade Americans that he is no slacker but a leader of presidential stature, a Washington outsider and fresh alternative to Democrats' tax-and-spend tradition; for Gore, goal was to score a knockout, to demonstrate that he towers over Bush in his command of issues; initial reading of many strategists and academics is that Bush met more of his objectives (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush entered the three presidential debates with strikingly different objectives. For Mr. Bush, it was to persuade Americans that he was no slacker but a leader of presidential stature, a Washington outsider and a fresh alternative to the Democrats' tax-and-spend tradition. For Mr. Gore, the goal was more ambitious: to score a knockout. He wanted to demonstrate that he towered over Mr. Bush in his command of the issues, that he was independent of the Clinton administration and that he was a fighter for the middle class. And he was determined that questions about his personality not distract voters from the issues. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush entered the three presidential debates with strikingly different objectives. For Mr. Bush, it was to persuade Americans that he was no slacker but a leader of presidential stature, a Washington outsider and a fresh alternative to the Democrats' tax-and-spend tradition. For Mr. Gore, the goal was more ambitious: to score a knockout. He wanted to demonstrate that he towered over Mr. Bush in his command of the issues, that he was independent of the Clinton administration and that he was a fighter for the middle class. And he was determined that questions about his personality not distract voters from the issues. After four-and-a-half hours before tens of millions of Americans, the initial reading of many strategists and academics is that Mr. Bush,  whose campaign tried mightily last month to limit his exposure in the debates, met more of his objectives. ''Candidly, I think Bush gained the most of them just by surviving,'' said David Axelrod, a Democratic strategist in Chicago who sometimes advises the Gore campaign. ''There was an unrealistic expectation among some Democrats that Gore would just grind him in the dust and that Bush would be tongue-tied and tearful.'' Even so, many analysts said Mr. Gore finally seemed to find his voice in the last debate, while Mr. Bush was more halting and less articulate than in earlier performances. It is no accident that Gore officials yesterday said they wanted to deliver videotapes of the third debate -- not the first or second -- to cable television stations around the country. So now that the voters have seen the strengths and weaknesses of both candidates, this is the question as the campaign enters its final stretch: Will Americans come away from the three debates remembering Mr. Bush's more assured performances in the first two? Or will Mr. Gore's more sure-footed showing in the last debate take hold? Or will the events leave the voters more confused and unsure about their choice? While the debates may have further muddled the contest, it is undeniable that Mr. Bush, for whatever reason, is in a better position than he was before the first debate in Boston three weeks ago. At that time, Mr. Bush was veering downward in the polls and drawing harsh publicity for pressing a debate proposal that seemed more favorable to him than the three prime-time debates planned by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. It could be that by the time voter sentiment settles out, Mr. Gore may have gained from the last debate. But, for now, Mr. Bush can claim to have stemmed his dip in the polls -- and even inched ahead of Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush can declare the debates a success for his candidacy if for no other reason than that he showed he could go up against Mr. Gore -- who was regarded as a vaunted debater. ''The big consideration in peoples' minds was, 'Is Bush up to the job?' And I think the debates basically answered that for a lot of people,'' said Morris P. Fiorina, a professor of political science at Stanford University. '' 'O.K., he may not be a genius, but he's O.K. on that dimension.' On the part of Gore, there were personality questions, and concerns, and the debate served to magnify those in the eyes of some.'' In the end, Mr. Gore found himself in the uncomfortable position of competing against his own performance, bowing at first to the initial critiques that he was too aggressive and then to the conclusion that he was too meek. Comparing himself to Goldilocks, Mr. Gore said yesterday on ABC's ''Good Morning America'' program: ''The first was too hot. The second was too cool. The third one was just right.'' One reason that the debates, thus far, do not seem to have shaken the fundamental dynamics of an extraordinarily tight race is that neither Mr. Gore nor Mr. Bush was inclined to toss off one-liners or make any dramatic moves, probably out of fear that they could backfire. ''I can't find any moments in these debates that are memorable,'' said Don Hewitt, the creator of ''60 Minutes'' who was a producer of the first televised presidential debates in 1960. ''We went in with the idea that Bush ain't the smartest kid in the class. And I don't think we knew that Gore was quite so boring. That may be the sum total of what happened in these debates.'' While the candidates put forth starkly different philosophies on many issues, the focus of the press -- and in numerous interviews with voters -- seemed to be on the stylistic differences. There was far more attention, for instance, to Mr. Gore's audible sighs in the first debate than his musings on the issues. The candidates, perhaps, could have differentiated themselves even more, perhaps, had they not passed up opportunities to be more bold. On Tuesday night, for example, Mr. Bush was handed a perfect opening after Mr. Gore, speaking of the disaffection with politics among young people, criticized Mr. Bush for opposing the McCain-Feingold campaign finance measure. The governor could have reminded viewers about the Buddhist temple fund-raiser and other questions about his opponent's fund-raising practices. And Mr. Gore passed up an opportunity to try to portray Mr. Bush as an extremist on guns. Rather than remind viewers that Mr. Bush backed legislation in Texas that would permit the carrying of concealed weapons in churches, hospitals and nursing homes, Mr. Gore presented himself as a defender of gun owners. ''None of my proposals,'' he said, ''would have an effect on hunters or sportsmen or people who use rifles.'' ''What you saw in Bush was a geniality and accessibility but not great mastery or strength, for that matter,'' Mr. Axelrod said. ''In Gore, you saw strength and leadership and mastery, but not warmth.'' Though he hardly sounded enthusiastic, Mr. Axelrod is backing Mr. Gore, in part because warmth is low on his list of requirements. Mike Murphy, a Republican strategist, insisted personality was important. ''My view is that the country did get to know both guys better and that helped Bush,'' he said.
 Transcripts of three presidential debates show several instances in which Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush made points through selective use of facts, fudging of details and so-called fuzzy math; examination of their positions on Bush's tax plan, on Bush's plan to partly privatize Social Security system, on both candidates' spending plans, and on dissension over Medicare (M) In their three debates, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have waded deep into the thickets of tax policy, Social Security and the budget surplus. The numbers they have thrown around have often been confusing and conflicting -- and sometimes wrong. In the debate on Tuesday, Mr. Gore used the audience to illustrate his argument that Mr. Bush's tax plan favors the rich. If all 130 audience members were ''dead on in the middle of the middle class,'' he said, their combined tax cuts under the Bush plan would be less than the cut enjoyed by ''just one member'' of the wealthiest one percent of taxpayers, which he defined as people making more than $330,000 a year. Mr. Gore's assertion was misleading, if not wrong. In assessing the Bush plan, the Gore campaign relies on an analysis by Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal-leaning research group that uses a well-respected computer model. The group defined the top one percent as as people who make $319,000 or more, with the average being $915,000. The average annual tax cut for members of that group under the Bush plan would be $46,072, Citizens for Tax Justice said. There are a number of credible definitions of middle class. In this case the Gore campaign relied on one at the low end of the spectrum -- a range of $24,400 to $39,300 per household, with an average of $31,000, which Citizens for Tax Justice described as the middle 20 percent of incomes for tax purposes. The average tax cut for that group would be $453 under the Bush plan, the group said. Multiplied times 130, the total is $58,890 -- $12,818 more than the average tax cut for the top one percent. (The vice president's example would have worked only if there were no more than 101 people in the audience.) Mr. Gore seemed to imply in the debate that his assertion applied to anyone making more than $330,000 a year. Asked to explain Mr. Gore's statement, campaign aides said he had in mind someone making $1 million a year. Even at that income level, the Gore campaign had to compare apples and oranges to make the math work. It used the Citizens for Tax Justice figures for the middle income tax cut, but estimated the tax cut for a $1 million earner by combining figures from The Wall Street Journal's online tax calculator and Citizens for Tax Justice. In the second presidential debate last week, Mr. Bush said that ''most of the tax reductions'' in his plan would ''go to the people at the bottom end of the economic ladder.'' In assessing his plan's effect on different income groups, Mr. Bush relies on an analysis by the nonpartisan staff of Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation. The analysis shows that in 2005, after the Bush plan is fully phased in, it would reduce taxes on households making $200,000 or more by $32.2 billion, or 26.8 percent of the total tax cut in that year of $120.1 billion. Moreover, the analysis does not consider Mr. Bush's proposal to repeal the federal estate tax. Economists differ about how much of the benefits of an estate tax repeal would go to the wealthy, but there is no disagreement that they would reap most of the benefit. Mr. Bush has said in all the debates that his plan would require people at upper-income levels to pay a greater share of federal income taxes. The Joint Committee on Taxation's analysis shows that households making $200,000 or more in 2005 would pay 27.4 percent of total federal income taxes under Mr. Bush's plan, just as they do now. Households making $100,000 or more would see their share of the total income tax bill tick up to 25.2 percent, from 25.1 percent under current law. The calculations do not consider the effects of the estate tax, which would benefit people at upper-income levels the most. In the debate on Tuesday, Mr. Gore said that Mr. Bush intended to take $1 trillion out of the Social Security trust fund over the next decade to establish private investment accounts within the retirement system. The vice president said that in doing so, Mr. Bush had promised the same money twice -- once for the private accounts and once to pay benefits to retirees -- and that he would have to break one of those promises. Mr. Gore was right to say that Mr. Bush's Social Security plan will require $1 trillion to get started, and the governor acknowledged as much. Mr. Gore was also right that the money would come out of Social Security payroll taxes. Social Security is currently taking in more money from payroll taxes than it needs to pay in benefits to current retirees. That surplus is projected at nearly $2.4 trillion over the next decade, and the system will probably run surpluses until around 2015, when it will begin running huge deficits. Mr. Bush's $1 trillion would come from the Social Security surplus. Mr. Gore has a point in this sense: It is possible to think of debt reduction as a way of saving for the day when Social Security will need to call on general tax revenues to help pay for benefits. To the extent that Mr. Bush's plan would leave less money for debt reduction, the government might find it harder, or at least more expensive, to come up with the money needed for Social Security benefits in the long run. Mr. Gore said that under Mr. Bush's proposal, Social Security would be bankrupt in 20 years. If nothing is done, Social Security will have run through its trust fund -- promises by the government to pay back to itself the Social Security surpluses that over the years have gone to government spending and tax cuts -- by 2037. Using $1 trillion of the surplus for private accounts would move that date up by around 15 years. Starting in the first debate, Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore was a big spender -- bigger than any of the three previous Democratic presidential candidates -- whose proposals would bust the budget. And he said electing Mr. Gore would mean the return of big government. Mr. Bush's budget has less of a buffer than Mr. Gore's does. By Mr. Bush's own accounting, his budget would use all but $265 billion of the surplus, and that is without paying for some of his campaign promises, like an expanded national missile defense system. Mr. Gore says he would set aside $660 billion of the surplus for a reserve fund and higher levels of debt reduction. Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore is proposing three times as much spending as President Clinton did when he was running in 1992. That assertion rests on an analysis by a conservative research group, the National Taxpayers Union, which concluded that Mr. Gore's spending would total $2.9 trillion in the next decade. The Gore campaign says it would spend a little over $1 trillion and offer tax breaks of less than $500 billion. Mr. Clinton's 1992 proposals were made a time of record budget deficits; Mr. Gore's were made at a time of large and growing surpluses. Mr. Gore said he had helped slim down the federal bureaucracy through his work on the administration's Reinventing Government initiative. Since 1992, the civilian government work force has fallen by 400,000 people, to 1.82 million, although nearly three-quarters of the reduction has been the Pentagon. Some analysts measure the size of government by looking at total spending relative to the size of the economy. By that measure, government outlays have declined steadily in recent years, to 18.7 percent of gross domestic product this year. Mr. Gore said his plan would push that figure down to 17 percent by 2008. In the first debate, Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush is refusing to treat surplus Medicare revenues in the same way that the two parties have agreed to treat the surpluses in Social Security -- by putting them in a ''lockbox,'' where they would be unavailable to either party for new spending or tax cuts. Mr. Gore was largely correct. The vice president has proposed that the entire Medicare surplus of $360 billion over the next decade go to debt reduction. Mr. Bush needs that same money in his budget to pay for his $1.3 trillion tax cut and his spending initiatives. Without the Medicare surplus, Mr. Bush's budget would be in the red by $95 billion. There is a loophole available to Mr. Bush. Most lockbox proposals allow the money to be used for Medicare reform, and Mr. Bush has nearly $200 billion in his budget for Medicare-related proposals, including the establishment of a prescription drug benefit for retirees. In their three debates, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have waded deep into the thickets of tax policy, Social Security and the budget surplus. The numbers they have thrown around have often been confusing and conflicting -- and sometimes wrong. In the debate on Tuesday, Mr. Gore used the audience to illustrate his argument that Mr. Bush's tax plan favors the rich. If all 130 audience members were ''dead on in the middle of the middle class,'' he said, their combined tax cuts under the Bush plan would be less than the cut enjoyed by ''just one member'' of the wealthiest one percent of taxpayers, which he defined as people making more than $330,000 a year. Mr. Gore's assertion was misleading, if not wrong. In assessing the Bush plan, the Gore campaign relies on an analysis by Citizens for Tax Justice, a liberal-leaning research group that uses a well-respected computer model. The group defined the top one percent as as people who make $319,000 or more, with the average being $915,000. The average annual tax cut for members of that group under the Bush plan would be $46,072, Citizens for Tax Justice said. There are a number of credible definitions of middle class. In this case the Gore campaign relied on one at the low end of the spectrum -- a range of $24,400 to $39,300 per household, with an average of $31,000, which Citizens for Tax Justice described as the middle 20 percent of incomes for tax purposes. The average tax cut for that group would be $453 under the Bush plan, the group said. Multiplied times 130, the total is $58,890 -- $12,818 more than the average tax cut for the top one percent. (The vice president's example would have worked only if there were no more than 101 people in the audience.) Mr. Gore seemed to imply in the debate that his assertion applied to anyone making more than $330,000 a year. Asked to explain Mr. Gore's statement, campaign aides said he had in mind someone making $1 million a year. Even at that income level, the Gore campaign had to compare apples and oranges to make the math work. It used the Citizens for Tax Justice figures for the middle income tax cut, but estimated the tax cut for a $1 million earner by combining figures from The Wall Street Journal's online tax calculator and Citizens for Tax Justice. In the second presidential debate last week, Mr. Bush said that ''most of the tax reductions'' in his plan would ''go to the people at the bottom end of the economic ladder.'' In assessing his plan's effect on different income groups, Mr. Bush relies on an analysis by the nonpartisan staff of Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation. The analysis shows that in 2005, after the Bush plan is fully phased in, it would reduce taxes on households making $200,000 or more by $32.2 billion, or 26.8 percent of the total tax cut in that year of $120.1 billion. Moreover, the analysis does not consider Mr. Bush's proposal to repeal the federal estate tax. Economists differ about how much of the benefits of an estate tax repeal would go to the wealthy, but there is no disagreement that they would reap most of the benefit. Mr. Bush has said in all the debates that his plan would require people at upper-income levels to pay a greater share of federal income taxes. The Joint Committee on Taxation's analysis shows that households making $200,000 or more in 2005 would pay 27.4 percent of total federal income taxes under Mr. Bush's plan, just as they do now. Households making $100,000 or more would see their share of the total income tax bill tick up to 25.2 percent, from 25.1 percent under current law. The calculations do not consider the effects of the estate tax, which would benefit people at upper-income levels the most. In the debate on Tuesday, Mr. Gore said that Mr. Bush intended to take $1 trillion out of the Social Security trust fund over the next decade to establish private investment accounts within the retirement system. The vice president said that in doing so, Mr. Bush had promised the same money twice -- once for the private accounts and once to pay benefits to retirees -- and that he would have to break one of those promises. Mr. Gore was right to say that Mr. Bush's Social Security plan will require $1 trillion to get started, and the governor acknowledged as much. Mr. Gore was also right that the money would come out of Social Security payroll taxes. Social Security is currently taking in more money from payroll taxes than it needs to pay in benefits to current retirees. That surplus is projected at nearly $2.4 trillion over the next decade, and the system will probably run surpluses until around 2015, when it will begin running huge deficits. Mr. Bush's $1 trillion would come from the Social Security surplus. Mr. Gore has a point in this sense: It is possible to think of debt reduction as a way of saving for the day when Social Security will need to call on general tax revenues to help pay for benefits. To the extent that Mr. Bush's plan would leave less money for debt reduction, the government might find it harder, or at least more expensive, to come up with the money needed for Social Security benefits in the long run. Mr. Gore said that under Mr. Bush's proposal, Social Security would be bankrupt in 20 years. If nothing is done, Social Security will have run through its trust fund -- promises by the government to pay back to itself the Social Security surpluses that over the years have gone to government spending and tax cuts -- by 2037. Using $1 trillion of the surplus for private accounts would move that date up by around 15 years. Starting in the first debate, Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore was a big spender -- bigger than any of the three previous Democratic presidential candidates -- whose proposals would bust the budget. And he said electing Mr. Gore would mean the return of big government. Mr. Bush's budget has less of a buffer than Mr. Gore's does. By Mr. Bush's own accounting, his budget would use all but $265 billion of the surplus, and that is without paying for some of his campaign promises, like an expanded national missile defense system. Mr. Gore says he would set aside $660 billion of the surplus for a reserve fund and higher levels of debt reduction. Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore is proposing three times as much spending as President Clinton did when he was running in 1992. That assertion rests on an analysis by a conservative research group, the National Taxpayers Union, which concluded that Mr. Gore's spending would total $2.9 trillion in the next decade. The Gore campaign says it would spend a little over $1 trillion and offer tax breaks of less than $500 billion. Mr. Clinton's 1992 proposals were made a time of record budget deficits; Mr. Gore's were made at a time of large and growing surpluses. Mr. Gore said he had helped slim down the federal bureaucracy through his work on the administration's Reinventing Government initiative. Since 1992, the civilian government work force has fallen by 400,000 people, to 1.82 million, although nearly three-quarters of the reduction has been the Pentagon. Some analysts measure the size of government by looking at total spending relative to the size of the economy. By that measure, government outlays have declined steadily in recent years, to 18.7 percent of gross domestic product this year. Mr. Gore said his plan would push that figure down to 17 percent by 2008. In the first debate, Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush is refusing to treat surplus Medicare revenues in the same way that the two parties have agreed to treat the surpluses in Social Security -- by putting them in a ''lockbox,'' where they would be unavailable to either party for new spending or tax cuts. Mr. Gore was largely correct. The vice president has proposed that the entire Medicare surplus of $360 billion over the next decade go to debt reduction. Mr. Bush needs that same money in his budget to pay for his $1.3 trillion tax cut and his spending initiatives. Without the Medicare surplus, Mr. Bush's budget would be in the red by $95 billion. There is a loophole available to Mr. Bush. Most lockbox proposals allow the money to be used for Medicare reform, and Mr. Bush has nearly $200 billion in his budget for Medicare-related proposals, including the establishment of a prescription drug benefit for retirees.
 Third and final scheduled debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W. Bush was watched by 37.7 million viewers, slightly more people than watched their debate last week (M) The third and final scheduled debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Tuesday night was watched by slightly more people than watched their debate last week, figures released yesterday by Nielsen Media Research showed. About 37.7 million people saw the debate on the major broadcast and cable news networks, Nielsen reported. The Oct. 11 meeting between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush was watched by 37.5 million people, the second-smallest audience on record for a televised presidential debate. Their first debate, on Oct. 3, was watched by at least 46.6 million people, Nielsen said. The third and final scheduled debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Tuesday night was watched by slightly more people than watched their debate last week, figures released yesterday by Nielsen Media Research showed. About 37.7 million people saw the debate on the major broadcast and cable news networks, Nielsen reported. The Oct. 11 meeting between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush was watched by 37.5 million people, the second-smallest audience on record for a televised presidential debate. Their first debate, on Oct. 3, was watched by at least 46.6 million people, Nielsen said. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VIEWERS  Correction:  October 20, 2000, Friday  A headline yesterday about television ratings for the three debates between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore misstated viewership for the last one, on Tuesday. It drew more viewers than the Oct. 11 debate, but not more than the one on Oct. 3. A headline yesterday about television ratings for the three debates between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore misstated viewership for the last one, on Tuesday. It drew more viewers than the Oct. 11 debate, but not more than the one on Oct. 3.
 Vice Pres Al Gore's advisers say they want to buy 90 minutes of time on cable television channels in various swing states to rebroadcast entire last debate; Gore aides sense that Gore's debate performance was unusually strong and provided him ammunition both to make case for himself as best steward of nation's economy and to make case against Gov George W Bush; photo (M) Sensing that Vice President Al Gore's debate performance on Tuesday night has revived his candidacy, Mr. Gore's advisers said today that they wanted to buy 90 minutes of time on cable television channels in various swing states to rebroadcast the entire debate. Sensing that Vice President Al Gore's debate performance on Tuesday night has revived his candidacy, Mr. Gore's advisers said today that they wanted to buy 90 minutes of time on cable television channels in various swing states to rebroadcast the entire debate. The plan is based on the premise that Mr. Gore's debate performance was unusually strong and provided the vice president ammunition both to make the case for himself as the best steward of the nation's economy and to make the case against Gov. George W. Bush as someone who would bankrupt Social Security and give most tax cuts to the rich. The campaign began broadcasting three new television commercials today that underscored these themes. The commercials are running in 12 swing states and will be reinforced by three major speeches in the next few days -- an economic speech on Thursday in New York and speeches on Saturday in New Orleans and on Sunday in Dallas about his priorities and how they reflect his values. Except for a brief stop on Saturday in Washington to watch his son play football, Mr. Gore is expected to be on the road continuously until Election Day, Nov. 7. Campaign officials were clearly pleased with Mr. Gore's performance in the debate, which most polls showed the vice president had won. Virtually crowing about Mr. Gore's performance, Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager, said: ''Last night allayed a lot of concerns.'' He said that the debate had fortified Gore representatives today as they met with Democrats on Capitol Hill who had been worried about Mr. Gore's previously weak  debates and sagging poll numbers. Gore officials contend that Mr. Bush made two major blunders in the debate. The governor agreed that ''of course'' most of his tax cut would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans, because, as Mr. Bush said, they are the ones who pay the most taxes. And he said that his plan to privatize part of Social Security would cost $1 trillion, money that would come from the Social Security trust fund -- an admission that Mr. Gore said today essentially conceded that Mr. Bush would bankrupt Social Security in 23 years, 14 years sooner than was now projected. A newly plucky Mr. Gore appeared on the campaign trail today as he traveled from Missouri to Iowa to Michigan and headed for New York late tonight. ''Social Security is on the ballot this fall,'' Mr. Gore told about 200 people in Des Moines. As if speaking to Mr. Bush, he added: ''Don't promise it away. Don't use fuzzy math. You promise the same trillion to two different groups. That's fuzzy math. You want to talk about fuzzy math, that's plenty fuzzy.'' Mr. Bush had accused Mr. Gore in the first debate of using ''fuzzy math.'' At an outdoor rally here tonight,  Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of being in the pocket of the big drug companies. ''He does what they want,'' Mr. Gore roared to the crowd of thousands. ''That's just the hard truth.'' But Mr. Gore was well aware that he also had to battle negative impressions that Mr. Bush sought to raise about him during the debate --  one, that Mr. Gore was an advocate of big government and, two, that he did not understand that younger entrepreneurial-minded voters wanted to invest part of their Social Security taxes in the stock market. Mr. Gore sought to reassure his audience that he did not want to expand government. ''I'll make our government smaller and smarter,'' he pledged. He said he would do this in part by putting many government services online. ''I want create a federal government where you never have to stand in line because you can get it online.'' On the subject of investing Social Security, Nancy Nichols, an older voter in Des Moines, said she was concerned that Mr. Gore had not made his position plain enough. She said that a young Republican had told her that in the time that he had paid $9,000 into Social Security, he had also invested $9,000 in stocks -- and that those stocks were now worth $18,000. ''Under your plan, they still would have that opportunity if they were willing to save, but I don't think that part of your plan or that message has gotten across,'' Ms. Nichols told the vice president. Mr. Gore mocked the idea of older people investing their Social Security in the stock market. He gestured to Winnie Skinner, 79, a Des Moines resident whom he made famous last month because she recycled aluminum cans for extra money, who was sitting in today's audience, and said, ''So, are you ready to get on the Internet and be a day-trader, Winnie?''
 Correction of picture caption Oct 10 about Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign stop in Florida; he was in Lido Key, not Longboat Key A picture caption on Oct. 10 about a campaign stop in Florida by Vice President Al Gore, before he shopped on a break from debate practice, misidentified the location of the appearance. It was in Lido Key, not Longboat Key. A picture caption on Oct. 10 about a campaign stop in Florida by Vice President Al Gore, before he shopped on a break from debate practice, misidentified the location of the appearance. It was in Lido Key, not Longboat Key.
 Robert Nordvall letter deplores Gov George W Bush's and Vice Pres Al Gore's support of capital punishment in final presidential debate on October 18 In the final debate, George W. Bush defended capital punishment solely on the ground that it deters killings, and Al Gore agreed that the death penalty is a deterrent to potential murderers (transcript, Oct. 18). The evidence that the death penalty deters crime is on the whole negative and at best (to those who support the deterrence rationale) inconclusive. In the final debate, George W. Bush defended capital punishment solely on the ground that it deters killings, and Al Gore agreed that the death penalty is a deterrent to potential murderers (transcript, Oct. 18). The evidence that the death penalty deters crime is on the whole negative and at best (to those who support the deterrence rationale) inconclusive.
 Roy R Robson letter comments on final presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush During the debate George W. Bush consistently called women -- and a black man -- by their first names. When answering a white man, however, he used ''sir.'' Al Gore never used first names when responding to questions, preferring, if anything, more formal forms of address. While Mr. Bush may assert that it is part of his folksy style, I wonder if his use of language highlights a patronizing attitude toward women and black men but a serious attitude toward white men.
 Pat Murphy letter, commenting on final presidential debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, says Bush's stated disdain for Washington is 'pure sham' George W. Bush's disdain for Washington is pure sham (transcript, Oct. 18). George W. Bush's disdain for Washington is pure sham (transcript, Oct. 18). After all, Mr. Bush's father, President George Bush, spent most of his adult life thriving on Washington jobs in the Central Intelligence Agency, the Republican National Committee, an ambassadorship to China, the vice presidency and Congress. And George W. Bush's vice-presidential running mate, Dick Cheney, has spent many years in Washington as a Bush cabinet member and a congressman, and Mr. Bush's possible nominee to be secretary of state, Gen. Colin L. Powell, is certainly a Washington insider. And what of George W. Bush himself? If elected, would he shun Washington and govern from his Texas ranch, providing the country with ''Texas solutions''?
 Race to replace Sen Paul Coverdell of Georgia, who died in July, is nonpartisan, with all seven candidates appearing on Nov 7 ballot; nonpartisan nature of race has allowed former Gov Zell Miller, who is acting senator, to stay at arm's length from Vice Pres Al Gore, who is behind in most Georgia polls, and to portray himself as above party bickering in state where Republican presence continues to grow; former Sen Mack Mattingly, Republican seeking Coverdell's seat, prods Miller to publicly state his choice for president on live television; photo (M) ''Did you see -- I finally got him to say he's going to vote for Al Gore,'' Mr. Mattingly said later in an interview. ''He's on the Clinton-Gore team, and Hillary Clinton's team, and he's also got Ted Kennedy on his team. Not me, I'm on the George Bush team, I'm on the Trent Lott team.'' ''Did you see -- I finally got him to say he's going to vote for Al Gore,'' Mr. Mattingly said later in an interview. ''He's on the Clinton-Gore team, and Hillary Clinton's team, and he's also got Ted Kennedy on his team. Not me, I'm on the George Bush team, I'm on the Trent Lott team.'' It was true; Mr. Miller, a popular former governor, had indeed pledged himself to Mr. Gore when pinned down by Mr. Mattingly. Not because he agreed with Mr. Gore on the issues, he quickly made clear, but only because Mr. Gore had helped Georgia in natural disasters and had helped bring the 1996 Olympics to Atlanta. In other words, it was not because Mr. Gore and Mr. Miller both happen to be Democrats. The word ''Democrat'' is not uttered by Mr. Miller on the campaign trail, and appears nowhere on his campaign Web site. Technically, this is because the race to replace Senator Paul Coverdell, who died in July, is nonpartisan, with all seven candidates appearing on the Nov. 7 ballot without party affiliation. (There will be a Nov. 28 runoff between the top two candidates if no one gets more than 50 percent of the votes.) But the nonpartisan nature of the race has also allowed Mr. Miller to stay at arm's length from Mr. Gore, who is behind in most Georgia polls, and to portray himself as several steps above party bickering in a state where the Republican presence continues to grow. Mr. Mattingly, on the other hand, has built most of his campaign on sharing a party and a conservative ideology with Mr. Coverdell, who was a Republican. The result is one of the stranger campaigns in this divisive political season, one in which the worst insult either candidate can hurl is that his opponent is a member of an organized political party. The unusual formula seems to be working, and Mr. Miller has been well ahead in the same polls that show Mr. Gore trailing. A recent statewide telephone poll conducted for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution showed Mr. Miller at 59 percent and Mr. Mattingly at 31 percent, with a margin of sampling error of four  percentage points. The same poll showed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Mr. Gore by 16 points in the state.
 Bush Rallies His Base  Gov. George W. Bush argued that Vice President Al Gore would endanger the nation's prosperity as a proponent of ''big government,'' and he used his own pledge of tax cutting to rally his party's base in Wisconsin. Mr. Gore's advisers said they wanted to buy 90 minutes of time on cable television channels in swing states to rebroadcast Tuesday's debate. Mr. Gore's performance, the advisers say, helped him make the case for himself as the candidate best prepared to guide the nation's economy. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said he and Mr. Gore would be good stewards of nature, while Mr. Bush would spoil it. Bush Rallies His Base  Gov. George W. Bush argued that Vice President Al Gore would endanger the nation's prosperity as a proponent of ''big government,'' and he used his own pledge of tax cutting to rally his party's base in Wisconsin. Mr. Gore's advisers said they wanted to buy 90 minutes of time on cable television channels in swing states to rebroadcast Tuesday's debate. Mr. Gore's performance, the advisers say, helped him make the case for himself as the candidate best prepared to guide the nation's economy. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said he and Mr. Gore would be good stewards of nature, while Mr. Bush would spoil it.
 Senate votes, 86 to 8, for bill easing nearly four decades of sanctions on sale of food to Cuba; overwhelming approval all but assures measure will become law; lawmakers add restrictions to bill that will make it difficult, maybe impossible, for food shipments to be made to Cuba in near future; anti-Castro Cuban-Americans in Florida, hotly contested state in presidential election, are able to win new restrictions on travel to Cuba and prohibitions on US government credit and private financing for any sales; in Havana, Pres Fidel Castro leads large protest against bill, which he calls insulting because of its restrictions; Vice Pres Al Gore has no immediate comment on bill, and Gov George W Bush condemns it, saying sanctions should be retained until Cuba allows free elections, free speech and freedom for political prisoners (M) Indicative of the political sensitivity of the issue, the campaign of Vice President Al Gore had no immediate comment on today's vote, and his rival, Governor George W. Bush, condemned the Senate action. ''Governor Bush opposes changing the sanctions against Cuba until Fidel Castro or the Cuban government allow free elections, free speech and freedom for political prisoners,'' said Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush.
 Re ''Bush and Gore, in Last Debate, Stage Vigorous Give-and-Take'' (front page, Oct. 18): Re ''Bush and Gore, in Last Debate, Stage Vigorous Give-and-Take'' (front page, Oct. 18): After three presidential debates, we learned that Al Gore would fight for the American people. He's right about the fighting, and we'll see plenty of that should he be elected president. Mr. Gore demonstrated his aggressiveness in each encounter. He is unable to follow rules or give the other person respect. If he is in the White House, he will continue this behavior with Republicans and any Democrats who disagree with him. We thought we had it bad when President Clinton and Newt Gingrich went head to head, but with Al Gore it would be total gridlock.
 Stephen K Hiltner letter comments on Gov George W Bush's pledge to work with Congress, made in presidential debate on October 17 George W. Bush's promise to work with Congress is not as comforting as it sounds (transcript, Oct. 18). Among Bill Clinton's accomplishments were his vetoes, actual or threatened, of ill-conceived legislation. With a Republican White House and Congress, an often reckless conservative agenda would not be held in check so consistently. George W. Bush's promise to work with Congress is not as comforting as it sounds (transcript, Oct. 18). Among Bill Clinton's accomplishments were his vetoes, actual or threatened, of ill-conceived legislation. With a Republican White House and Congress, an often reckless conservative agenda would not be held in check so consistently.
 CALIFORNIA CONCLUSIONS Vice President Al Gore is at a critical juncture in California, says one of his political advisers there. Citing polls showing Gov. George W. Bush gaining, the adviser, Garry South, said some leading California Democrats had concluded it was past time for the vice president to begin an advertising blitz. Mr. Gore's campaign aides rejected Mr. South's analysis, suggesting that his goal was to widen Mr. Gore's 10-point lead in the state to the point that other Democratic candidates would be pulled along. Their third and final debate over, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush returned to the campaign trail yesterday, each focusing again on the crucial swing states in the upper Midwest. The stats: States visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3  Cities/towns visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3  Official Events: Gore, 2; Bush, 3  Plane boardings: Gore, 3; Bush, 3  Main message: Gore, Social Security and maintaining prosperity; Bush, the Gore plan is the wrong plan. CALIFORNIA CONCLUSIONS Vice President Al Gore is at a critical juncture in California, says one of his political advisers there. Citing polls showing Gov. George W. Bush gaining, the adviser, Garry South, said some leading California Democrats had concluded it was past time for the vice president to begin an advertising blitz. Mr. Gore's campaign aides rejected Mr. South's analysis, suggesting that his goal was to widen Mr. Gore's 10-point lead in the state to the point that other Democratic candidates would be pulled along. Their third and final debate over, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush returned to the campaign trail yesterday, each focusing again on the crucial swing states in the upper Midwest. The stats: States visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3  Cities/towns visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3  Official Events: Gore, 2; Bush, 3  Plane boardings: Gore, 3; Bush, 3  Main message: Gore, Social Security and maintaining prosperity; Bush, the Gore plan is the wrong plan.
 Kevin M McGehee letter comments on October 18 article on final presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush What accomplishments can Vice President Al Gore point to in boosting his claim of foreign policy experience (front page, Oct. 18)? Well, we've just heard that Mr. Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister, signed a secret agreement in 1995 regarding Russian arms sales to Iran whose details were never disclosed to Congress and which apparently undercut a 1992 United States law. I suppose that's experience. Some kinds of experience, though, we just don't need. What accomplishments can Vice President Al Gore point to in boosting his claim of foreign policy experience (front page, Oct. 18)? Well, we've just heard that Mr. Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister, signed a secret agreement in 1995 regarding Russian arms sales to Iran whose details were never disclosed to Congress and which apparently undercut a 1992 United States law. I suppose that's experience. Some kinds of experience, though, we just don't need.
 Del Janik letter comments on October 18 article on final presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush Re ''Bush and Gore, in Last Debate, Stage Vigorous Give-and-Take'' (front page, Oct. 18): Re ''Bush and Gore, in Last Debate, Stage Vigorous Give-and-Take'' (front page, Oct. 18):
 William Safire Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore won third and final debate with Gov George W Bush but in way that may cost him election since his 'demagogic shots' and personal demeanor is likely to have negative effect on undecided voters (M) If the town hall meeting between Bush and Gore were a prizefight being scored on points, the judges would declare Al Gore the winner. He earned more debating points and gets credit for aggressiveness in carrying the fight to his opponent. George W. Bush won the first debate by not losing; Gore lost the second debate by not fighting. In the rubber match, like the sadly victorious King Pyrrhus, Gore won the third debate in a way that may cost him the election. If the town hall meeting between Bush and Gore were a prizefight being scored on points, the judges would declare Al Gore the winner. He earned more debating points and gets credit for aggressiveness in carrying the fight to his opponent. George W. Bush won the first debate by not losing; Gore lost the second debate by not fighting. In the rubber match, like the sadly victorious King Pyrrhus, Gore won the third debate in a way that may cost him the election. To the vast army of undecideds, this debate was conducted in body language. Gore bestrode the stage like a Colossus, expressing confidence in a John Wayne swagger, once almost butting his puffed-out chest against Bush in a Lazio-like space invasion. When not speaking, the vice president stood stiffly at attention, feet together, hands rigidly at his sides, to remind us visually of his service in Vietnam. Playing to an electorate that supposedly dislikes finger-pointing, Gore repeatedly pointed an accusing finger at Bush and all around the room. In this way he goaded and tried to rattle Bush, who airily dismissed these devices as ''an old high school debating trick.'' Governor Bush, in contrast, often struck a Milquetoast pose, fingers intertwined as if in prayer, rocking from side to side as if his feet hurt. He looked plaintively to the referee to enforce the rules against direct elbowing in the clinches, while Gore -- having shed the ill-fitting sheep's clothing of the previous meeting -- resumed his lupine lecturing. Bush dismayed his supporters at first by failing to counterpunch when given clear openings. Gore's claim to have cut the federal payroll by 300,000 cried out for the easy comeback: Almost all of that was in Defense Department reduction after the Reagan-Bush cold-war victory. And Gore's campaign finance piety invited a sharp riposte: He's all for putting the barn door in a lockbox after stealing the fund-raising horse. Not until the second half did Bush rouse himself to remind viewers that cynicism and apathy would be overcome when the nation elected ''somebody who'll tell the truth.'' He got in a good lick about abolishing the unpopular death tax. He used a prepared line to underscore his big-spender charge -- ''If this were a spending contest, I'd come in second'' -- and closed strongly by reciting the promise that most irritates die-hard Clintonites: ''to uphold the dignity and honor of the office.'' Did Gore succeed in showing sharp difference between policies, so necessary to getting out his vote? Yes; to arrest the seeming slide toward Bush, he returned to the populism of the Democratic convention, using ''fight'' as his keyword, holding himself out as the class warrior out to soak the rich and to drive big oil and the big drug companies to the wall. But in so doing, Gore displayed the difference between candidates in personality. He came on strong; he knew it all; he slid around questions to touch all the hot buttons (except, unaccountably, abortion and Supreme Court nominations). ABC's Cokie Roberts noted ''the cringe factor'': the negative reaction of many women to the ferocity of the policy wonk. This final debate was less about positions (which will change as surpluses vanish) than impressions. Gore, playing catch-up, was determined to dominate the stage and thereby rally his dispirited troops; Bush, playing not to lose, was out to be so non-threatening as to narrow the gender gap. For once, the personas reflect the persons; the images are close to the realities; ''the style is the man himself.'' Gore is truly tough-minded, stupefyingly experienced and unabashedly divisive, while Bush is truly amiable and not all that deep and all too eager to unify.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore was clear winner in final debate with Gov George W Bush; says Gore was best he has been since acceptance speech at Democratic National Convention (M) This time Al Gore got it right, and not a moment too soon. People were starting to say of George W. Bush: Well, he might not know the Middle East from the Big East, but he's a nice guy. He might not know subliminal from subliminable, but he's likeamable. And, hey, I can't locate Yemen on a map, either. This time Al Gore got it right, and not a moment too soon. People were starting to say of George W. Bush: Well, he might not know the Middle East from the Big East, but he's a nice guy. He might not know subliminal from subliminable, but he's likeamable. And, hey, I can't locate Yemen on a map, either. Turned off by Al Gore's performance in the first two debates, a fair number of voters began moving toward Mr. Bush, making excuses and weird rationalizations along the way. Some argued that if Mr. Bush were to become president and the country found itself in a tight spot, he'd have plenty of experienced people available to bail him out -- his dad; his vice president, Dick Cheney; his secretary of state, Colin Powell, etc. Talk about the soft bigotry of low expectations! Why should anyone be afraid to set high standards for Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore, and demand that they meet them? They're running for president. At the debate Tuesday night, Al Gore was the best he's been since his acceptance speech at the Democratic convention. He was knowledgeable and comfortable discussing a wide range of complex issues, including health care, Social Security and tax cuts. You can agree or disagree with his position on any issue, but you cannot argue that Mr. Gore does not understand the issue. With Mr. Bush, you're never quite sure. The tone of the debate was set early. Mr. Gore was much better prepared than Mr. Bush to discuss a so-called patients' bill of rights. ''Doctors are giving prescriptions, they're recommending treatments, and then their recommendations are being overruled by H.M.O.'s and insurance companies,'' said Mr. Gore. ''That is unacceptable.'' Mr. Bush said he, too, supports a patients' bill of rights. But though he was asked twice if he supported the Dingell-Norwood bill, he never answered. Instead, he scoffed at the whole governmental process, saying, ''There's this kind of Washington D.C. focus -- well, it's in this committee, or it's got this sponsor.'' Time and again during the debate Mr. Bush appeared baffled by the specifics of one issue or another. During a discussion of affirmative action, Mr. Gore asked, ''Are you for what the Supreme Court says is a constitutional way of having affirmative action?'' Mr. Bush turned to Jim Lehrer, the moderator, his facial expression and body language all but begging Mr. Lehrer to save him by declaring there was no time left for him to answer. ''Jim --'' said Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore said, quietly and devastatingly, ''I think that speaks for itself.'' The answer was bizarre. It meandered this way and that until it lost any semblance of coherence. Mr. Bush said everyone would get tax relief under his plan. He went on to say, ''I think also what you need to think about is not the immediate but what about Medicare?'' He said, ''You get a plan that will include prescription drugs, a plan that will give you options.'' He talked about Medicare people being stuck in a time warp. He said, ''You're going to live in a peaceful world.'' He said, ''You'll be in a world, hopefully, that's more educated, so it's less likely you'll be harmed in your neighborhood, seeing an educated child is one much more likely to be hopeful and optimistic.'' And so on. Mr. Bush smiled. ''Hi, Leo,'' he said. ''You want a mike?''
 Registered Democrats and Republicans are almost equal in number, and nearly all of the remaining 43 percent of voters are unaffiliated. The district supported George Bush in 1992 and Bill Clinton in 1996, and has been known to throw out incumbent congressmen in either party,  having done so in 4 of the last 14 elections. Mr. Maloney was first elected to Congress in 1996 by defeating Gary Franks, a Republican incumbent.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column speculates about Pres Clinton's reaction to debates between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, noting Clinton has become somewhat of 'pariah' in Gore's presidential campaign (M) Al Gore has said he would consider putting a 24-hour-a-day Webcam, or Alcam, in the Oval Office. Al Gore has said he would consider putting a 24-hour-a-day Webcam, or Alcam, in the Oval Office. I have zero desire to see President Gore round the clock, putting comely interns to sleep with charts and lectures on gaseous reduction. What an exquisite dilemma for a man who always wants things both ways! He needs his partner to excel so that Al can defeat W. and secure Mr. Clinton's legacy. But if Mr. Gore falls short, Mr. Clinton can comfort himself with the belief that ''if only I were out there, the election would be over. I'm still the best. If you find a turtle on a fencepost, it didn't get there by accident.'' Mr. Clinton, some close to him say, is bewildered and hurt by the way Mr. Gore keeps erasing him from his  White House photo album. The president thinks Mr. Gore should run as his vice president, bragging on their record of economic growth, welfare reform and fiscal (if not personal) discipline. In a 1996 debate with Bob Dole, Mr. Clinton used sidling and staring to intimidate his rival. Mr. Gore attempted the same maneuver Tuesday. Lithe as a lawn mower, subtle as a subpoena, Alpha Al clomped right up beside Mr. Bush, who rewarded him with a disdainful double take that brought chuckles from the crowd. Mr. Gore kept right on striding up to the crowd, like an Olympic diver about to do a three-and-a-half-somersault pike. Mr. Gore's points often had a subtext of tattling. He said his four children had come to the debate. (W.'s didn't, nyah, nyah!) He said he had gone to Vietnam, even though there were ''fancy ways to get out of going.'' (W. got a cushy spot in the Texas Air National Guard, nyah, nyah!) He had ''not spent the last quarter-century in pursuit of personal wealth.'' (W. was using family connections to get rich, nyah, nyah!) Mr. Gore's erratic and sometimes arrogant debate demeanor, which has caused some Gore focus groups to violently turn on the Democratic nominee, has surely confirmed Mr. Clinton's belief, which he once confided to a friend, that Al would have been happier in academia. But Mr. Gore, who has not appeared publicly with the president since their awkward passing of the torch in Monroe, Mich., two months ago, resents Mr. Clinton so much he might rather lose than reattach himself. He has paid all the dues he intends to. He frets over polls that show lingering anger at Mr. Clinton that might drag him down. Mr. Gore cannot even bring himself to use the word ''Clinton.'' In the debate, he was boasting of his role in planning ''the president's'' summit meeting in the Mideast. He caught himself using the ''P'' word and you could practically hear the klaxon go off as he switched to praising the great job of ''our country's team.''
 Gov George W Bush plunges into final three-week stretch of presidential race, arguing that Vice Pres Al Gore would endanger nation's prosperity and using his own pledge of tax cutting to rally his party's base; Bush crisscrosses swing state of Wisconsin, repeatedly criticizing Gore as proponent of big government; race is still considered dead heat (M) Gov. George W. Bush plunged into the final three-week stretch of the presidential race today, arguing that Vice President Al Gore would endanger the nation's prosperity and using his own pledge of tax cutting to rally his party's base. Crisscrossing the swing state of Wisconsin on a glorious fall day, Mr. Bush, a Texas Republican, repeatedly criticized his Democratic opponent as a proponent of big government. Gov. George W. Bush plunged into the final three-week stretch of the presidential race today, arguing that Vice President Al Gore would endanger the nation's prosperity and using his own pledge of tax cutting to rally his party's base. Crisscrossing the swing state of Wisconsin on a glorious fall day, Mr. Bush, a Texas Republican, repeatedly criticized his Democratic opponent as a proponent of big government. ''He's of the government,'' Mr. Bush thundered. ''He's for the government. He loves Washington, D.C.'' And seeking to sway voters who consider prosperity an argument for  Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush said his opponent would actually endanger the good times. Mr. Bush engaged in a delicate balancing act as he barnstormed across a state that voted twice for President Clinton but is considered up for grabs. ''I'm here to let you know I'm going to work my heart out all the way to the finish,'' Mr. Bush told an airport rally. ''But I want your help. This is going to be a close election. Nobody should take anything for granted. It's going to be down to the wire, which means hard work and grass-roots people are going to make a big difference.'' He struck the same note at the E. O. Johnson Company. ''One of the reasons I've come is to ask you to tell your independents and Democrats to be open-minded,'' Mr. Bush said. Wisconsin's governor, Tommy G. Thompson, was far more pointed as he introduced Mr. Bush at a packed rally here in the afternoon. He said that Mr. Bush had been well raised by his parents but that Mr. Gore needed to learn the lessons taught by Robert Fulghum in his book ''All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten.'' ''Don't interrupt people when they speak,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''He said, Don't be a bully. He said, Don't interrupt people. Come November,  We should send Al Gore back to kindergarten.'' And Mr. Bush scoffed at Mr. Gore's statement in Tuesday's debate that the vice president did not stand for big government. ''Now there's a man whose prone to exaggeration.'' Mr. Gore was also seeking to frame the final days of the race as a choice between economic visions.  Tad Devine, a senior Gore strategist, seized on several of Mr. Bush's answers in Tuesday night's debate to argue that Mr. Bush ''demonstrated conclusively that he wanted to fight for the wealthy, not the rest of society.'' Mr. Devine pointed to Mr. Bush's reply when the moderator, Jim Lehrer, asked him to respond to Mr. Gore's accusation that Mr. Bush's tax cut would mainly benefit the top 1 percent of wealthiest Americans. (Mr. Bush said, ''Of course it does.'') Mr. Devine also pointed to Mr. Bush's description of the word ''insurance'' as ''a Washington term.'' Mr. Bush fired back today against accusations that he favors the well-to-do. ''That's the kind of language that's divisive,'' he said. ''It's the kind of language that pits one group  of people against another. It's called class warfare. That's the kind of language that will make it hard to get something done in Washington, D.C. America doesn't want class warfare. '' Mr. Bush's aides declared themselves pleased with the outcome of the three presidential debates. ''I think we exceeded all expectations,'' said Karen P. Hughes, the governor's communications director. ''The debate phase was clearly a turning point. We have come out of the debate phase with the trend clearly in our direction.'' Arguing that he would be the better steward of prosperity, Mr. Bush said there were warning signs of a recession on the horizon. He called his proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut an ''insurance policy against an economic slowdown.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush accept invitation to share hour of free time on Fox television network during which each candidate will tell viewers why he thinks he should be president; hour will be aired on Oct 27 (S) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have accepted an invitation to share an hour of free time on the Fox television network during which each candidate will tell viewers why he thinks he should be president. Network executives said yesterday that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush would each get about a half-hour to plead their cases directly to the network's audience on Oct. 27. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have accepted an invitation to share an hour of free time on the Fox television network during which each candidate will tell viewers why he thinks he should be president. Network executives said yesterday that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush would each get about a half-hour to plead their cases directly to the network's audience on Oct. 27.
 ''I think they're very useful tools for humanizing stories that journalists want to cover,'' said one polling expert, Michael Traugott, a political science professor at the University of Michigan who has conducted focus groups for the news media. ''The problem arises when a journalist makes a statement that attempts to generalize, or to say that based on these 12 people, Bush won or Gore won.'' From the video chronicle of game-show combatants on a deserted island off Malaysia to the public relations tactics of George W. Bush and Al Gore, ''real people'' is the mantra of the moment, and producers and editors are in businesses obsessed with trends. Their professions have also long sought better and better methods of tracking the vox populi, and with polls showing that this presidential election could be the tightest in 40 years, there is added pressure and interest in identifying and talking to voters who have yet to make up their minds. Mr. Blitzer's first on-air question was, ''Tell me who you think won the debate.'' When the anchor mentioned Mr. Gore, 14 hands went up; 3 went up for Mr. Bush. Mr. Blitzer did not mention the count, and today Mr. Traugott, the Michigan professor, applauded the absence of any such tally on the air. Asking for a show of hands, Mr. Traugott said, was an acceptable way to stimulate discussion. The polling expert's verdict:  ''I'd say they were clean last night.''
 Voters in Ann Arbor, Mich, say third and last debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush has not changed their voting plans; many of them express dissatisfaction with what they heard; Republicans, Democrats and ticket-splitters alike laugh derisively when Gore claims his children made independent decisions to attend debate; others groan or hiss when Bush refuses to say if he supports affirmative action; in post-debate discussion, participants say final round was mostly about reinforcing previous views about two men (M) Almost without exception, a group of 20-odd voters in southeastern Michigan, who gathered at the request of The New York Times at Wallace House, just off the campus of the University of Michigan, said after watching the 90-minute television encounter between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Tuesday evening that their voting plans were unchanged. Almost without exception, a group of 20-odd voters in southeastern Michigan, who gathered at the request of The New York Times at Wallace House, just off the campus of the University of Michigan, said after watching the 90-minute television encounter between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Tuesday evening that their voting plans were unchanged. Republicans, Democrats and ticket-splitters alike laughed derisively when Mr. Gore, in one of his family-friendly moments, announced that all his children had made independent decisions to fly to St. Louis to watch the debate. One member of the group later called the remark ''stupid.'' Another said it was ''corny.'' When Mr. Bush refused to give a yes-or-no answer to the question of whether he supports affirmative action, a lot of groans and a few hisses  resounded through the room. And in a post-debate discussion, which lasted for almost an hour, several participants complained about Mr. Gore's style. Fewer focused on his policy positions, although some found fault with his spending plans. Marisa Buchanan, 21, a senior at the University of Michigan, said that she had been more impressed by Mr. Bush, even though she tended to agree with the vice president on issues. She said that she found Mr. Gore ''a caricature of himself'' whose oratory was ''overdone, even for politics.'' Nevertheless, Ms. Buchanan continued: ''I found myself leaning towards Bush at the end, although I must admit I still don't like him. I've always had the impression that he says what other people tell him to say. But he seemed tonight to mean things, like when he defended his position on the death penalty. He appeared very sincere.'' Mark Hadesh, 56, the owner of several small businesses, reached a different conclusion, though he, too, was bothered by Mr. Gore's manner. ''Al Gore's tedious,'' Mr. Hadesh said. ''He makes me twitch. It's hard for me to listen to him. But when George Bush says he doesn't trust Washington, it means nothing. It's not nearly enough to persuade me to vote for him.'' Another in the group said he thought that when Mr. Gore walked over to Mr. Bush while the latter was speaking, he briefly feared that the vice president ''was going to smack him.'' And Norman J. Rotter, a neurosurgeon who lives in Oakland County, one of the pivotal suburban areas north of Detroit, said he worried that Mr. Gore was ''too arrogant'' to represent the United States effectively in negotiations with other countries, especially poor ones. Peter Thomas, a computer consultant who grew up poor in Detroit, said that he found many of Mr. Gore's ideas ''too grandiose,'' especially his promises to make all American schools excellent and to nurture a world at peace. Dick Siegel, a singer and songwriter, said he was considering voting for Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, ''but not if it would elect Bush.''  He was opposed ''intellectually and spiritually,'' he said, to the Texan's positions and what he termed his ''good old boy'' personality. But he added, he found Mr. Gore ''a strange man,'' which bothered him. ''Gore's inherently a bully,'' said Richard Boothman, 45, a lawyer and a Republican. ''He's in your face, all the time. Bush had a theme: that he knew how to build coalitions between parties, and he'd done it in Texas.'' Simone D. Lightfoot, the Detroit coordinator for the N.A.A.C.P. National Voter Fund, said that as a veteran of the Persian Gulf war, she found Mr. Bush's criticisms of American military preparedness convincing. But she said she could not join in the complaints about Mr. Gore's manner. She explained: ''I prefer a leader who's aggressive and outspoken, so I thought Gore did very well.  Gore had the details. Bush said what he wanted, Gore how he'd get there.'' Rebecca Blank, 45, the dean of the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at Michigan, took strong exception to the other part of Mr. Boothman's comment. An economist and a Democrat, she said that she thought Mr. Bush's coalition theme completely fallacious. ''That was the area in which Mr. Bush had the least credibility,'' she said, ''that he could go to Washington and make it work. I don't see any evidence at all -- he gave none -- that Texas prepared him to deal with Congress.'' Mr. Gore had other defenders.  Nancy Reame, 53, a professor of nursing, said that he offered ''more substantive strategies'' on education and other major matters. ''I listened for specifics from Bush, but I didn't hear them,'' she said.  ''All I heard were generalities. Neither of them paid a lot of attention to women's issues like abortion and hand guns. Bush talked a lot about taking the government out of our lives, but not as far as abortion is concerned.'' Her husband, Ron, 54, chairman of New Horizons Graphic Computer Learning, much preferred Mr. Bush's demeanor, describing him as more courteous. ''But Gore's statements were clearer,'' Mr. Reame, a Republican, said. ''Gore was on target all evening. Bush, no. Bush tired at the end and seemed to run out of material. He was falling apart, not answering questions, sometimes not even following them well.'' Mike Spahn, 21, the editor of The Michigan Daily, a student newspaper, said Mr. Bush had failed to answer questions and had failed to reply effectively to Mr. Gore's accusations, like the vice president's insistence that the Bush tax plan favored the richest 1 percent of Americans. Whereas Mr. Bush ''deflected all the tough questions,'' said Peter Eckstein, a retired economist, Mr. Gore ''showed his experience during the last eight years and effectively laid out what this administration has accomplished.'' ''Gore proved to us all tonight that he learned his lessons from Clinton,'' he said. ''Just like Clinton, he disregarded the rules -- interrupting, asking questions when he wasn't supposed to, all that. In this country we're taught that everyone plays by the same rules, but these people don't do it.''
 More flavorful alternatives, including Bush Blue Lake, Kentucky Wonder (bush) and Tendergreen Improved, are easy to find in garden stores. Specialty catalogs offer dozens of others, each more interesting and delicious than the last.
