 Vice Pres Al Gore, criticized as too pushy in first debate with Gov George W Bush and too subdued in second, turns to average citizens for help in preparing for third and final encounter; meets with citizens of Innsbrook, Mo, who advise him to be himself; many say Gore's chief challenge is to unify and stabilize shifting personalities he has displayed throughout campaign and particularly during first two debates with Bush; photo (M) After being criticized as too pushy in the first debate and too subdued in the next, Vice President Al Gore turned to average citizens again today to help him prepare for his third and final encounter with Gov. George W. Bush. After being criticized as too pushy in the first debate and too subdued in the next, Vice President Al Gore turned to average citizens again today to help him prepare for his third and final encounter with Gov. George W. Bush. Secluded at a sprawling wooded resort 50 miles west of St. Louis, Mr. Gore brought together 10 of the average citizens who helped prepare him on his first two debates and 13 other citizens from Missouri as he sought to repeat the best of his earlier performances and eliminate the worst. The final debate, at 9 p.m. on Tuesday -- the candidates' last sure-fire way of reaching millions of voters in what may be the closest election in four decades -- will be in the style of a town meeting, in which citizens selected by the Gallup organization  will ask the questions. A third of the participants are undecided; a third favor Mr. Gore and a third prefer Mr. Bush. The vice president also had on hand his paid consultants, including Carter Eskew and Bob Shrum, two of his daughters, Karenna Gore Schiff and Sarah Gore, as well as policy experts like Leon Fuerth, his national security adviser in the vice president's office, and Robert O. Boorstin, a former official in the Clinton White House with an expertise in mental health policy. William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, said the vice president's goal was to combine ''the intensity of the first debate with the genuineness of the second.'' Mr. Daley also said that the vice president ''seems much more determined in the last 36 hours'' than he had been before the previous debates. Gore advisers said that he would return to themes he emphasized in the first debate, including the role of the Clinton administration in the current economic expansion. Mr. Daley also said that Mr. Bush's Texas record was fair game. And the vice president can be expected, as he did in the second debate, to play down his views on gun control. Mr. Daley said that the National Rifle Association had effectively spent millions of dollars on television commercials scaring sportsmen and hunters into believing that Mr. Gore wanted to take away their guns. But there seemed to be general agreement -- among the ordinary people, the professional consultants and independent analysts -- that Mr. Gore's chief challenge was to unify and stabilize the shifting personalities he has displayed throughout the campaign and particularly during the first two debates. Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster  in Washington, said that Mr. Gore needed to be the candidate he was at the Democratic National Convention. ''For Al Gore, what it comes down to is going back and finding the inner voice he had at the convention,'' he said. ''Voters have seen too many Al Gores in the last two debates,'' he added. ''He's got to be the person he's going to be in the next four years.'' Leaving aside the question of whether Mr. Gore knew who he was, Mr. Hart said of the differing personas he had presented in the debates: ''The voter gets confused.'' Mr. Hart added: ''When everything is said and done about George W. Bush, he may be wearing the dunce's hat but the voter senses that he's comfortable with himself and they perceive him to be engaging and likable and straightforward and honest, and those aren't inconsiderable traits.'' Mr. Gore found his first session this morning with the real people so valuable that instead of rehearse in the afternoon with his political advisers, he held a second session with the unpaid advisers. At the opening of the first, which reporters were allowed to attend for just a few minutes, Mr. Gore said that if he is elected president, ''I will have regular open meetings all across the country with citizens from all walks of life to help shape the agenda of the Gore-Lieberman administration.'' The original group of citizen-advisers were voters whom Mr. Gore met along the campaign trail. The campaign brought them to Sarasota, Fla., for three days while he prepared for the first debate, then talked with him by conference call before the second debate in North Carolina. Unusually for a presidential candidate just three weeks before an election, Mr. Gore is spending three full days out of the public eye, with no campaign events Sunday, Monday or Tuesday. Some of this is in deference to the Middle East crisis, which is dominating the news. And Mr. Gore does not plan to travel Wednesday until after the memorial service for the American sailors killed in Yemen is conducted. But it also gives him a chance to focus intently on how to repair the damage he seems to have done to himself in the first two debates. One senior adviser said the consensus within the Gore circle was that Mr. Gore did more harm when he muzzled himself in the second debate, than when he forcefully argued with Mr. Bush in the first.
 ''The Republicans are running on pork!'' moaned Kevin Hassett, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. ''Do you hear anybody saying 'Elect me and I'll get George W. Bush's tax cut through'? Noooo. They say, 'Elect me and I'll deliver the National Monument for Slate Manufacturing.' Or whatever.''
 But it remains unclear what role Mr. Pitofsky will play in the Chevron-Texaco deal, because it is by no means certain he will remain at the agency. The chairman of the F.T.C. serves at the pleasure of the president, and if Vice President Gore wins the election, there is a broad expectation that Mr. Pitofsky would continue in his post. On the other hand, if Gov. George W. Bush were to prevail, it is not known who would lead the agency. Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's foreign policy adviser, is a Chevron board member.
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed column questions Gov George W Bush's ability to grasp complexities of foreign policy or deal with situation in Israel in light of Bush's citing Lebanon in 1982 when asked in debate to name a foreign intervention of which he approved; says failed intervention in Lebanon was direct outcome of having a president, Ronald Reagan, who was fuzzy on details, susceptible to cliches and totally dependent on advisers (M) If there has been a low point for the press following the Bush-Gore campaign, surely it has been the mass rush to judgment that because George W. Bush was able to tick off world hot spots in the last debate, he understands foreign policy enough to be president. In fact, Mr. Bush uttered a stunning howler during that debate. When asked by Jim Lehrer which of the recent U.S. interventions abroad he would approve of, Mr. Bush said he did not approve of Haiti, but he did approve of Lebanon in 1982. Oh, really? Too bad Mr. Lehrer did not have time to ask him: ''Governor Bush, what was it about Lebanon that you liked?'' If there has been a low point for the press following the Bush-Gore campaign, surely it has been the mass rush to judgment that because George W. Bush was able to tick off world hot spots in the last debate, he understands foreign policy enough to be president. In fact, Mr. Bush uttered a stunning howler during that debate. When asked by Jim Lehrer which of the recent U.S. interventions abroad he would approve of, Mr. Bush said he did not approve of Haiti, but he did approve of Lebanon in 1982. Oh, really? Too bad Mr. Lehrer did not have time to ask him: ''Governor Bush, what was it about Lebanon that you liked?'' The devil in this region -- and the solution -- is in the details. Foreign policy problems rarely come packaged in your ideal way. They always come messy, spurred as much by the fecklessness of allies as the mendacity of enemies. And they can be solved only by some combination of military might, detailed, patient diplomacy and, yes, some cautious optimism. When you approach them with superficial cliches, an unwillingness to master details and an over-reliance on military power, you end up with America in Lebanon in 1982 -- one of George W. Bush's preferred foreign policy moments. Scary.
 ''Our opponents in this campaign, Al Gore and Joe Lieberman, have sometimes argued when I raise issues about the status of the U.S. military today, they sometimes argue that you shouldn't talk about it, that somehow it's unpatriotic to have this conversation,'' Mr. Cheney, a former defense secretary, told a rally at Evangel University here. ''Well, I think they're dead wrong. I can't think of a more important time to have this conversation.'' In recent days, both campaigns have cautiously sought to use the attack on the Cole and the crisis in the Middle East to support their positions. The Bush campaign has seen it as a validation of its calls for a stronger military and more domestic oil production, while the Gore campaign has sought to remind voters that Vice President Al Gore has far more foreign policy experience than Gov. George W. Bush. The Gore campaign accused the Bush campaign today of trying to score political points off a crisis. ''The Bush campaign's attempt to take advantage of the Middle East situation for Bush's own selfish political benefit will be rejected by the American people,'' said Kym Spell, a Gore campaign spokeswoman . Juleanna Glover Weiss, a spokeswoman for Mr. Cheney, responded: ''For the Gore campaign to purposefully misunderstand Cheney's point that our troops don't have what they need is typical of the dissembling and distortions that the American people have come to expect from Al Gore.'' The Gore campaign noted that Mr. Gorewas proposing to spend more than twice as much money on national defense as the Bush campaign; Ms. Glover Weiss said she thought the Gore campaign's numbers were ''suspect.''
 Both Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore have said that if elected president, they would push to expand the approach. The governor, Frank L. O'Bannon, a Democrat, and the mayor of Indianapolis, Stephen Goldsmith, a Republican, made financing programs with religious organizations a priority when the initiative began. (Mr. Goldsmith is now a domestic policy adviser to Mr. Bush.)
 The confluence of the playoffs with the presidential and vice presidential debates probably skimmed some viewers from baseball on Oct. 3, 5 and 11. Fox did not pre-empt baseball for the debates, while NBC gave its affiliates the option of doing so when it had a game. On Oct. 11, when the cumulative rating for the debate between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas reached a 26.8 on seven broadcast and cable networks, Fox recorded a 6.8 for Game 1 of the Mets-Cardinals National League Championship Series. Four years ago, Game 6 of the N.L.C.S. on Fox generated an 11.9 rating compared with a 26.1 cumulative rating for the Bill Clinton-Bob Dole presidential debate.
 Re ''El Gore,'' by Gail Collins (column, Oct. 13): Re ''El Gore,'' by Gail Collins (column, Oct. 13): No one doubts that both Al Gore and George W. Bush want to make this country greater. Does it really matter if Mr. Bush stumbles on his words? Dwight D. Eisenhower could never read a speech without mangling the syntax. Does it matter  that Mr. Gore lacks charisma? He has experience and is an environmentalist, which is important to me.
 Tone of advertising in presidential campaign is becoming noticeably more confrontational, on issues if not personalities, as strategists concentrate on states they believe are up for grabs as campaign winds down; Republicans and Democrats spent total of $18.5 million on television, evenly split between parties, in last week of September and first week of October on six highly contested states: Florida, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin; Republicans are also spending in California, Minnesota and West Virginia--states thought to be long shots for Bush; Democrats are fashioning television and radio attack ads in Florida, Washington State, West Virginia and Iowa; photos (M) On television in Tampa, the Democrats are starting to aim poison-tipped arrows at Gov. George W. Bush. ''Two million more pounds of toxic chemicals dumped into Texas waterways,'' the commercial's voice-over intones, adding, ''Now imagine Bush's Texas record in Florida's Everglades.'' On stations in Columbus, Ohio, meanwhile, Republicans are warning that Vice President Al Gore is a profligate caretaker of America's budget surpluses. ''Al Gore plans to spend it all and more,'' the announcer declares. ''Gore's big-government spending plan threatens American prosperity.'' On television in Tampa, the Democrats are starting to aim poison-tipped arrows at Gov. George W. Bush. ''Two million more pounds of toxic chemicals dumped into Texas waterways,'' the commercial's voice-over intones, adding, ''Now imagine Bush's Texas record in Florida's Everglades.'' On stations in Columbus, Ohio, meanwhile, Republicans are warning that Vice President Al Gore is a profligate caretaker of America's budget surpluses. ''Al Gore plans to spend it all and more,'' the announcer declares. ''Gore's big-government spending plan threatens American prosperity.'' Expanding beyond the 17 states that have been the focus of the media campaign for months, Republicans are now also spending television money in California, Minnesota and West Virginia, states that have been thought of as long shots for Mr. Bush. The Democratic Party, with much smaller cash reserves, is less concerned with expansion than with refining its strategy, fashioning television and radio attack advertisements for specific states and specific issues: the Everglades piece in Florida, for example; a pollution spot directed at voters in Washington State; an advertisement about the minimum wage in West Virginia; and a radio spot about children in Iowa asserting that ''George Bush's priorities are wrong for Iowa's kids.'' ''The movement seems to be into states Gore needs to win,'' Mr. Goldstein said. ''In Mr. Gore's favor, he still hasn't had to spend money in California and he's competitive in Florida. But he's spending money in Oregon, Washington, Wisconsin and Iowa, which should all be pretty safe for him if he's going to win this.'' In recent weeks, Mr. Gore has been outspending Mr. Bush in Michigan and Pennsylvania, while Mr. Bush has poured new millions into Florida. The Bush and Gore advertising campaigns, waged in tandem with their national party organizations, have been so tactically selective that they are in essence regional rather than national efforts. In his most recent analysis of the data compiled by Campaign Media Analysis Group, a company that tracks advertising spending, Mr. Goldstein found that virtually no presidential spots have run in 32 of the top 75 media markets. ''We upped our buy in the Tampa media, to re-air a spot concerning Gore's record on the environment,'' explained Terry Holt, a spokesman for Victory 2000, the campaign arm of the Republican National Committee. The spot, unveiled in August, depicts an aerial photograph of land owned by Mr. Gore in Tennessee and includes the claim that Mr. Gore ''has allowed mining companies to mine zinc from his property.'' Both sides are, for the moment,  steering clear of the kinds of video disparagements of personality that voters profess to abhor. Patterned after the Republican assaults on the governorships of Michael S. Dukakis in the 1988 campaign and Bill Clinton in 1992, the Democrats are hitting hard on Mr. Bush's Texas record. ''After 17 years in the oil business, George W. Bush ran for governor,'' says a new Democratic commercial running in Missouri, Washington, Oregon and Michigan, ''then passed laws to let big polluters regulate themselves.'' In a television spot directed at Iowa voters, an announcer warns of dire consequences for Iowa's schoolchildren: ''Under Bush, Texas SAT scores have fallen to 47th, while Iowa ranks second. Iowa doesn't need a Texas plan for our schools.'' In earlier spots, the Republicans took swipes at Mr. Gore's reputation for exaggerating his accomplishments. Now they have shifted to a critical analysis of the candidates' budget plans. ''Al Gore's plan: three times the new spending President Clinton proposed, so much it wipes out the entire surplus and creates a deficit again,'' says a new advertisement running in the battleground states. And in a ubiquitous new commercial by the Bush campaign, Mr. Bush stares squarely into the camera and observes: ''I believe in government that is responsible to the people. That's the difference in philosophy between my opponent and me. He trusts government. I trust you.'' The Brennan Center study showed that as of Oct. 8, the Bush campaign and the Republican Party had spent $47 million on television in the general election, while the Gore campaign and the Democratic Party had spent $42 million. However, some $5 million that has been spent on behalf of Mr. Gore by outside groups like the Sierra Club, Handgun Control and Planned Parenthood has brought the two sides to temporary parity. In fact, the study found in the two weeks that ended on Oct. 8, Planned Parenthood's expenditure of $1.46 million actually exceeded the amount paid out for commercials by the Democratic National Committee. Groups allied with the Republicans, like the National Rife Association, have only just begun advertising. ''With $20 million to $25 million to put on television in the last month of the campaign, and $40 million to $50 million committed already, we feel we're in a pretty good position,'' Mr. Holt said. He added that despite Mr. Gore's lead in California, the party had decided to make an investment in the nation's most expensive media state. ''We added $1 million per week to our campaign there on Tuesday, with 90 percent of that money going into the Los Angeles TV market, where 40 percent of the voters reside,'' Mr. Holt said. Mr. Andrew asserted that the strategy of challenging Mr. Bush's Texas record in a handful of states was not a function of limited resources, but the long-planned final phase of an effort to ''make the issue landscape our home turf.'' ''The 2000 campaign so far is more positive than 1996 was,'' said Mr. Benoit, who analyzed the statements in 61 commercials that have run  through Saturday. He found that while the number of statements in the spots attacking the opposing side have been rising in recent weeks, the level of vitriol remains relatively mild. About 29 percent of the statements in Mr. Gore's spots and 17 percent in Mr. Bush's could be interpreted as attacks, Mr. Benoit said.
 Members of Texas labor unions are campaigning actively for Vice Pres Al Gore; so-called Texas Truth Squad has adddressed labor audiences in 15 cities, attacking policies of Gov George W Bush; photos (M) As part of labor's effort to help Vice President Al Gore, Minnie Sanchez, a middle-school teacher in San Antonio, came to Michigan today to tell hundreds of union members some unflattering things about life under Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Speaking to 120 union members in this heavily Republican city, Ms. Sanchez sharply attacked Mr. Bush's record, saying Texas ranks 46th in child poverty, 37th in education spending per student and 49th in the percentage of children without health insurance. As part of labor's effort to help Vice President Al Gore, Minnie Sanchez, a middle-school teacher in San Antonio, came to Michigan today to tell hundreds of union members some unflattering things about life under Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Speaking to 120 union members in this heavily Republican city, Ms. Sanchez sharply attacked Mr. Bush's record, saying Texas ranks 46th in child poverty, 37th in education spending per student and 49th in the percentage of children without health insurance. ''George Bush talks in warm, fuzzy and compassionate conservative images,'' she said. ''But that's not the George W. Bush we know at home. He says he will leave no children behind. But the fact is he has left many children behind.'' Ms. Sanchez and several other union members from Texas -- a sheet-metal worker, a corrections officer and a retired cafeteria worker -- have spoken to labor audiences in 15 cities. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. calls them  ''The Texas Truth Squad.'' The Bush campaign views them as an irksome propaganda squad. The Texans acknowledge that they are largely preaching to the choir, but they hope their assaults on Mr. Bush's record will inspire union members to campaign actively for Mr. Gore. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. has sent these Texans to speak to 2,000 union members in Los Angeles, 1,500 in Cleveland and 1,200 in New York City. They have repeatedly portrayed Mr. Bush as indifferent to working families, hostile to unions and cozy with corporations and the rich. Alex Flores, the sheet-metal worker, attacked Mr. Bush for not pushing to change his state's $3.35-an-hour minimum wage, which is paid to many Texas farm workers not covered by the $5.15-an-hour federal minimum. And Irenier Ford, who retired last year after working for 28 years in a school cafeteria, criticized Mr. Bush's Social Security proposals, saying he would push up the age for full benefits to age 70 and hurt struggling retirees like herself. ''I want you all to help me to tell Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney to keep their hands off of our Social Security,'' Ms. Ford said, standing near a pumpkin-covered poster saying, ''When working families vote, working families win.'' The roving squad of Texans, accompanied today by John J. Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, is meant to restore support for Mr. Gore among union members who soured on him because he supported the bill to liberalize trade with China. To drum up union support, labor leaders are roaming the Midwest in buses, while thousands of shop stewards are distributing millions of pro-Gore fliers at factories and offices. Mr. Sweeney said, ''We're the reason he won the nomination, and we will be the margin of victory on Nov. 7. We got behind Gore because he and Bill Clinton have been real champions of working families and of unions over the past almost eight years. With the exception of trade issues, they have been there for us when we needed them.'' Bush campaign officials insist that the so-called truth squad is often untruthful and is guilty of nonstop negative campaigning. Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for the campaign, said, ''Governor Bush is running well among rank-and-file union members in places like Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. But unfortunately the leadership of some of these unions are spreading false and misleading attacks against the governor.'' He said, for instance, that Mr. Bush had said that under his plan benefits for current retirees or people about to retire must not be changed and would not be changed. Lorra Espey, a member of the carpenters' union in Grand Rapids, said she found the Texans informative. ''If you're from Michigan, you don't know what's happening in Texas,'' she said. ''If that's what Bush is like, I don't want him.''
 But Mr. Sorkin has met current and former White House officials and Washington journalists and has hired as advisers former White House aides like Dee Dee Myers, who worked as press secretary for President Clinton, and Marlin Fitzwater, spokesman for Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, who seek to give the show a patina of realism.
 BY A NOSE -- Gov. George W. Bush goes into the third and final presidential debate with a narrow edge over Vice President Al Gore in four nationwide opinion polls taken since the candidates met last week. But his lead in each is within the margin of sampling error. BY A NOSE -- Gov. George W. Bush goes into the third and final presidential debate with a narrow edge over Vice President Al Gore in four nationwide opinion polls taken since the candidates met last week. But his lead in each is within the margin of sampling error. Averaged together, they show Mr. Bush with the support of 47 percent of voters, Mr. Gore with 43 percent, Ralph Nader with 4 percent and Patrick J.  Buchanan with 1 percent. COME AGAIN? -- Last week Al Gore and his aides were quick to deride George W. Bush for tripping over his own numbers while trying to explain his tax cut proposal at a rally in Florida. In the second debate, Mr. Gore pointed out that he ''wasn't the one having trouble explaining'' his plans. But Mr. Gore does at times have that trouble. Last Tuesday during a forum in Florida, on Wednesday during the debate and again on Friday in Milwaukee, he misstated his proposal for a tuition-based tax break by saying he would help parents ''send their kids to college with a $10,000 tax deduction for college tuition, per child, per year.'' In fact, as ABC News pointed out on Thursday, the proposal calls for a $10,000 deduction per family per year, not per child. On Saturday, in a speech in Detroit, Mr. Gore corrected himself. BACKING FOR BUSH -- A group of Arab-Americans from the Detroit area, which has one of the largest Arab-American concentrations in the country, has endorsed George W. Bush for president. The group, the Arab-American Political Action Committee, made up of influential businessmen and other community leaders, gave its unanimous backing to Mr. Bush over the weekend, a noteworthy development inasmuch as the presidential race in Michigan is rated a tossup. There are about 400,000 Arab-Americans in southeastern Michigan. Some committee members said they supported Mr. Bush rather than Al Gore because the governor had courted the Arab vote and had shown a flexibility on Middle East issues. Others said they were pleased that he had mentioned two issues important to Arabs during the second presidential debate: racial profiling and the government's use of secret evidence in deportation cases. And still others said they were concerned that the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, is Jewish.
 Christopher Ochoa and Richard Danziger remain in Texas prison 10 years after their conviction for 1988 rape and murder of 20-year-old Nancy DePriest, even though inmate Achim Josef Marino wrote letter to Gov George W Bush in 1998 and to police in Austin, Tex, providing details about crime and confessing that he alone was responsible; both are serving life sentences (M) The inmate, Achim Josef Marino, a born-again Christian, made the confession in a February 1998 letter to Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Marino told how evidence linking him to the crime, including the victim's keys, could be found at his parents' house. He said he had written a letter to the local police a year earlier but had received no response. He wanted Mr. Bush to intervene, even saying the governor was ''legally and morally obligated'' to do so. The inmate, Achim Josef Marino, a born-again Christian, made the confession in a February 1998 letter to Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Marino told how evidence linking him to the crime, including the victim's keys, could be found at his parents' house. He said he had written a letter to the local police a year earlier but had received no response. He wanted Mr. Bush to intervene, even saying the governor was ''legally and morally obligated'' to do so. Mike Jones, a spokesman for Governor Bush's office, confirmed that the letter arrived in 1998 and remains on file. Mr. Jones said about 1,400 letters from inmates were received by the governor's office every year, and standard policy calls for forwarding them to the appropriate law enforcement agency. But, he said, Mr. Marino's letter fell into a different category because it indicated that a copy was also being sent to Mr. Earle. In such cases, Mr. Jones said, a letter would not be forwarded, to ''avoid duplication.'' ''It was already in the hands of the law enforcement agencies,'' said Mr. Jones, adding that Mr. Bush never saw the letter. ''This case should shock anyone,'' Mr. Scheck said. He chided Mr. Bush's office for failing to act on the letter and said the case undermined the governor's oft-stated confidence in the Texas criminal justice system. ''This has got to tell Governor Bush that he can't have confidence that all these death penalties and other convictions in his state are sound and just because officials have proclaimed them sound,'' Mr. Scheck said. Mr. Marino wrote his first confessions in 1996, including two to the Austin police department and one each to the local branch of the American Civil Liberties Union and the local newspaper, Then, in 1998, Mr. Marino wrote to Mr. Bush, explaining how in prison he had completed the Alcoholics Anonymous 12-step program and had found Christianity. Austin police also said an investigator visited Mr. Ochoa in 1998 after his department received Mr. Marino's letter that was addressed to Governor Bush. An official said Mr. Ochoa was questioned about the case again and continued to maintain that he had committed the crime. Mr. Scheck, however, said that Mr. Ochoa was simply fearful that investigators were trying to implicate him in another crime.
 Bruce Weber reviews play The Gorey Details, musical anthology of stories by writer and artist Edward Gorey, at Century Center for Performing Arts; Daniel Levans directs; photo (M) The somehow cheerful drawing on the curtain -- a headless man reclining comfortably on a pedestal -- that greets theatergoers at ''The Gorey Details'' sends just the right message about the performance that is about to begin. The show is a musical anthology of stories by the writer and artist Edward Gorey, many of them reprised from previous like shows, and the drawing (one of his own, of course) welcomes you into the genially macabre universe that Gorey (who died this year) made familiar in more than 100 books. Amusing and pleasant, especially for nostalgic devotees, the show is also, well, headless, roaming whimsically around in the Gorey oeuvre until, alas, the inevitable happens and the body stops twitching. The somehow cheerful drawing on the curtain -- a headless man reclining comfortably on a pedestal -- that greets theatergoers at ''The Gorey Details'' sends just the right message about the performance that is about to begin. The show is a musical anthology of stories by the writer and artist Edward Gorey, many of them reprised from previous like shows, and the drawing (one of his own, of course) welcomes you into the genially macabre universe that Gorey (who died this year) made familiar in more than 100 books. Amusing and pleasant, especially for nostalgic devotees, the show is also, well, headless, roaming whimsically around in the Gorey oeuvre until, alas, the inevitable happens and the body stops twitching. The show, which opened yesterday at the Century Center for the Performing Arts, is both directed (by Daniel Levans) and performed with the fervor of happy cultists thoroughly immersed in an alternative world, and its strength is a winking conviction that Gorey's imagination had a palpable foundation. Singing on roller skates, dancing as if possessed by a childish eccentricity, speaking in an exotic language they and they only share, the nine actors are all persuasively in the thrall of Goreyana, willfully and casually weird. And the music, by Peter Matz, played by three musicians (piano, cello and percussion), is appropriately jingly in a Halloween mode. The frame for the evening is provided by a narrator, in the form of a lanky, bald, mustached and rather charmingly eccentric actor named Kevin McDermott, who assumes the role of Gorey's anagrammatical alter ego, Ogdred Weary. Entering on a bicycle, reciting favorite words from the Gorey lexicon (''Haiku, Glue, Seppuku, Maru''), he seems to be calling up the gods of composition, and they answer him with the skits that follow. Like many an omnibus show, in this one the skits are variously successful, and you'll be particularly impatient if you're the sort who waits for a punch line or a concluding moment. That isn't where Gorey's imagination flourished. Indeed, a sudden death offered with a hapless shrug is the most frequent curtain-closer in these tales -- which is, of course, the kind of philosophical resignation that informed most of his work. The humor is, rather, largely dependent on mood, the sense that in this peculiar world, with its atmosphere of a gleefully haunted house, life will go on in all its bizarre idiosyncrasy until it doesn't. Those who adhere to or at least admire the Goreyan view are likely to be satisfied by its presentation here, and it's hard, of course, to escape the poignant underscoring of the artist's death in April. The cardboard set (by Jesse Poleshuck), playfully painted in Gorey's distinctively spidery style, with a drawing of an upended cow over a drawn fireplace and a seaside view out the back windows, suggests the artist's home on Cape Cod. ''The Gorey Details,'' as a result, has the feel of a posthumous visit there, with the artist gone but his creations alive. In the end, the show is something of an animated headstone, a memorial that Gorey would doubtless have appreciated. By Edward Gorey; music by Peter Matz; direction and staging by Daniel Levans; sets by Jesse Poleshuck; costumes by Martha Bromelmeier; lighting by Craig Kennedy; sound by Johnna Doty; musical direction by Bruce W. Coyle; orchestrations by Mr. Matz; production stage manager, Thom Schilling. Presented by Ken Hoyt and Kevin McDermott, in association with Brent Peek. At the Century Center for the Performing Arts, 111 East 15th Street, Manhattan.
 Interview with Jim Lehrer, moderator of presidential debate between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, who has been harshly criticized by partisans and analysts for failing to sufficiently probe candidates and for not being aggressive in following up on questions; many accuse him of allowing nominees off hook on vital matters, and of allowing debates to meander to point where they verged on being downright tedious; photo (M) ''If you had a moderator who was trying to accentuate the differences, that would have been a fabulous debate,'' said Senator Bob Kerrey,  Democrat of Nebraska, who blamed Mr. Lehrer for not pressing the candidates, especially Gov. George W. Bush, on the issues in the debate last week. ''You could have picked 10 people off the street who didn't know Jerusalem from Georgia,'' Mr. Kerrey said, ''and they would have had better questions.'' Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, suggested that Mr. Lehrer did not adequately rein in Vice President Al Gore during the first debate. ''Gore kept interrupting and violating the rules, and Lehrer must have clearly been taken aback,'' Mr. McConnell said. ''Let me say this: I think that Lehrer did a better job in the second debate.'' Gore supporters, on the other hand, have been especially vociferous in their criticism. Among their complaints is that in the second debate Mr. Lehrer said, incorrectly, that there were Gore commercials depicting Mr. Bush as a bungler. They also noted that in several of the exchanges at the end of the debate Mr. Lehrer allowed Mr. Bush to get the last word. Some Gore campaign advisers said they now regretted that they prevailed when, in pre-debate negotiations with the Bush organization,  they pressed for Mr. Lehrer as the moderator. Bush campaign officials had proposed Tim Russert of NBC,  according to people involved in the talks, although at one stage they suggested Larry King of CNN and perhaps Mr. Lehrer for one debate each. In the end, Mr. Lehrer got all three, and Bernard Shaw moderated the vice-presidential debate. One possible explanation for the criticism among Democrats is that party leaders are frustrated by the stinging reviews of Mr. Gore's performance in the two debates so far.
 Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush will debate tonight at 9:00 in the final encounter of the campaign. The event at Washington University in St. Louis will be shown live, in its entirety, on ABC, CBS, C-Span, CNN, the Fox News Channel, MSNBC and PBS. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush will debate tonight at 9:00 in the final encounter of the campaign. The event at Washington University in St. Louis will be shown live, in its entirety, on ABC, CBS, C-Span, CNN, the Fox News Channel, MSNBC and PBS.
 Democratic Vice Presidential candidate Sen Joseph I Lieberman campaigns in West Palm Beach, Fla, where he lays claim to most basic of shared values with Vice Pres Al Gore; says their policies stem from fundamental American and religious principles and are more in tune with beliefs of most Americans on major issues (M) Laying claim to the most basic of shared values, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said today that his and Vice President Al Gore's policies stemmed from fundamental American and religious principles. Laying claim to the most basic of shared values, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said today that his and Vice President Al Gore's policies stemmed from fundamental American and religious principles. Mr. Lieberman's remarks today are an attempt to tap again into that perceived authority. The senator spoke frequently about his faith and its connection to his values in the first month after he was chosen as Mr. Gore's running mate, but he has said less about the subject since then. Part of Mr. Lieberman's shift in tone meant softening the criticism of Gov. George W. Bush that has been a standard part of his stump speech, though that criticism was hardly absent. He belittled Mr. Bush's proposed tax cuts and his prescription drug plan for retirees. The Bush drug plan would give money to the states in the early years to cover only some of the elderly poor, and would then rely on vouchers to help people buy private insurance coverage -- coverage that Mr. Lieberman said the insurers would not be willing to sell. ''The Bush-Cheney prescription drug plan for seniors, middle-class seniors, comes down to this: wait four years and then call your H.M.O. in the morning,'' Mr. Lieberman said. Mr. Gore has proposed a prescription drug benefit under Medicare, available to all older people, though recipients would still be liable for up to $4,000 a year in expenses for medications. Several people here told of having far higher costs and said they welcomed Mr. Gore's plan; one woman said her prescriptions cost her $7,000 a year, none covered by her insurance.
 Focus on presidential race in Pacific Northwest, where contests are being fiercely fought by Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore and are ranked as tossups; while closeness reflects same dynamics at play in rest of nation, other factors are more specific to region--such as relatively high popularity of Ralph Nader and resentment widely felt in Seattle area over Clinton administration's antitrust case against Microsoft Corp; charts (M) For several reasons, the contests here between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are being fiercely fought and are ranked as tossups right now. To some degree, of course, the closeness of the race in the Pacific Northwest reflects the same dynamics at play in much of the rest of the nation. But other factors are more specific to the region, such as the relatively high popularity here of Ralph Nader and perhaps even the resentment widely felt in the Seattle area over the Clinton administration's antitrust case against Microsoft. In Seattle, more television advertisements have been run for the candidates than in any other metropolitan market in the nation, except for Philadelphia -- a total of 5,921 (3,037 for the Gore campaign, 2,884 for the Bush campaign) from June 1 through Oct. 8, according to a tracking survey conducted by the Brennan Center at the New York University School of Law. The survey ranks the Portland metropolitan area No. 7. For Mr. Gore, who has made 16 visits here since 1997, the targeting of so many resources in two states worth a combined 18 electoral votes, and once considered relatively safe, is clearly not a good sign. ''It's not that there is any great shift of political ideology going on this year'' in the region, said Robert E. Gogerty, a political strategist in Seattle who generally works for Democrats. ''It's that Gore has just not bonded with people in the Northwest, at least not yet. And if he can't do it here, he's going to have trouble in a lot of places.'' Were Mr. Nader not in the race, it is possible that the Gore-Lieberman campaign might, if not take the Northwest for granted, at least not have to worry so much about it. But Mr. Gore seems to be suffering from political leanings among many here that are so solidly on the left that discontent with him runs very strong in some places. The other half, he added, might well decide in the end that the race between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore is so close that they want to have an impact on it. But even here, Mr. Hibbitts added, those voters will not necessarily vote uniformly for Mr. Gore, though he should claim the lion's share. In interviews, some pro-Nader voters have suggested that they would prefer Mr. Bush to Mr. Gore because they believe a Bush presidency is more likely to inspire the kind of anger and opposition that truly ignite what they describe as a progressive, third-party movement for future years. And of course, Mr. Nader may well keep many of those voters or even add to their totals by Election Day, especially if they remain disenchanted with Mr. Gore. Thousands have paid for tickets to cheer on Mr. Nader at boisterous rallies in both Seattle and Portland in recent weeks. Mr. Bush has taken a stand opposing plans to breach the dams. ''People have been able to make a living off rivers and at the same time coexist with nature,'' he said at a rally in Spokane last month at which he vowed: ''If George W. Bush becomes president, the dams will not be breached.'' And, he added, to more applause, as if he were addressing Mr. Gore directly: ''These dams are important to a way of life, Mr. Vice President.'' Such a stance, at a minimum, has strengthened Mr. Bush's support in a conservative region that would be likely to side with him regardless and that Mr. Gore has visited just once in recent years. It may even bring out some voters who otherwise might not make it to the polls, analysts say. But on the western side of the Cascades, where far more people live and which should be much friendlier territory to the vice president, Mr. Gore's decision to straddle the issue has had a much murkier fallout. Earlier this year he endorsed the administration's plan to put off any such decision for at least several years while other methods of helping the fish were tried and more scientific studies conducted. In many ways, the debate crystallizes the region's tensions between economic development and ''livability'' concerns such as sprawl and stronger environmental protection. But as energy costs have mounted and the specter of electricity shortages looms, the idea of doing away with dams supplying about 4 percent of the region's electric power has become more controversial, and Mr. Gore is trying hard not to alienate anyone on the matter. Still, some voters here may simply be irritated at their perception that he is waffling. He even faces the wrath of a group  called ''Environmentalists Against Gore,'' though most mainstream environmentalist groups now support him. ''The dams are one of those issues that kind of adds to a cumulative level of frustration with Gore, and continues to cause people to look at Nader,'' said Bill Arthur, the Northwest/Alaska regional director of the Sierra Club. ''On the other hand, as an organization, we certainly have endorsed Gore. Our members recognize there's a Grand Canyon's worth of difference between Gore and Bush on the environment.'' And then there is the Microsoft case. Many people who work in the high-tech industry region in the Seattle area classify themselves as politically liberal. But lingering anger over the Microsoft case seems to have blunted some of the potential enthusiasm for Mr. Gore. (Microsoft itself and its employees have given more to Mr. Bush and the Republican National Committee than to Mr. Gore and the Democratic committee, finance records show.)
 Campaigns Intensifying Pace of TV Ad Spending  The Gore and Bush campaigns, their parties and outside groups spent a total of $18.5 million on television ads in just the last week of September and the first week of October. The bulk of that money, $14.5 million, was spent in six highly contested states: Florida, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Vice President Al Gore gathered nearly two dozen people near St. Louis to help prepare for his third and final campaign debate tonight with Gov. George W. Bush. Their message was, be yourself. The debate will be in a town-meeting format, with questions from the audience. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said that his and Mr. Gore's policies stemmed from fundamental American and religious principles. He cited such disparate sources as the Ten Commandments and the Declaration of Independence and precedents as varied as the civil rights movement and the creation of Medicare. Mr. Bush, campaigning in Arkansas, derided Mr. Gore as an old-time Democrat who favors big government, a theme he promised to strike in tonight's debate. Campaigns Intensifying Pace of TV Ad Spending  The Gore and Bush campaigns, their parties and outside groups spent a total of $18.5 million on television ads in just the last week of September and the first week of October. The bulk of that money, $14.5 million, was spent in six highly contested states: Florida, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Vice President Al Gore gathered nearly two dozen people near St. Louis to help prepare for his third and final campaign debate tonight with Gov. George W. Bush. Their message was, be yourself. The debate will be in a town-meeting format, with questions from the audience. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said that his and Mr. Gore's policies stemmed from fundamental American and religious principles. He cited such disparate sources as the Ten Commandments and the Declaration of Independence and precedents as varied as the civil rights movement and the creation of Medicare. Mr. Bush, campaigning in Arkansas, derided Mr. Gore as an old-time Democrat who favors big government, a theme he promised to strike in tonight's debate.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in Pres Clinton's home state of Arkansas on way to final presidential debate; tweaks Democrats by declaring that Arkansas 'is going to be George W country;' photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush flew into President Clinton's home state today on his way to the final presidential debate and tweaked the Democrats by declaring, ''Arkansas is going to be George W. country.'' With a giant state flag behind him in an amphitheater along the Arkansas River, Mr. Bush derided Vice President Al Gore as an old-time Democrat who favors big government and said he would strike that theme in the third and last presidential debate in St. Louis on Tuesday. Gov. George W. Bush flew into President Clinton's home state today on his way to the final presidential debate and tweaked the Democrats by declaring, ''Arkansas is going to be George W. country.'' With a giant state flag behind him in an amphitheater along the Arkansas River, Mr. Bush derided Vice President Al Gore as an old-time Democrat who favors big government and said he would strike that theme in the third and last presidential debate in St. Louis on Tuesday. ''I can't wait to remind people that the day of the New Democrat is evidently over,'' he said to a cheering crowd that had gathered despite a drizzle. ''The day of the big-spending Democrat is back.'' He tied Mr. Gore not to the president he had served under for eight years, but to the two losing Democratic presidential nominees before Mr. Clinton, who were considered more traditional liberals. ''I'm running against somebody who's proposed a budget that's three times bigger than President Clinton proposed when he ran,'' he said. The crowd, in response, joyously booed Mr. Gore. ''I'm running against a man who has got such great faith in the federal government that he has proposed more federal spending than Michael Dukakis and Walter Mondale combined.'' The crowd booed louder. ''It's O.K. to spend federal money,'' Mr. Bush said, ''but it's not O.K. to spend so much federal money that it's going to bust the budget.'' With the race still considered a dead heat and the election now just three weeks away, Mr. Bush urged supporters to go to the polls. Arkansas is one of the states that Mr. Gore is counting on to avoid a shutout across the South. It voted twice for its favorite son, Bill Clinton, and was only one of five states that Mr. Gore won in the Democratic primaries in 1988 when he made his last presidential bid. But the state has been leaning more toward Republicans in recent years. Gov. Mike Huckabee and Senator Tim Hutchinson, both Republicans, shared the stage with Mr. Bush, as did Representative Asa Hutchinson, the senator's brother, who had been one of Mr. Clinton's prosecutors in his Senate impeachment trial. And while Mr. Gore has been running a barrage of television advertisements here, he has not been able to establish a lead. The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette in Little Rock conducted a poll two weeks ago that  had the race in a dead heat. Mr. Bush was introduced today by Erma Hendrix, a former Little Rock board member who switched from Democrat to Republican in 1980 after a run-in with the Democratic Party over a race for the State House of Representatives. Mr. Clinton was the Democratic governor at the time. ''You've had a history of dealing with those folks up in Washington, D.C.,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to her dispute with Mr. Clinton and the Democrats when she was not allowed into a primary runoff in her bid to become representative even though a court said she was entitled to the spot in the runoff because of a dispute over uncounted ballots. Ms. Hendrix praised Mr. Bush for his stand on ''empowering the people and the pro-life issue,'' and he gave her a big hug. Later this evening, Mr. Bush arrived here in St. Louis where he was endorsed by the National Troopers Association, which represents 35,000 state troopers and highway patrol officers. As he accepted the endorsement, Mr. Bush criticized Mr. Gore, who noticeably changed his style between the first and second debates. With the race in a dead heat, both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore will seek to press an advantage in the final debate Tuesday night, which for the first time will feature audience questions and comes at a time when violence in the Middle East has put foreign affairs at center stage. The governor practiced for the debate this morning in Austin, Tex., and was expected to conduct another run-through on Tuesday.
