 Clayton R Swope letter says isolationist foreign policy envisioned by Gov George W Bush is hypocritical (Oct 7 Anthony Lewis Op-Ed column) Re ''Milosevic and Bush,'' by Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 7): By criticizing United States involvement in regions outside of its strategic or economic interests, George W. Bush fails in promoting cherished American values. Re ''Milosevic and Bush,'' by Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 7): By criticizing United States involvement in regions outside of its strategic or economic interests, George W. Bush fails in promoting cherished American values. An isolationist United States foreign policy is hypocritical; thus, by ignoring ''ethnic cleansing'' and the gross violations of human rights that occur throughout the world, Mr. Bush would disregard the American values that he claims to uphold.
 The bassist Annie Holland and the drummer Justin Welch gave Elastica a secure base upon which to wreak havoc, while the keyboardist Dave Bush (formerly of the Fall, another band Ms. Frischmann adores) and the guitarist Paul Jones did the heavy demolition work.
 Thomas P McKenna letter agrees with Gov George W Bush's stand that US forces should be used only to defend the vital interests of America (Oct 7 Anthony Lewis Op-Ed column) Re ''Milosevic and Bush,'' by Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 7): Re ''Milosevic and Bush,'' by Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 7): The more we do, the less our allies will do for themselves. George W. Bush is right. American armed forces should be used only to defend the vital interests of America.
 Some 60 percent of the public reports being worried about energy costs, according to the Gallup Organization. That helps explain why both Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have made the topic an important issue during the campaign's final weeks. Mr. Bush has proposed increasing oil supplies by allowing energy companies to drill in parts of Alaska that the Clinton administration wants to keep environmentally protected. Mr. Gore, by contrast, has accused large oil companies of price-gouging and has promised to provide incentives to pursue alternative energy sources.
 G.O.P. PLANS CALIFORNIA BLITZ -- Despite polls showing Vice President Al Gore holding on to a comfortable lead over Gov. George W. Bush in California, the Republican Party says it will begin a $1 million-a-week television advertising blitz in the Los Angeles area in the next few days that, as party officials describe it, will be a ''serious'' effort to contest the Golden State. G.O.P. PLANS CALIFORNIA BLITZ -- Despite polls showing Vice President Al Gore holding on to a comfortable lead over Gov. George W. Bush in California, the Republican Party says it will begin a $1 million-a-week television advertising blitz in the Los Angeles area in the next few days that, as party officials describe it, will be a ''serious'' effort to contest the Golden State. Gore campaign and Democratic Party officials say they are not impressed. They have spent no money for commercials in California, and they dismiss the Republican move as a feint to prompt them to start spending. California has been a tough state for Republicans in recent years, and Mr. Bush's father, President George Bush, drew sharp criticism in 1992 after he abandoned any effort to compete there against Bill Clinton. Governor Bush has vowed to run hard in the state. But so far he has mostly raised money there, not spent it. This year, however, another DNA test further proved Mr. Criner's innocence, and local prosecutors and the local judge joined defense lawyers in asking that Mr. Criner be freed. Gov. George W. Bush did just that.
 ''I'm concerned that the word is not getting out about what this measure would do,'' said Wev Shea, the United States attorney here during the Bush administration and now a lawyer in private practice, who is a leading critic of the measure. ''This thing is so overbroad, unless you really take the time to look at it, you don't realize the vast scope of it.''
 Thomas L Friedman Op-Ed column holds Gov George W Bush most needs to improve on foreign policy issues in next presidential campaign debate; cites Republican Party's failure to come to terms with end of cold war and Bush's lack of interest in issue; holds world security and stability is most threatened by weakness and potential collapse of post-cold war states, while Bush still views world from 1980's perspective (M) Let's not mince words here: George W. Bush did not come in second last week in the debates. He came in fourth, because anyone watching could see that Al Gore, Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman all had a better command of the issues than Mr. Bush and seemed more like presidential timber than he did. That voters noted that is unquestionable. But whether they will care on Election Day is another question. Will voters care more about Mr. Gore's intelligence, or his maddening tendency to pander and fib? Will they punish Mr. Gore for his intellectual arrogance, or reward Mr. Bush for his affable ignorance? Whom will voters prefer? A candidate who can't tell the truth, or one who can't pronounce it? A candidate who sometimes will say anything or a candidate who sometimes seems to know nothing? Let's not mince words here: George W. Bush did not come in second last week in the debates. He came in fourth, because anyone watching could see that Al Gore, Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman all had a better command of the issues than Mr. Bush and seemed more like presidential timber than he did. That voters noted that is unquestionable. But whether they will care on Election Day is another question. Will voters care more about Mr. Gore's intelligence, or his maddening tendency to pander and fib? Will they punish Mr. Gore for his intellectual arrogance, or reward Mr. Bush for his affable ignorance? Whom will voters prefer? A candidate who can't tell the truth, or one who can't pronounce it? A candidate who sometimes will say anything or a candidate who sometimes seems to know nothing? These are all open questions. But there are still two more debates for Mr. Bush to regroup in. The place he must improve most tomorrow is on foreign policy. Mr. Bush's answers to the foreign policy questions were so deeply, deeply shallow that you could only wonder: Is he that unfamiliar with the material and uncomfortable with the issues, or have his foreign policy advisers simply not prepared him because they themselves are unprepared for this world? I think it was a little of both. Consider the moment when Mr. Bush was asked how he would respond to another sudden global financial crisis. He said: I would call Alan Greenspan and I would gather the facts. Wonderful! So would my mother. But she doesn't think she should be president. This is the essence of Mr. Bush's foreign policy. I would call Colin Powell. I would call Alan Greenspan. But what will he ask those advisers, and what happens if they disagree? For that Mr. Bush actually has to know something himself, and he appears to be a man with little intellectual curiosity. Mr. Bush seems to believe that by simply mentioning the name Colin Powell on foreign policy, he has a foreign policy. Had Mr. Bush listened to Mr. Powell on Kosovo, there would probably never have been a U.S. air war against Slobodan Milosevic and he would still be in power. Mr. Bush's non-answers were a reflection of the shallow level of thinking about foreign policy generally in the Republican Party today. The fact is, the mainstream of the Republican Party, which for decades had the cold war and anti-Sovietism to guide it abroad, has simply gone brain dead since the cold war ended. It has lived off Clinton gaffes and a kind of drive-by foreign policy, in which Republicans drive by the White House, shout some insult at the Clinton team and drive on. The only original efforts to come to terms with the end of the cold war in the Republican Party have been the hyper-isolationist American nationalism of Pat Buchanan or the hyper-interventionist American nationalism articulated by William Kristol and Robert Kagan. Since Mr. Bush is not interested in either, it is not surprising that when pressed on foreign policy he falls back on name-dropping or on neo-cold-warism, such as his vow to ''rebuild military power,'' which ''starts with a billion-dollar pay raise for the men and women who wear the uniform.'' The best you can say about Mr. Bush is that he has thought about the world and decided that it's still the 1980's, and therefore he plans to solve the problems of his father's era with his father's old advisers. The worst you can say is that deep into this campaign he still hasn't been able to master his briefing book on foreign policy and has evinced zero interest in thinking about the world afresh.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, in Florida, and Gov George W Bush, in Texas, stay largely sequestered with large teams of advisers to prepare for televised debate; their supporters continue war of words; Democratic National Committee head Joe Andrew unveils plan to use television advertisements, Web sites and roadshows to criticize Bush's record and his occasional verbal gaffes, news conference; photo (M) Separated by the Gulf of Mexico, and a few ideological divides, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas stayed largely sequestered today as they prepared for the second of their three scheduled nationally televised debates. Separated by the Gulf of Mexico, and a few ideological divides, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas stayed largely sequestered today as they prepared for the second of their three scheduled nationally televised debates. In anticipation of Wednesday's debate in Winston-Salem, N.C., Mr. Gore settled in for three days of practice at the Mote Marine Laboratory, a shark research and conference center near here. Mr. Bush gathered with advisers at his Texas ranch two hours north of Austin. He was to practice with Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire, who has played the role of Mr. Gore in rehearsals. On the Democratic side, the political strategist and television commentator Paul Begala played Mr. Bush. As the candidates rehearsed, their surrogates continued a war of words that intensified on Sunday, when Gore aides characterized Mr. Bush as ''bumbling and babbling'' and Bush aides called Mr. Gore a ''serial exaggerator.'' Joe Andrew, the national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, held a news conference here to unveil plans to use television advertisements, Web sites and roadshows to criticize Mr. Bush's record in Texas and his occasional difficulties in explaining his policies. Mr. Andrew said the assault on the Bush record would focus on air pollution in Houston and Odessa, poverty along the Mexican border, problems with the Medicaid program for poor children and Mr. Bush's opposition to hate-crimes legislation. Asked by reporters why Texas voters had re-elected Mr. Bush by a margin of 38 percentage points in 1998 if he had done such a bad job, Mr. Andrew laid the blame at the campaign run by his own party's candidate that year, Garry Mauro. Mr. Andrew also said it was ''fair game'' to attack Mr. Bush's verbal gaffes, which he said demonstrated that Mr. Bush ''simply does not have the experience we believe to be up to a presidential standard.'' But he tried to draw distinctions between those attacks and the Republican criticism of Mr. Gore's misstatements, which he described as ''character assassination.'' In response, Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, predicted that ''the American people would rather have a president who occasionally mispronounces words compared to a president who has a long history of exaggerating and embellishing his history.'' And the Bush campaign issued a statement by a Democratic state senator from Texas, Ken Armbrister, accusing Mr. Gore of breaking his pledge to avoid personal attacks. While preparing for the debate, Mr. Gore made a conference call to his so-called special advisers, people from around the country who were flown here by the campaign last week to help him prepare for the first debate but have not returned. Mr. Gore's only diversion today was a trip to a bookstore, where he bought the novels ''Open House,'' by Elizabeth Berg, and ''Sick Puppy,'' by Carl Hiaasen, and a children's book, ''The Adventures of Pelican Pete,'' for his grandson. Mr. Gore plans to stay in Florida until flying to Winston-Salem on Wednesday, but he will give a speech on education in the Sarasota area on Tuesday. Mr. Bush plans to attend a rally on Tuesday in Tennessee, Mr. Gore's home state, where a recent poll showed Mr. Bush leading. After the debate, Mr. Bush plans to travel to Pennsylvania and Michigan, while Mr. Gore plans stops in Milwaukee; Cedar Rapids, Iowa; and Detroit. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: PREPARING FOR DEBATES  Correction:  October 19, 2000, Thursday  A picture caption on Oct. 10 about a campaign stop in Florida by Vice President Al Gore, before he shopped on a break from debate practice, misidentified the location of the appearance. It was in Lido Key, not Longboat Key. A picture caption on Oct. 10 about a campaign stop in Florida by Vice President Al Gore, before he shopped on a break from debate practice, misidentified the location of the appearance. It was in Lido Key, not Longboat Key.
 Federal prosecutors subpoena records from Gov George W Bush's presidential campaign and Maverick Media, its media consulting firm, to determine whether either played role in mailing confidential Bush debate materials to Thomas J Downey, Vice Pres Al Gore's adviser; Downey immediately turned materials over to authorities; Bush campaign says it aids in probe (M) Federal prosecutors have subpoenaed records from Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign and its media consulting firm to determine whether either played any role in mailing confidential Bush debate materials last month to an associate of Vice President Al Gore, law enforcement officials and Bush campaign officials said today. Federal prosecutors have subpoenaed records from Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign and its media consulting firm to determine whether either played any role in mailing confidential Bush debate materials last month to an associate of Vice President Al Gore, law enforcement officials and Bush campaign officials said today. Investigators are seeking a list of employees of the Bush campaign and Maverick Media, the campaign's advertising firm in Austin, Tex., who may have had access to the debate videotape and other internal briefing papers. The materials were mailed on Sept. 11 from Austin to Thomas J. Downey, a former Democratic congressman from New York who is a Gore adviser. ''We are cooperating fully with the investigation,'' Scott McClellan, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said, ''because no one wants to get to the bottom of this more than us with the Bush campaign who are working tirelessly day in and day out to elect Governor Bush.'' The Gore campaign declined to comment on the developments. Bush campaign officials said that Friday's subpoena sought materials that the campaign manager, Joe Allbaugh, had promised at a Sept. 15 meeting to give to the authorities. Law enforcement officials said that they had uncovered no evidence that any senior campaign officials were responsible for the mailing of the tape, which showed Governor Bush answering questions from aides as he prepared for the debates. Federal investigators have been interviewing workers in both the Gore and Bush campaigns in recent days. A week ago, agents interviewed a Gore aide who was suspended for telling a friend about a ''mole,'' or informer for the Gore camp, within the Bush campaign. The Bush campaign has repeatedly defended Ms. Lozano's loyalty.
 Editorial sees debate audiences trying to gauge whether candidate has presidential temperament, not just intelligence and mastery of facts; holds Vice Pres Al Gore's concept of debates as 'like job interview' is too limited and even politically dangerous for him; holds outcome of his next debate with Gov George W Bush could be decided by some symbolic moment that inspires swing voters to leap of faith In the current New Yorker, the magazine's Washington correspondent, Joe Klein, recounts an exchange from a 1992 campaign debate in which President Bush gave a fumbling answer to a question from the audience about how the national debt affected the ''economic problems of common people.'' Because the woman who asked the question was black, Mr. Bush noted that he had been to an A.M.E. church recently. Then he veered awkwardly to the subject of teenage pregnancies. When Bill Clinton's turn came, he stepped toward the woman and said, ''Tell me how it's affected you again.'' In Mr. Klein's view, this demonstration of Mr. Clinton's superior empathic ability was a pivotal moment in their competition. The observation touches on the perennial questions of what voters look for in the candidate debates and how they process what they see and hear. In our view, the history of televised debates since John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon met in 1960 demonstrates that mastery of facts is seldom decisive. Kennedy exaggerated the ''missile gap,'' and many contemporary observers famously thought that Nixon had won. In 1980, Jimmy Carter outpointed Ronald Reagan on substance. Last week Vice President Al Gore demonstrated a superior grasp of every aspect of domestic and foreign policy, but his presentation apparently set the stage for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to leap past him in the CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll. In the current New Yorker, the magazine's Washington correspondent, Joe Klein, recounts an exchange from a 1992 campaign debate in which President Bush gave a fumbling answer to a question from the audience about how the national debt affected the ''economic problems of common people.'' Because the woman who asked the question was black, Mr. Bush noted that he had been to an A.M.E. church recently. Then he veered awkwardly to the subject of teenage pregnancies. When Bill Clinton's turn came, he stepped toward the woman and said, ''Tell me how it's affected you again.'' In Mr. Klein's view, this demonstration of Mr. Clinton's superior empathic ability was a pivotal moment in their competition. The observation touches on the perennial questions of what voters look for in the candidate debates and how they process what they see and hear. In our view, the history of televised debates since John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon met in 1960 demonstrates that mastery of facts is seldom decisive. Kennedy exaggerated the ''missile gap,'' and many contemporary observers famously thought that Nixon had won. In 1980, Jimmy Carter outpointed Ronald Reagan on substance. Last week Vice President Al Gore demonstrated a superior grasp of every aspect of domestic and foreign policy, but his presentation apparently set the stage for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to leap past him in the CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll. The point, we hope, is not that intelligence does not matter, but rather that voters are not looking only for the smarter contestant or the more articulate or the more experienced, as the elder Mr. Bush was in 1992. The act of political bonding that must take place between a candidate and the voters is more complex than that. A certain level of intelligence is required as table stakes, so to speak. But the examples of Mr. Reagan and -- so far -- Governor Bush show that the public cannot be spooked by jokes and commentary to the effect that a given nominee may not be the brightest bulb on the tree. The importance of such unquantifiable qualities probably means that Mr. Gore's concept of the debates as ''like a job interview'' is too limited and even politically dangerous for Mr. Gore, given his passion to explain his qualifications over and over. A more expansive metaphor has been used by campaign strategists who say that in political broadcasts the television camera works like an X-ray, exposing all aspects of a candidate's personality, character, intellect and inner commitments. But no conceptual model fully covers the odd drama that will have its second act when Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have their next meeting tomorrow night. The vice president believes that the voters will succumb to a relentless reading of the facts on his inner teleprompter. The Texas governor thinks he can charm them into overlooking the manifest gaps in his knowledge and experience. In the end, the outcome could well be decided by some symbolic moment that inspires swing voters to a leap of faith.
 The comprehensive approach became a centerpiece of United States policy in both the Bush and Clinton administrations, and it was adopted at the Rio Convention in 1992 and the Kyoto Protocol in 1997.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column on Gov George Pataki's gaffe in deriding Hillary Rodham Clinton's reference to E B White during Senate campaign debate, only to learn that White was New Yorker essayist who wrote book about what it was to be New Yorker and some well-loved children's stories; notes Pataki has deflected all media attention from Republican Senate candidate Rick Lazio onto himself; cites similarities between Pataki and Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush (M) Mr. Pataki's performance was yet another piece of evidence of a disturbing election-year phenomenon. It is becoming increasingly apparent that he and George W. Bush are actually the same person. Or maybe twins, like those girls in ''The Parent Trap'' who go to camp and discover they're bunking with an exact replica. And now we discover that they both experience problems of lost memory when it comes to children's literature. Mr. Bush, you may remember, was asked last year about his favorite boyhood book, and named ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar,'' which was written the year after he graduated from college.
 There were four generations of Gores and two generations of Gore in-laws at a party at the West Village loft of the artist JENNIFER BARTLETT the other night. By the time VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE and TIPPER GORE arrived from Florida, their daughter, KARENNA GORE SCHIFF, and her 15-month-old son, WYATT, had cruised through the living room, the terrace and the white-walled studio downstairs. Mrs. Schiff's husband, DREW, was there, too, as were his parents, DAVID and LISA SCHIFF; his sister ASHLEY; and his brother SCOTT. So was Mr. Gore's mother, PAULINE LAFON. It was her 88th birthday. Wyatt stole the show, rolling, clapping, gurgling and toddling his way through Mr. Gore's talk. Karenna Gore Schiff tried to distract him with a book. Wyatt would not be distracted, but the vice president was only too happy to let himself be. At one point, he turned to the little boy and said, ''Wyatt, would you like to show these people how you can walk backwards?'' After a bit of coaxing and coaching by Mr. Gore -- and some neck-craning in a crowd that included the artist CHUCK CLOSE, the singers BARBARA COOK and MARY CLEERE HARAN and the society pianist BOBBY SHORT -- Wyatt complied. Mr. Gore went back to talking about the things presidential candidates talk about, only to stop and say, ''I would rather hear him speak, even if it's only 'Mama.' '' Correction:  October 12, 2000, Thursday  A report on Public Lives page on Tuesday about a party held in a West Village loft for Vice President Al Gore and his family referred incorrectly in some copies to Fran Lebowitz, a guest. She is a writer, not a photographer. A report on Public Lives page on Tuesday about a party held in a West Village loft for Vice President Al Gore and his family referred incorrectly in some copies to Fran Lebowitz, a guest. She is a writer, not a photographer.
 Republican conservatives score Dick Cheney for his stand during vice presidential debate with Democratic Sen Joseph I Lieberman that homosexuals should have all constitutional rights enjoyed by other citizens and that issue of gay marriages should be decided by states; note party platform explicitly opposes gay marriages and backs 1996 law denying federal recognition of same-sex marriages; Cheney says he will defer to Gov George W Bush's opposition to same-sex marriages; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush has said flatly that he opposes same-sex marriages. And in an interview today aboard his campaign plane, Mr. Cheney said he would defer to his running mate's views on the matter. ''The governor sets the policy for a Bush administration, and I'll be happy to support his policy,'' he said.
 Florida, with three Republican seats in play, exemplifies most of the factors that have improved Democrats' chances. Few states have seen as much unexpected strength from the ticket of Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, and Florida's continuing status as a presidential tossup guarantees that they will keep coming to stir up the party faithful.
 Lack of money does not appear to be the problem; spending per pupil here is higher than the state average. And Englewood, a suburb of 24,850 residents, is a city of opulent homes and famously successful residents, like the actor Eddie Murphy and the investment banker Orin Kramer. So wealthy are the town's residents that Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman have been here recently for fund-raisers held by residents with deep pockets.
 Preparing for Next Debate  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush stayed largely sequestered as they prepared for the second of their three scheduled nationally televised debates, tomorrow night in Winston-Salem, N.C. Campaign Mole Inquiry  Federal prosecutors have subpoenaed records from Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign and its media consulting firm to determine whether either played any role in mailing confidential Bush debate materials last month to an associate of Vice President Al Gore, law enforcement officials and Bush campaign officials said.
