 At issue is whether Congress acted constitutionally when it made states liable for damages for violating the Americans With Disabilities Act. The act, intended to remedy and prevent discrimination against the disabled, was approved overwhelmingly by Congress and signed into law by President Bush. At issue is whether Congress acted constitutionally when it made states liable for damages for violating the Americans With Disabilities Act. The act, intended to remedy and prevent discrimination against the disabled, was approved overwhelmingly by Congress and signed into law by President Bush.
 LIEBERMAN BOWS OUT OF SENATE DEBATE  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman is still running for re-election in Connecticut, but he will not be debating his opponent for United States Senate, Mayor Philip A. Giordano of Waterbury. Mr. Lieberman had agreed to participate in a debate before becoming Vice President Al Gore's running mate, but had put the event on hold since joining the big ticket. LIEBERMAN BOWS OUT OF SENATE DEBATE  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman is still running for re-election in Connecticut, but he will not be debating his opponent for United States Senate, Mayor Philip A. Giordano of Waterbury. Mr. Lieberman had agreed to participate in a debate before becoming Vice President Al Gore's running mate, but had put the event on hold since joining the big ticket. BUSH CRITICIZES GORE IN CAR COUNTRY  Gov. George W. Bush strongly criticized Vice President Al Gore in Pontiac, Mich., yesterday as an enemy of the automobile whose concern for the environment trumped the economic interests of many people in Michigan, a crucial swing state. Mr. Bush rummaged through Mr. Gore's voting record and his 1992 book on the environment, ''Earth in the Balance,'' to make his points, and noted the vice president's tie-breaking vote in the Senate in 1993 to raise gasoline taxes. ''In speeches, he calls auto workers his friends,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But in his book, he declares that the engines that power your cars are his enemy.'' Mr. Bush went on: ''The internal combustion engine, Mr. Gore wrote, is, and I quote, 'a mortal threat to the security of every nation that is more deadly than that of any military enemy we're ever likely to confront.' Unlike Al Gore, I don't consider the internal combustion engine a threat to the future of mankind. I consider it a remarkable testimony to American ingenuity.'' Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said that accusation was wholly unfounded. Mr. Gore's campaign proposals included no new energy taxes, Ms. Spell said, and the incentives he had outlined for the manufacture of vehicles not powered solely by gasoline were meant to benefit, not punish, the auto industry. BY THE NUMBERS  Both candidates ended the week in closely contested states, George W. Bush in Michigan and Vice President Al Gore in Iowa. Length of official day: Gore, 14 hours; Bush, 11 hours States visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 1 Towns/Cities visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 2 Official Events: Gore, 2; Bush, 2 Diners visited/drop-bys: Gore, 0; Bush, 0 Press conferences: Gore, 0; Bush, 1 (editorial board meeting) Press interviews (includes newspapers and television): Gore, 2; Bush, 9 Main message: Gore, Preserving proserity; Bush, commitment to the ''greatest generation'' and energy conservation
 Frank W Hunger, who was married to Vice Pres Al Gore's late sister, is perhaps Gore's best friend and among his most valued advisers; is discreet and offers much of his advice in private, making his influence hard to quantify; has taken leave from law firm to travel with Gore, serving as intermediary between campaign staff and candidate; photos (M) As soon as the first presidential debate ended last week, Vice President Al Gore's wife, three daughters and son-in-law joined him on stage, creating a handsome family portrait for the cameras. But Mr. Gore thought the picture was incomplete. He motioned to the audience, summoning an older man with a weathered face and a shock of white hair, who bounded up, giving Mr. Gore a hearty hug and a slap on the back. For Al Gore, there is no question that the man, Frank W. Hunger, is family, and then some. Though not related by blood, they share more than four decades of history. Some memories are jubilant, like their constant companionship during Mr. Gore's successful campaigns for the Senate and the vice presidency. Others are heartbreaking, like the 1984 death of Nancy Hunger -- Mr. Hunger's vivacious wife and Mr. Gore's beloved only sibling -- after a prolonged battle with lung cancer. As soon as the first presidential debate ended last week, Vice President Al Gore's wife, three daughters and son-in-law joined him on stage, creating a handsome family portrait for the cameras. But Mr. Gore thought the picture was incomplete. He motioned to the audience, summoning an older man with a weathered face and a shock of white hair, who bounded up, giving Mr. Gore a hearty hug and a slap on the back. For Al Gore, there is no question that the man, Frank W. Hunger, is family, and then some. Though not related by blood, they share more than four decades of history. Some memories are jubilant, like their constant companionship during Mr. Gore's successful campaigns for the Senate and the vice presidency. Others are heartbreaking, like the 1984 death of Nancy Hunger -- Mr. Hunger's vivacious wife and Mr. Gore's beloved only sibling -- after a prolonged battle with lung cancer. Sixteen years later, Mr. Hunger is  perhaps the vice president's closest friend. And in this campaign, as in Gore campaigns past, he is also among Mr. Gore's most valued advisers, a man whose counsel is treasured because he has no agenda other than the advancement of Al Gore. ''He is the only one traveling with Al Gore,'' said the campaign manager, Donna Brazile, ''who can look him eye to eye and keep his day job.'' A successful corporate litigator and former top Justice Department official, Mr. Hunger, 64, is sometimes mentioned as a potential attorney general in a Gore administration, a Robert Kennedy to Mr. Gore's John. Such nepotism would probably be politically untenable today. But if Mr. Gore wins, Mr. Hunger will clearly be one of the most influential people in the White House, whether he works there or not. Because Mr. Hunger is discreet and offers much of his advice in private, even Mr. Gore's top strategists say his influence is hard to quantify. But they know that it is there, and that his reach as a minister without portfolio stretches from the profound to the trivial, from the choice of a running mate to the selection of beer on Air Force Two. Mr. Hunger was among the few in a Nashville hotel room when Mr. Gore winnowed his list of potential running mates to Senator Joseph I. Lieberman. When one aide asked whether the country was ready for a Jewish vice president, Mr. Hunger silenced the discussion. ''If it's not,'' he said, ''it damn well should be.'' Since taking unpaid leave from a Washington law office on June 30, Mr. Hunger, often in his campaign uniform of dungarees and running shoes, has traveled with Mr. Gore virtually every day, as he did today  here in Milwaukee. Of the many voices that Mr. Gore hears on strategic issues, Mr. Hunger's redolent Mississippi drawl is often the last. He serves as an intermediary between the campaign staff and the candidate, delivering difficult messages and gauging the correct moment to approach Mr. Gore for thorny decisions. His politics, Mr. Hunger said, are similar to Mr. Gore's, but he generally avoids discussions of government policy, feeling it is not his place. He  helps Mr. Gore prepare for debates, however, sometimes simply by buffering him from a deluge of advice. He served as a sounding board for Mr. Gore's convention speech. He will also get people hired to the campaign staff. And at the vice president's request, he investigated why the campaign was hemorrhaging money last year, and as a result recommended moving the headquarters from Washington to less expensive Nashville. He did rail at Gore aides, however, when the vice president took what Mr. Hunger considered a boneheaded position on Elian Gonzalez and when the campaign did not move quickly to quash the furor over Mr. Gore's claims about the price of drugs for his dog. Known for a sense of connection to typical Americans,  he took an early interest in the rising price of gasoline and advised Mr. Gore to get out in front of the issue. And yet less weighty matters are not beneath his concern. When Mr. Gore strolled barefoot along a Florida beach last week while being interviewed by two reporters, Mr. Hunger walked alongside and issued constant alerts -- ''Watch your foot!'' -- about sharp shells in the sand. But perhaps Mr. Hunger's most significant role is as Mr. Gore's fun-loving alter ego. Mischievous and slightly irreverent, he is the crazy uncle of both the Gore family and the Gore campaign, and it falls to him to keep the famously disciplined candidate loose and relaxed. He is easy to laugh, eager to dance and ready with a Rebel whoop at any sign of good news. On Mr. Gore's post-convention riverboat trip down the Mississippi, he walked the decks in bare feet, shorts and a Hawaiian shirt. With no children of his own, he is devoted to the four Gore children; he has attended their ballgames, been to their graduations and slipped them sips of his beer. Even the campaign staff calls him Uncle Frank. For years, he had Mr. Gore's eldest daughter, Karenna, believing that he had shared a bunk with Elvis Presley in the military (though Presley served in the Army and Mr. Hunger in the Air Force). On his 60th birthday, at Kristin Gore's urging, he jumped from an airplane at 11,000 feet. The free fall, he says, ''scared the bejesus out of me.'' Tipper Gore, who shares her own friendship with Mr. Hunger, calls him the Auntie Mame of the family.  ''He gets Al to have fun,'' she said. ''He'll say: 'Enough of that. Let's have a beer.' With Frank around, Al's more prone to laugh, cut up, think of jokes, play. I think Frank lightens him up and loosens him up, most definitely.'' Mr. Hunger is also the Gores' tenant, living in the Tudor house in Arlington, Va., that they vacated in 1993 to move into the vice president's official residence in Washington.  The house once belonged to the grandparents of Mrs. Gore, who moved there as a child with her mother after her parents divorced. Mr. Hunger has only grown closer to his brother-in-law since the death of Nancy Hunger, Mr. Gore's older sister, who was a longtime smoker. The bond was forged in part during the two agonizing years when the men researched her lung-cancer treatment and consoled each other through her deterioration. Mr. Hunger encouraged Mr. Gore to speak about her death in his anti-tobacco speech at the 1996 Democratic National Convention, not anticipating the cynical reaction following news accounts that Mr. Gore had boasted, while in tobacco country during previous campaigns, that he had farmed the crop. ''Might have been one of the dumber things I've done,'' Mr. Hunger said. Mr. Gore says he values Mr. Hunger for his integrity, his experience and his judgment, which the vice president says is ''the best of practically anybody I know.'' ''He's the closest thing I have to a brother,'' said Mr. Gore, 52, pausing before appending one of the good-natured barbs that characterize their friendship. ''An older brother, I might add.'' Mr. Hunger, 12 years the vice president's senior, chuckled when told of Mr. Gore's aside, then said, ''I have no better or closer friend in the world.'' Mr. Hunger met Nancy Gore while visiting a longtime friend from Winona at Vanderbilt, where she was an undergraduate. Gregarious, smart and sophisticated, she captivated him as she did most all who knew her. ''She was one of the most attractive women I'd ever seen in my life,'' he said. They began dating several years later and married in 1966. It was lucrative work. The last financial disclosure report that Mr. Hunger filed with the Justice Department, in 1999, showed he had assets of at least $4 million. Among them were significant holdings in the companies that Mr. Gore now derides as ''big oil'' and ''big drug companies.'' Mr. Hunger had become assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department's immense civil division, with nearly 700 lawyers handling 22,000 cases, after the 1992 election. Mr. Gore helped him get the appointment, but in his six years at Justice he won widespread admiration for his judgment in a broad variety of cases, including the government's ultimately unsuccessful defense of the Food and Drug Administration's efforts to regulate tobacco. Those who worked with Mr. Hunger at Justice say he never overtly played the Gore card.
 THE SCRIPT -- ''In the end, it's about the issues. Hillary supports guaranteed prescription drug coverage for all seniors. Lazio voted no with the drug companies. Hillary supports adding 100,000 new teachers. Lazio has voted no -- voted with Gingrich for the biggest education cuts in history. Hillary says use the surplus to extend Social Security. Lazio, like George Bush -- a trillion-dollar tax plan. His plans squander the surplus. Hillary's the one who'll be a strong voice for us.'' ACCURACY -- Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Lazio both support expanding Medicare to cover some prescription drug costs for the elderly, but Mr. Lazio supports a more limited federal program. Mr. Lazio's aides say Mrs. Clinton has also proposed large cuts in education spending. Mr. Lazio asserts that his tax cut plan would cost less than the one proposed by Mr. Bush, and that there is enough money in the federal surplus to ensure the stability of Social Security.
 Democratic vice presidential nominee visits shantytown along Rio Grande and accuses Gov George W Bush of failing to improve conditions in ramsackle 'colonias' photo; local Hispanic leaders also fault governor (S) Hammering again at Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman today visited one of the desperately poor shantytowns strung along the Rio Grande, accusing the governor of failing to improve conditions there. Hammering again at Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman today visited one of the desperately poor shantytowns strung along the Rio Grande, accusing the governor of failing to improve conditions there. In the last two weeks, the campaign of Mr. Lieberman's running mate, Vice President Al Gore, has made Mr. Bush's record in Texas a central part of its message, warning in campaign appearances and television commercials that conditions in the state could be duplicated elsewhere if Mr. Bush became president. Mr. Lieberman carried that message yesterday to Odessa, in West Texas, to call attention to pollution there. ''These acts of failed leadership by Governor Bush are part of what the American people should consider as they decide how to vote this year,'' he said today. The Bush administration said the ''colonias,'' ramshackle, unincorporated settlements in the state's border regions, and the environmental problems long predate the governor's tenure, and that he should be credited for trying to address them. But Mr. Bush has also been assailed by Hispanic leaders and advocates for the poor, for never having visited a colonia, an omission they say shows his insensitivity. ''You don't have to go to Alaska to know it's cold, and I don't think you have to go to colonias to know what it's like,'' said Elton Bomer, Mr. Bush's secretary of state, whom the governor has put in charge of addressing problems of the colonias. In a conference call with reporters that was arranged by the Bush campaign, Mr. Bomer said such a visit would be no more than ''a photo op.'' ''No one has done more to improve the living conditions of the Texas colonias than Governor Bush has,'' Mr. Bomer said. But Texas Democrats insist that Mr. Bush's Democratic predecessor, Ann Richards, did more. Mr. Bomer said $600 million has been spent on the colonias under Mr. Bush; but only $250 million of that was state money, and that state money came from bond acts approved by voters during previous administrations. He said the state planned to spend $25 million on sewer hookups for the villages. Mr. Bush also signed a bill eliminating some bureaucratic barriers to connecting colonias to sewer, water and electric service. But Mr. Bush has also opposed several pieces of legislation that would have greatly increased state spending on the communities.
 In the early 1990's, groups like FAIR and politicians like Patrick Buchanan and Pete Wilson attacked immigration as a threat to the economic security of millions of Americans. Today such claims ring hollow, and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas deserves credit for altering the tenor of his party's rhetoric on immigration.
 The apparent terrorist action against the American Navy destroyer Cole (''Blast Kills Sailors on U.S. Ship in Yemen,'' front page, Oct. 13) illustrates a critical campaign issue: our military has been reduced to dangerously low levels under the Clinton-Gore administration. The apparent terrorist action against the American Navy destroyer Cole (''Blast Kills Sailors on U.S. Ship in Yemen,'' front page, Oct. 13) illustrates a critical campaign issue: our military has been reduced to dangerously low levels under the Clinton-Gore administration. In the debate, Al Gore said our military must remain strong enough for the job. Let's see him try that one on the grieving families of those sailors who died for lack of adequate financing.
 Voters in Santa Ana, California, veer from traditional conservatism as they flip-flop between Al Gore and George W Bush; photos (M) ''Before the first debate, I was saying, 'You know, Gore might not be a bad choice, the way the economy's going,' '' said Mr. Suica, a 42-year-old Republican with two Bush-Cheney signs in his front yard. ''You say, 'Maybe . . . ' '' he added, his voice trailing off. ''But then I saw the debate and Gore turned me off and Bush started to impress me again.'' ''Before the first debate, I was saying, 'You know, Gore might not be a bad choice, the way the economy's going,' '' said Mr. Suica, a 42-year-old Republican with two Bush-Cheney signs in his front yard. ''You say, 'Maybe . . . ' '' he added, his voice trailing off. ''But then I saw the debate and Gore turned me off and Bush started to impress me again.'' After the second debate, Ms. Proctor felt that way even more. ''I thought Bush did much better,'' she said. ''He seemed more in command, in control, and Gore is just so darn irritating. I thought, if I have to listen to that man for four years, I'll go crazy. You know, it's one thing for a politician to get caught in a smart lie. But in a stupid lie, that's another thing.'' This year, Mr. Romero was open to suggestion. In the summer, Gov. George W. Bush's nephew George P. Bush, who is also Mexican-American, made a campaign stop at Mr. Romero's store full of prayer books  and devotional objects, and Mr. Romero was impressed. He watched both debates closely, and in the second one, on Wednesday, had a flash. ''They kept agreeing with each other,'' he said. ''I thought maybe what we ought to do is not make a change. I like Bush. I like his easy manner. But right now, after what I watched, it's like a friendly game of badminton, and the economy is great. So why make a change?'' Evenly divided is how the conversation went this week in interviews up and down the streets of Santa Ana, smack in the heart of a county that was once a Republican stronghold. Eight years ago, this Congressional district, long represented by the fiery conservative Robert K. Dornan, voted for George Bush. But its demographics have been steadily changing, and now nearly half its residents are of Hispanic origin. Even Gore supporters had some doubts about his demeanor. And even Bush supporters had some doubts about his experience and readiness for the presidency. ''Did either one of them really burst out of their shell?'' asked Clarin Cheek, 30, speaking of the performances of Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore in the debate.  ''No.'' Still, Ms. Cheek, a paralegal, and her husband, Chris, 30, who works in his family's metal-stamping business in nearby Tustin, said they were ''tending to lean towards Gore,'' as Mr. Cheek put it while they walked their yellow mutt, Zoe, at twilight. ''There are some things I like Bush better on,'' Mr. Cheek said. ''I thought he'd be more judicious about intervening in situations around the world than Gore. We can't just go off everywhere.'' But Ms. Cheek added, ''Since these events in the Middle East, I feel a little bit more confident with Gore having international experience.'' Just across the street, Thomas Hunsaker, 38, a tile contractor renovating a house, called himself ''a moderate conservative'' and confessed that after he watched part of this week's debate, ''Gore scares me, where he'd take the country.'' At the same time, Mr. Hunsaker said, ''I do think Bush would do more to support the military, and I think he'd take a stronger foreign policy role without sticking his neck out everywhere. I don't think the economy's got any correlation with Clinton and Gore and their staff. A lot of it is from things that happened six, seven, eight years before.'' Hector De La Torre, a 40-something elementary school teacher who usually votes Democratic, used exactly the same word as Mr. Hunsaker, except to describe Mr. Bush. ''Bush really scares me,'' Mr. De La Torre said as he stopped on Fourth Street to chat. ''He doesn't know his facts in his own state. He didn't know and he could defend himself and his tax plan when Gore attacked him. He said, 'I care about the environment,' but he couldn't explain the smog in Houston.'' ''I thought that in this debate, Bush did edge Gore out,'' said Mr. Hartman, a Navy veteran of World War II. ''He seemed more relaxed. But right now we're into this very bad situation in the Middle East, and how would he handle that if he doesn't have experience?'' But moments later he added, ''I think either way we're going to have a good president, but I think I'd feel better if it were Bush.'' Mrs. Hartman said she voted for Mr. Clinton four years ago, and liked much of what Mr. Gore had to say in the debates. ''But then I think of these, what do they call them, exaggerations, and some of these faux pas,'' she said of Mr. Gore. ''And I've heard people say that's not just an exaggeration, but part of his character, so how do you really know? I don't.'' Greg Joslyn, 46, an executive with the Orange County Foundation for Medical Care, a nonprofit organization that administers health insurance plans for businesses, was heading into the museum for another reception, this one for St. Joseph Hospital. Asked what struck him about the second debate, he replied instantly: ''Gore's complete character change. He seemed totally different from the first one. I think George is just who he says he is and what you see is what you get.'' Mr. Joslyn is a Republican and a Bush supporter, but he said neither candidate was adequately addressing the burden that aging baby boomers would place on the Medicare and Social Security systems. ''I don't think either candidate, quite frankly, is really honest about the impact of that demographic boom. Something has got to be done.'' Mr. Joslyn also said he liked Mr. Bush's overall attitude, and thought he would be cooperative with Democrats to get things done. ''My sister lives in Texas, and she's a single-issue voter for whom a women's right to choose is really most important,'' he said. ''But even she says that as governor, Bush really has reached out across the aisle.''
 Gov. George W. Bush has touted the need for a technologically advanced missile defense of the United States and proposed that billions be spent for research on reconnaissance and targeting systems that would enable the United States to pummel enemy armies from afar. But those steps would not insolate the American military from low-tech terrorist strike. Vice President Al Gore has asserted a need for the ''forward engagement' of American forces in distant trouble spots without specifying ways to reduce the risk of that engagement.
 Gov George W Bush and Dick Cheney, while continuing to voice support for Clinton administration's Mideast policy, find ways to frame crisis there as validation for Bush's proposals on energy and military; Bush, campaigning in Pontiac, Mich, holds crisis bolsters his call for United States to become less dependent on foreign oil; Cheney, campaigning in Madison, Wis, holds attack on destroyer Cole shows importance of maintaining military strength; photo (M) Even as he continued to voice support for the Clinton administration's approach to the Middle East, Gov. George W. Bush, along with his running mate, Dick Cheney, found ways today to frame the crisis there as an argument for their ticket and a validation for Mr. Bush's proposals on energy and the military. Mr. Bush used the developments abroad to bolster his call for the United States to become less dependent on foreign oil, making particular reference to growing imports from Iraq during the Clinton years and to the decision several weeks ago to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Even as he continued to voice support for the Clinton administration's approach to the Middle East, Gov. George W. Bush, along with his running mate, Dick Cheney, found ways today to frame the crisis there as an argument for their ticket and a validation for Mr. Bush's proposals on energy and the military. Mr. Bush used the developments abroad to bolster his call for the United States to become less dependent on foreign oil, making particular reference to growing imports from Iraq during the Clinton years and to the decision several weeks ago to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Mr. Cheney, a defense secretary under Mr. Bush's father, said he did not mean to imply that any lack of military preparedness contributed to the attack on the Cole, though he did question whether better gathering of intelligence could have prevented it. But his comments echoed statements he and Mr. Bush have repeatedly made, asserting that the Clinton administration had allowed the military to deteriorate. Mr. Bush, in a speech to automotive designers and engineers here today, used the prism of the Middle East to revisit and disparage Vice President Al Gore's recommendation to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. President Clinton subsequently took that step, intended largely to keep rising fuel prices under control as winter approached. With their remarks, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney showed that they were prepared to make events in the Middle East a part of the campaign debate, although it was a course that they were pursuing with obvious caution, lest they be accused of using a tragedy to score political points. Thus far, Mr. Bush has not questioned the administration's diplomatic efforts, saying that the United States must ''speak with one voice'' at times like this. And he has weighed in only vaguely about the correct response to the terrorist attack on the Cole, saying there ''must be a consequence.'' The crisis in the Middle East has afforded Mr. Gore an opportunity, which he has seized, to emphasize his role as a statesman and, at least implicitly, highlight his greater experience in international affairs. But the Bush campaign would like to turn the situation to its own advantage, a fact made clear in Mr. Bush's speech today and in his aides' reaction to an article in The New York Times about a secret agreement between Mr. Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister. The article said the agreement called for an end to all Russian sales of conventional weapons to Iran by the end of 1999, but the deadline passed and the transfer of weapons continued. Mr. Bush, in his speech today, asserted that ''on the Clinton-Gore watch, Saddam Hussein's Iraq has become a major supplier of oil to America'' Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said that in 1999, Iraq supplied only 8 percent of the oil imported to this country. Mr. Bush said that Mr. Gore and the Clinton administration had not only erred in releasing oil from the petroleum reserve but had also mismanaged its distribution. ''Vice President Gore called for this release and he should take responsibility for what has occurred,'' Mr. Bush said. ''If this is the best the administration can do, it is time for a new administration.''
 Bush Cautiously Raises Mideast as Campaign Issue  Gov. George W. Bush continued to express support for the Clinton administration's approach to increased violence in the Middle East. But he and his running mate, Dick Cheney, also signaled that they were prepared to make events in the Middle East a part of the campaign debate, finding ways to frame recent events there as an argument for their election and a validation of their positions on oil imports, the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and the strength and use of the military. Vice President Al Gore canceled a meeting with 30 to 40 Arab-Americans in Detroit to return to Washington for a White House meeting on the Middle East. Aides said that the cancellation was logistical, not political, that the meeting would be rescheduled and that Mr. Gore would meet later in the day in Washington with several of those who were to have attended the Detroit session. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman visited El Flaco, one of the poor Texas shantytowns along the Rio Grande inhabited mainly by Mexican immigrants, and accused Governor Bush of ''failed leadership'' for not improving conditions in the ''colonias.'' Governor Bush raised $125 million in six months for the Republican National Committee, more than twice the $60 million that Vice President Gore raised for the Democratic National Committee. Both parties shattered quarterly fund-raising levels for this stage in a presidential campaign. In the last three calendar months, the Republicans raised $101 million and had $45 million left; the Democrats raised $55 million and had $26 million left.
 George W Bush has raised $125 million in six months for Republican national committee, compared with $60 million raised by Al Gore for Democrats (S) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has raised $125 million in six months for the Republican National Committee, more than twice the $60 million that Vice President Al Gore has raised for the Democratic National Committee, according to officials from both parties. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has raised $125 million in six months for the Republican National Committee, more than twice the $60 million that Vice President Al Gore has raised for the Democratic National Committee, according to officials from both parties. The Republican committee has raised $188 million since the beginning of this year. Mr. Bush, who turned his fund-raising attentions to the party in April after he had sewn up the nomination, is responsible for $125 million of that, or 66 percent, party officials said. He raised the money through coast-to-coast personal appearances and direct-mail letters to specific voters. The Democratic committee has raised $119 million, with the amount raised by Mr. Gore representing  about 50 percent of the total. On the Democratic side, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is expected to spend $9 million to increase voter turnout. Groups that favor abortion rights are already advertising on television and are expected to spend a few million on Mr. Gore's behalf. The Democratic National Committee may spend as much as $25 million for voter turnout, officials said. Labor is also expected to spend millions for Mr. Gore. As in 1998, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is spending less on television commercials and more on outreach programs in which union members call other union workers and urge them to vote Democratic. Incalculable in terms of money -- and value -- to Mr. Gore are factors like the United Auto Workers' having won in their contract the right to take off Election Day as a paid holiday, thus allowing them to devote the day to taking people to the polls to vote for Mr. Gore.
 Vice Pres Gore alters campaign schedule for second day to attend White House meeting on Mideast; cancels meeting with Arab-Americans in Detroit, although aides promise quick rescheduling (S) For the second consecutive day, Vice President Al Gore altered his campaign schedule today to return to Washington for a White House meeting concerning the instability in the Middle East. Mr. Gore canceled a scheduled private meeting with 30 to 40 Arab-Americans in Detroit, a city where Arabs hold considerable political sway. Mr. Gore's aides said the cancellation was logistical, not political. Indeed, Mr. Gore planned to meet tonight in Washington with several of those who were to have attended the Detroit session, and his staff pledged to reschedule the full meeting quickly. For the second consecutive day, Vice President Al Gore altered his campaign schedule today to return to Washington for a White House meeting concerning the instability in the Middle East. Mr. Gore canceled a scheduled private meeting with 30 to 40 Arab-Americans in Detroit, a city where Arabs hold considerable political sway. Mr. Gore's aides said the cancellation was logistical, not political. Indeed, Mr. Gore planned to meet tonight in Washington with several of those who were to have attended the Detroit session, and his staff pledged to reschedule the full meeting quickly. ''We've met with Arab-American leaders in the past and will continue to do so in the future,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's press secretary. Greg Simon, an adviser to the Gore campaign who is of Lebanese descent, said there was no awkwardness in meeting with Arab-Americans at a time of such tension in the Middle East. On Thursday, 17 American sailors were killed in a suspected terrorist attack on a United States destroyer in Yemen, while on the West Bank a Palestinian mob killed two Israeli soldiers and prompted an Israeli missile attack on Ramallah and Gaza City. While Arab-Americans may play a role in the election in pivotal states like Michigan, a heavy turnout by Jewish voters is expected to be even more critical to Mr. Gore's chances in Florida. Mr. Gore campaigned today before a modest crowd in this city in northeastern Iowa, delivering virtually the same attack on George W. Bush's record on health care as governor of Texas that he did in Milwaukee on Thursday. ''At a time like this, it is just unacceptable to have millions of parents worry themselves sick about how they're going to get health care for their children,'' Mr. Gore said. ''My opponent doesn't have that as a priority,'' Mr. Gore said. ''He has very different priorities, because he has proposed a massive tax cut, almost half of which goes to the top 1 percent.'' There was one notable change in Mr. Gore's remarks today: He lost the ''lockbox.'' After ''Saturday Night Live'' parodied his frequent use of that term to refer to his promise to protect Medicare and Social Security surpluses from raids by Congress, Mr. Gore avoided the metaphor today. In a year of few cross-party endorsements, Mr. Gore received the backing today of the Republican mayor of Cedar Rapids, Lee Clancey. In remarks before Mr. Gore's address, Ms. Clancey leveled a blistering critique of Mr. Bush.
 Gov George W Bush, Sen John McCain and other Republicans in Congress score Vice Pres Al Gore over report that Russia continues to deliver conventional arms to Iran in violation of deal Gore signed in 1995; deal with then-prime minister, Viktor S Chernomyrdin, was never fully disclosed to public and allegedly exempted Russia from law requiring sanctions against nations that sell advanced arms to Iran and other nations that sponsor terrorism and called for end to such sales by end of 1999; Gore aide defends deal (M) Gov. George W. Bush said today that he was troubled by a report that Russia was continuing to deliver conventional arms to Iran in violation of a deal signed by Vice President Al Gore in 1995. Republican members of Congress also reacted angrily to the report, published today in The New York Times. It said that Mr. Gore entered into an agreement with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister then, that in essence exempted Russia from a 1992 law requiring sanctions against nations that sell advanced weapons to countries that sponsor terrorism, including Iran. Gov. George W. Bush said today that he was troubled by a report that Russia was continuing to deliver conventional arms to Iran in violation of a deal signed by Vice President Al Gore in 1995. Republican members of Congress also reacted angrily to the report, published today in The New York Times. It said that Mr. Gore entered into an agreement with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister then, that in essence exempted Russia from a 1992 law requiring sanctions against nations that sell advanced weapons to countries that sponsor terrorism, including Iran. The 1992 sanctions law is commonly known as the Gore-McCain act after its principal sponsors, Mr. Gore, who was in the Senate then,  and Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican. Mr. Bush, answering a reporter's question after a campaign appearance in Grand Rapids, Mich., said that Iran is a haven for terrorists and that any arms sales to Tehran undercut American policy. ''It is in the strategic interests of the United States to have peace in the Middle East, and any secret agreement that would be destabilizing in the Middle East is a troubling piece of information,'' Mr. Bush said. The Gore-Chernomyrdin deal, calling for an end to all Russian deliveries of arms to Iran by the end of 1999, was never fully disclosed to Congress or the public. Russia has failed to meet the deadline, over the protests of Mr. Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright. Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin mentioned it in a news conference the day the deal was signed in Moscow, without spelling out a number of key provisions. State Department officials briefed members of Congress and staff on the deal three weeks later, but only in skeletal form, according to a staff member who was present. The agreement is in a secret document that states that its terms will remain ''strictly confidential.'' He added that none of the weapons included in the agreement met the standard for triggering sanctions under the Gore-McCain law. But in a harshly worded statement, Senator McCain said, ''Clearly, the 1995 Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement was intended to evade sanctions imposed by legislation written in 1992 by the vice president and me.'' He said the assertion that the weapons were not covered by the law was ''provably false.'' A number of other Republican members of Congress issued statements complaining about the Gore-Chernomyrdin deal. They suggested that the administration had violated sanctions laws and had failed to properly notify Congress of a significant international agreement. Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican leader, and Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, sent a letter to President Clinton on the matter today. They sharply questioned Mr. Gore's promise to Mr. Chernomyrdin to avoid any penalties under American law. They also said that the Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement had many of the hallmarks of a treaty and thus should have been submitted to Congress for consideration. ''The secret Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement not only flouted law, but also failed,'' Mr. Leach said in a statement. ''The legitimization of Russian arms sales in defiance of law is hardly in the interest of a safer world. The naivete of this approach is matched only by the perfidiousness of its execution.'' Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, the senior Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, said that the Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement appeared to be an executive understanding that did not require Congressional notification or approval. He said that members of his committee had been offered a briefing by the administration in the summer of 1995 but had declined it.
 During his term, Governor Carper said, he has enacted laws to provide drug assistance to some low-income older residents, enforce new standards for teacher accountability in public schools and provide tax relief for married couples. Mr. Carper emphasized his ability to cross partisan lines to get things done, noting that he had worked with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as well as Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, when he was in the House.
 Excerpts from Gov George W Bush's remarks on his oil policy (M) ''Oil consumption is increasing; production is dropping; imports of foreign oil are rising. Yet Vice President Gore's administration has failed to act. As a result, America, more than ever, is at the mercy of foreign governments and cartels. ''Oil consumption is increasing; production is dropping; imports of foreign oil are rising. Yet Vice President Gore's administration has failed to act. As a result, America, more than ever, is at the mercy of foreign governments and cartels. On the Clinton-Gore watch, the American government has lost credibility with OPEC nations, including our gulf war allies. We fought a war in defense of some of these countries; yet we are unable to convince them to maintain an adequate and stable supply of oil. On the Clinton-Gore watch, Saddam Hussein's Iraq has become a major supplier of oil to America. This means that one of our worst enemies is gaining more and more control over our country's economic future. The current crisis in the Middle East underscores the danger of American reliance on Saddam  Hussein's oil. Several weeks ago, just weeks before the election, Vice President Gore called for releasing oil from America's Strategic Petroleum Reserve. I  strongly disagreed, because the strategic reserve is meant for times of war or a major disruption in oil supplies. It is a petroleum reserve, not a political reserve. Every barrel released today is one less barrel available to protect us against threats to our security, threats that are becoming more vivid with this week's turmoil and violence in the Middle East. Vice President Gore called for this release and he should take responsibility for what has occurred.''
 The Clinton administration, like the Bush administration before it, unwisely chose to advance the ''peace process'' as quickly as possible, attempting in effect to force the Palestinians and those Arabs allied to their cause to make de facto recognition of Israel de jure. We have in essence been demanding that they in broad daylight forsake their history and their faith as they have come to understand them. They quite naturally have declined.
 Treasury Sec Lawrence Summers and Housing Sec Andrew Cuomo visit New Mexico to announce program to make it easier for American Indians to obtain mortgages, and also to remind Indian leaders that Clinton administration has served them well and that Vice Pres Gore would continue same policies (S) But implicit in their message to two dozen Indian leaders and explicit in what several said they heard was a reminder that the Clinton administration has served them well and that a Gore administration would continue the same policies to help Indians share in the economic prosperity that has eluded them. If clearly received and acted upon on Nov. 7, the message could play some role in determining which candidate -- Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush of Texas -- wins New Mexico's five electoral votes. Home to some 65,000 Indians, about two-thirds of whom are old enough to vote, New Mexico is one of the few swing states in the Rocky Mountain West, and polls show the presidential race up for grabs. ''We're very concerned about continuity after the Clinton administration,'' Mr. Gachupin said. ''Under President Clinton we have seen interest in Indian country, and we feel Vice President Gore has been very involved in this. So in a real sense, we're feeling that he would continue the momentum here. ''But Bush is a real concern for us,'' Mr. Gachupin added. ''Some time ago he said Native American issues should be dealt with at the state level, rather than the federal level, and I know he changed his position now that he has more education. But for many of us, the first impression is the lasting impression.''
