 The impasse poses a particularly acute problem for Vice President Al Gore, who supported granting China permanent normal trading rights over vociferous objections from unions, environmentalists and other core political supporters. Signs that China is backtracking means that ensuring compliance with the trade accord could become a problem for the next administration, keeping alive an issue that Mr. Gore had hoped was behind him. Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, William M. Daley, stood behind Mr. Clinton as he signed the legislation. Mr. Daley played a central role in winning passage of the bill before he resigned as commerce secretary to become Mr. Gore's chief strategist.
 Barbara Bonn letter agrees with Gary Bauer (Oct 8 Op-Ed) about evasions exhibited by both Gov Bush and Dick Cheney on issues of abortion and gay marriage I never expected to agree with Gary Bauer about anything in this lifetime, but he is absolutely right about the evasions exhibited in the recent debates by both George W. Bush and Dick Cheney on the issues of abortion and gay marriage. I never expected to agree with Gary Bauer about anything in this lifetime, but he is absolutely right about the evasions exhibited in the recent debates by both George W. Bush and Dick Cheney on the issues of abortion and gay marriage.
 AN EYE ON THE OVAL OFFICE -- The guy who once thought it would be fun to have a 24-hour camera in outer space to beam back pictures of Earth says he would consider having a 24-hour camera in the Oval Office. That's Vice President Al Gore, who said ''maybe so'' when Yahoo's Internet Life, a magazine published by the Web site, asked him if he would consider a Web cam in the Oval Office. He expressed some concern that a 24-hour camera could give away security secrets, but said me might approve of ''episodic'' glimpses (audio and video) into the heart of the White House. As for his proposal for an all-Earth, all-the-time satellite, that is seeming less far-fetched than when Mr. Gore first raised it in March 1998. The proposal, part of the NASA authorization bill, passed the House last month and is pending in the Senate. The so-called Tirana Satellite would cost $35 million. BUSH STUMBLES ON 'I.R.A.' -- Gov. George W. Bush has no trouble articulating the broad differences between his tax-cut plan and Vice President Al Gore's. It's the little details that keep dragging him down. On Saturday, he sank into a quicksand of numbers and decimal points. Then yesterday he misstated what he said would be one of the impacts of all the complications in Mr. Gore's proposal. Speaking at a rally in Greensboro, N.C., he said, ''It's going to require numerous I.R.A. agents'' to decipher Mr. Gore's formulas. He meant I.R.S. agents, and although it was an isolated flub, it was an example of the kind of small verbal spasm that could cause a big tremor in a debate. George W. Bush, the Review figured, spoke at a grade level of 6.7, showing a fondness for the the word fuzzy, whereas Al Gore, who liked the word squander, spoke at the 7.9 grade level. Because Dick Cheney tossed around words like convene and decimated, he came in at the 8.5 grade level.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column says George W Bush's proposal calling for putting part of Social Security contributions into individual accounts, without any replacement for the diverted funds, is irresponsible and would bankrupt the system; says real problem with Social Security is that it makes people feel artificially rich, and any real reform has to make them feel poorer, but that, of course, is not what Bush is selling (M) I wish I could say that this fable oversimplifies this year's Social Security debate in some important way. But it really is that simple, and George W. Bush's proposal -- which calls for putting part of Social Security contributions into individual accounts, without any replacement for the diverted funds -- really is that irresponsible. Because Americans live more than two years, the drama will take longer to play out. Social Security won't go broke for about 30 years, so the victims will be those who are currently middle-aged, not those who are already retired. But the crisis will come much sooner, as the impending disaster becomes obvious. Mr. Bush has made an important political discovery. Really big misstatements, it turns out, cannot be effectively challenged, because voters can't believe that a man who seems so likable would do that sort of thing. In last week's debate Mr. Bush again declared that he plans to spend a quarter of the surplus on popular new programs, even though his own budget shows that he plans to spend less than half that much. (''No fuzzy numbers!'' roared the crowd -- but these are his own numbers.) And he insists that he has a plan to save Social Security, when his actual proposal, as it stands, would bankrupt the system. But aren't there good economists, even experts on Social Security, who support Mr. Bush's proposal? Think of it as a Faustian bargain -- selling their souls not for power or wealth (maybe that too, but that's not my department) but for reform. For there is a good case for Social Security reform -- if we are prepared to pay the price. The current system in effect promises today's workers that future generations will take care of them, just as they are taking care of today's retirees. As a Bush adviser, Martin Feldstein, has pointed out, this makes people feel richer than they really are, leading them to consume too much and save too little. But to fix this problem would take a lot of money -- money to pay off the system's existing obligations. Or to put it differently (making the same point from a different angle): Since the problem with Social Security is that it makes people feel artificially rich, any real reform has to make them feel poorer. But that, of course, is not what Mr. Bush is selling. But it's hard to see how. Try to imagine a victorious Mr. Bush explaining that he has to slash benefits after all, or abandoning his tax cut so that he has enough money to pay for Social Security reform. What is certain is that Mr. Bush's actual Social Security proposal would bankrupt the system. That's not a fuzzy number -- it's a cold, hard fact.
 Sen Joseph Lieberman says Republicans are attacking Vice Pres Gore's character because they are out of touch with majority of Americans and cannot win on issues (S) Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said today that Republicans were attacking Vice President Al Gore's character because they were ''out of touch with the majority of Americans'' and could not win on the issues. ''Maybe folks on the other side know that Al and I are really where America wants to be on the issues,'' he told 400 people here at a forum on higher education, ''so that forces them to resort to the kind of personal attacks that they have on Al Gore.'' Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said today that Republicans were attacking Vice President Al Gore's character because they were ''out of touch with the majority of Americans'' and could not win on the issues. ''Maybe folks on the other side know that Al and I are really where America wants to be on the issues,'' he told 400 people here at a forum on higher education, ''so that forces them to resort to the kind of personal attacks that they have on Al Gore.'' But as the Democrats' own counterpunches turn increasingly personal and harsh -- the Gore campaign mocked Gov. George W. Bush's malapropisms in recent days as ''babbling incoherently'' -- Mr. Lieberman said he would not make such attacks himself. Gore campaign officials have said that the toughest remarks will come from surrogates, allowing the candidates themselves to refrain from the kind of slashing attacks that can sully the attacker as well as the target. When asked if Mr. Bush's command of the issues -- and particularly his occasional difficulty articulating his own positions -- was a legitimate issue, Mr. Lieberman said, ''My feeling is, matters of that kind, the American people should reach their own judgment.'' Still, Mr. Lieberman took a backhanded swipe at the Texas governor in praising Mr. Gore. ''You know, he doesn't have to cram to know who different world leaders are, or the details of our history in the Balkans or Asia or the Middle East or anywhere else,'' he said of Mr. Gore. Mr. Lieberman campaigned today in Minnesota and Washington, states that Democrats have dominated in recent elections, but where polls show Mr. Gore barely ahead.
 Florida Republican party sends out pamphlets to older voters that accuse Al Gore of planning to force the elderly into 'government-run HMO'; Democrats charge misleading attempt to frighten old people (S) In the battle for vote-rich Florida, the state's Republican Party has mailed pamphlets to older Floridians that accuse Vice President Al Gore of planning to force elderly people into a ''government-run drug H.M.O.'' In the battle for vote-rich Florida, the state's Republican Party has mailed pamphlets to older Floridians that accuse Vice President Al Gore of planning to force elderly people into a ''government-run drug H.M.O.'' But Democrats say it is also a sign of what they called desperation on the part of Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican candidate for president. The pamphlet's cover says ''Open Al Gore's proposal, and you'll find . . .'' It opens to the words: ''Two bitter pills to swallow.'' The pamphlet says that not only would Mr. Gore implement a plan that forces the elderly to join a drug H.M.O. that is ''selected by Washington,'' but also that he ''ignores Social Security.'' The pamphlet mirrors the message that Mr. Bush has delivered in Tampa Bay and other enclaves of the elderly, and the same message was the focus of a recent television advertisement shown in the state. Under Mr. Gore's plan, Medicare would add a voluntary prescription drug benefit, for which the elderly would pay a $25 monthly premium; lower income elderly would pay nothing, or a portion of the $25. By contrast, Mr. Bush's plan would allow elderly people to choose among several plans offered by H.M.O.'s or private insurance companies. It reads that ''under Gore, you have only one chance to join -- at age 64 1/2 -- or you are left out forever.'' Under Mr. Gore's proposal, people would have to choose to sign onto the  drug plan, just as they now must choose, at age 64 1/2, whether to sign up for Medicare Part B.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column on upcoming second presidential debate says that Vice Pres Al Gore faces image problem of seeming to be a bullying 'goody-goody'; says Gore is locked into sychopantic Good Son role, while Bush is Prodigal Son who is exceeding expectations (M) Democrats will be holding their breath tonight, hoping Al Gore doesn't release his. Democrats will be holding their breath tonight, hoping Al Gore doesn't release his. Mr. Gore's aides were in a panic about how the imperious, repellent Debate Al seemed to have completely forgotten the sweet, unsmarmy Convention Al. In a ''Clockwork Orange'' moment, desperately trying to condition Mr. Gore against another such unbearable performance, his aides even made him watch the ''Saturday Night Live'' parody of the debate, in which the actor playing the vice president hogs the microphone for a sob story without end, delivered in punctilious tones, and wants to deliver two closing statements. The aides are also working to tone down Mr. Gore's George Hamilton orange glaze. Comics have been lampooning Mr. Gore, in his first face-off with W., as a Teacher's Pet from hell, a filibustering, exaggerating know-it-all and an impatient waiter. We should have realized what a martinet Mr. Gore was when his own daughter, Karenna, told this story in the Spike Jonze documentary that aired during the Democratic convention: Whenever the family watches a video, Mr. Gore insists on rewinding to the beginning if anyone gets up to grab a snack or run to the bathroom, and misses so much as the F.B.I. warning. The problem with Al Gore is not only that he's a goody-goody, but that he's a bullying goody-goody -- an oxymoron that seems a total turn-off to the male voters that Mr. Gore badly needs. He tattles on his rivals, he stretches the truth of his experiences, all in a self-defeating effort to seem even more perfect. Bill Turque, who wrote a Gore biography, says the vice president has been exaggerating for a long time. He liked to say, for instance, that he was responsible for sending people to jail through his crusading work as a reporter at The Tennessean, when in fact no one went to jail, although two city officials were indicted. Bob Zelnick, who also wrote a biography of Mr. Gore, agrees: ''This grew out of his desire to please his demanding father. . . . He has this need to get more acclamation for his good deeds than they warrant.'' Several Democrats told The Times's Richard Berke, as he interviewed voters in Circleville, the pumpkin capital of Ohio, that, believe it or not, they trust Bill Clinton more than Al Gore. The pumped-up vice president's pumped-up behavior at the debate did not transform him into the alpha male he longs to be. ''Clinton has more backbone,''  Walt Seymour, a warehouse worker, told Mr. Berke. ''Gore has never impressed me as being as firm as Clinton.'' If voters are feeling good about bad boys, rascals and scamps, Mr. Bush may benefit. Mr. Gore is locked into the Good Son role, while Mr. Bush is the Prodigal Son. The Good Son, on his dogged climb to success, can often seem like a sycophant. The Prodigal Son, on his circuitous quest, putting his sins behind him, surprising the father who had not expected much, can seem more appealing.
 Mr. Arafat apparently believes that Mr. Clinton, free of the election constraints put on him by the candidacies of Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton, will be better able to serve the Palestinians' needs as a lame duck president.
 Democratic party releases television ad attacking Gov George W Bush's environmental record in Texas; ad described; photo (S) The Democratic Party this week released a television advertisement that attacks Gov. George W. Bush's record on the environment. The Democratic Party this week released a television advertisement that attacks Gov. George W. Bush's record on the environment. Bush campaign officials said the advertisements were part of a ''troubling pattern'' of distortion by Vice President Al Gore. With respect to the environment, the officials said, Governor Bush has strengthened enforcement of the Clean Air Act and helped reduce industrial emissions by 11 percent since 1994. ON THE SCREEN -- The Houston skyline shrouded in smog. An image of Mr. Bush signing papers gives way to smokestacks churning out white clouds, and children's empty swing sets. The Seattle skyline appears and grows hazy. ''As governor, George W. Bush made key air pollution rules in Texas voluntary. Even for some plants near schools. ''Last year, Houston overtook Los Angeles as America's smoggiest city. Now take a deep breath and imagine Seattle with Bush's Texas-style environmental regulation. ''George Bush. Before he talks about cleaning up Washington, maybe he should clean up Texas.'' ACCURACY -- The commercial accurately reports that Houston last year surpassed Los Angeles as the city with the most federal ozone health standard violations in the country. It alludes to the fact that Mr. Bush worked with industry leaders -- and not environmental groups -- to draft an anti-pollution law last year that allowed companies long out of compliance with state standards to pursue licenses voluntarily under relaxed terms. SCORE CARD -- Conservationists say Mr. Bush left himself open to attack by showing little interest in environmental issues until he became a presidential candidate. Mr. Bush, a former oil executive, is hard-pressed to distance himself from some of the state's heaviest polluters, but his supporters insist he has used his ties to reduce certain toxic emissions in a state that is largely skeptical of environmental regulations.
 On the face of it, school vouchers are a polarizing issue this election year, with George W. Bush and free-market conservatives backing them and Al Gore and supporters of public education vehemently opposed. But voucher proposals don't have to lead to partisan deadlock. Limited, moderate voucher plans have shown they can build powerful and unusual alliances. On the face of it, school vouchers are a polarizing issue this election year, with George W. Bush and free-market conservatives backing them and Al Gore and supporters of public education vehemently opposed. But voucher proposals don't have to lead to partisan deadlock. Limited, moderate voucher plans have shown they can build powerful and unusual alliances. The first two voucher plans to gain approval, in Milwaukee and Cleveland, were limited to low-income families and passed with the allied support of white Republicans and African-American Democrats concerned about education in poor neighborhoods. In 1999 in Florida, Gov. Jeb Bush campaigned with a pro-voucher message designed to attract black votes; eventually, the State Legislature passed a voucher program. It was a major selling point that vouchers would go only to students in the most beleaguered schools.
 Al Gore's campaign responds to Republican attacks on his truthfulness and credibility with counterattack that accuses George W Bush and Dick Cheney of having credibility gaps of their own; Democrats charge Cheney told 'real whopper' during vice presidential debate and Bush is being misleading on Social Security (M) Faced with a Republican assault on Vice President Al Gore's truthfulness and credibility, the Gore campaign has mounted a counterattack, accusing Gov. George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, of being the ones with credibility problems. In a series of statements in the last two days, Mr. Gore's aides have used language that almost exactly echoes the Bush campaign's daily challenges to Mr. Gore's trustworthiness. They accused Mr. Cheney of telling ''a real whopper'' in the vice-presidential debate when he said that his wealth had nothing to do with government and of ''distortions'' in describing Mr. Bush's tax cut proposals. Faced with a Republican assault on Vice President Al Gore's truthfulness and credibility, the Gore campaign has mounted a counterattack, accusing Gov. George W. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, of being the ones with credibility problems. In a series of statements in the last two days, Mr. Gore's aides have used language that almost exactly echoes the Bush campaign's daily challenges to Mr. Gore's trustworthiness. They accused Mr. Cheney of telling ''a real whopper'' in the vice-presidential debate when he said that his wealth had nothing to do with government and of ''distortions'' in describing Mr. Bush's tax cut proposals. And Ron Klain, a Gore adviser, said today in a conference call with reporters that Mr. Bush ''is being misleading to the American people'' in how he describes his Social Security proposal. The Gore counteroffensive comes as strategists in both parties acknowledge that perceptions that Mr. Gore embellishes stories have gained traction on the eve of the second presidential debate. The race is now in a statistical dead heat and The Pew Research Center for the People and the Press has found in a new voter survey that recent events, including the first presidential debate, have taken a toll on Mr. Gore when voters are asked about the candidates' likability and honesty. At the same time, the Bush campaign has begun using the charges  about exaggerating and embellishing to try to discredit Mr. Gore's policy proposals and fend off new Democratic television ads that criticize the governor's record in Texas. The Bush campaign today, for example, charged that Mr. Gore ''continued to exaggerate his proposal'' for universal preschool. It said Mr. Gore fails to say his proposal would not apply to 3-year-olds. Mr. Bush has long sought to make character a major issue in this campaign and to link Mr. Gore to the flaws of President Clinton. But Mr. Gore shook off questions about his personality and Mr. Clinton at the Democratic National Convention, by pronouncing himself his ''own man.'' But in the last few weeks and the first debate, Mr. Gore gave the Republicans new openings. At one point in the debate he tried to one-up Mr. Bush by saying he had visited Texas fire victims along with James Lee Witt, the head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. He later said he had made a mistake and had traveled to Texas but not with Mr. Witt. ''The grass has always been very dry under Al Gore when it comes to his habit of embellishing and exaggerating,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''He himself lit the fire when he did it before 35 million Americans.'' Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster, said he thought the focus on Mr. Gore's misstatements was overblown and would ''fade into the ether.'' But he also said Mr. Gore and his aides needed to ''create a situation where they can move on to something else.'' Another Democrat who did not want to be identified said that in a case like this. it was useful to ''muddy the waters'' by echoing the charges of the opposition. The Gore campaign is trying simultaneously to nullify the Bush attacks on credibility and focus on issues that they think favor the Democrats. ''Our focus is on their distortions of major issues that actually impact people's lives,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. Today the Gore campaign put forward Mr. Klain and Alicia Munnell, a former member of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, to argue that Mr. Bush is being misleading on Social Security. They said he was not telling the public that most experts believe a plan like his to put some Social Security payroll taxes into individual investment accounts would have to be accompanied either by cuts in the guaranteed benefit or huge infusions of new money into the program. The Gore camp also said that Mr. Cheney had overlooked many of Mr. Bush's own proposed new tax credits for things like health insurance when he said in the vice-presidential debate ''they like tax credits -- we like tax reform and tax cuts.'' And one line of attack was personal. Two days in a row, citing news and opinion pieces, the Gore campaign said Mr. Cheney was ''not being fully honest'' when he joked in the vice-presidential debate that government had nothing to do with his financial gains after leaving Washington. The Gore camp said Mr. Cheney's contacts from his years in government made him attractive to the Halliburton Company, and they said Halliburton had benefited from financial guarantees from federal  agencies. Mr. Bush's aides and some Republican pollsters said that any Gore attack would not take hold because it does not play into the perceived vulnerabilities of th Republicans. Mr. Fleischer dismissed the charges, saying ''the worse they are doing in the polls the more they exaggerate and make things up.'' White Ayres, a Republican pollster, said the Gore campaign should have tried another tack. ''The accusation isn't going to fly,'' he said. ''They would have been better off counterattacking on anything which voters already suspect is true.''
 When Vice President Al Gore talks about what he would like to do for Americans who have no medical insurance if he is elected president, he more or less suggests that the nation become just like New York State. New York created a program called Child Health Plus, to insure children whose families made too much to qualify for Medicaid but could not afford private insurance, long before the federal government devised just such a plan in 1997. New York has also already taken steps to extend that program to the parents of many of these children, something else Mr. Gore proposes. And the state does something with its program that most states have avoided: it insures children of illegal immigrants with a special pool of nonfederal cash. When Vice President Al Gore talks about what he would like to do for Americans who have no medical insurance if he is elected president, he more or less suggests that the nation become just like New York State. New York created a program called Child Health Plus, to insure children whose families made too much to qualify for Medicaid but could not afford private insurance, long before the federal government devised just such a plan in 1997. New York has also already taken steps to extend that program to the parents of many of these children, something else Mr. Gore proposes. And the state does something with its program that most states have avoided: it insures children of illegal immigrants with a special pool of nonfederal cash.
 Second Debate Brings New Worries for Nominees  Vice President Al Gore's aides have warned him that he had better watch his performance in the second debate tonight and not come on too strong, as many of his advisers said he did the first time. Mr. Gore's advisers said they were worried about a perception from the last debate that he embellished stories. Neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Gore has yet been able to pull ahead in the presidential contest, with each man's weaknesses becoming magnified in the minds of voters, according to five polls out this week. When the polls are averaged, Mr. Bush's support is 45 percent and Mr. Gore's 44 percent. Bush campaign workers in Florida have mailed pamphlets to older Floridians that accuse Mr. Gore of planning to force elderly people into a ''government-run drug H.M.O.''
 Al Gore and George W Bush prepare for second televised debate in presidential campaign; Gore's aides show him tape of Saturday Night Live satire, to encourage him not to appear overbearing; photo; Gore says he has learned, and will sigh less and try not to get details of his stories wrong; aides charge press set higher standard for him and pounced on errors; Bush advisers, who earlier fretted about his potential for goofball image, now appear more confident, although polls still show nagging sense that governor is not as smart as Gore; Bush preparations stress foreign policy matters like Yugoslavia and Middle East, in which Bush is less agile; photos of Gore in Florida and Bush in Tennessee (M) It was not just for fun that aides to Al Gore sat him down yesterday and showed him a parody of last week's presidential debate on ''Saturday Night Live,'' in which the vice president is depicted as an overbearing know-it-all who tried to deliver two closing statements. Mr. Gore's aides said they wanted the message to sink in that he had better watch his performance in the debate tonight and not come on too strong, as many of his advisers said he did the first time. It was not just for fun that aides to Al Gore sat him down yesterday and showed him a parody of last week's presidential debate on ''Saturday Night Live,'' in which the vice president is depicted as an overbearing know-it-all who tried to deliver two closing statements. Mr. Gore's aides said they wanted the message to sink in that he had better watch his performance in the debate tonight and not come on too strong, as many of his advisers said he did the first time. The vice president seemed to get the message. In a round of network television interviews yesterday, Mr. Gore took the unusual step of acknowledging that he made factual errors in the debate and pledged to control his reactions to Gov. George W. Bush. ''I've learned from the first one, I guarantee you,'' Mr. Gore said in one of the interviews, with the Fox News Channel. He added, lightheartedly, ''I think I'll sigh a little bit less in this debate.'' Acknowledging his misstatements, Mr. Gore said he would ''take responsibility for getting some of the details wrong.'' And he pledged, ''I'll try to do better.'' Only a week ago, advisers to Mr. Bush were showering their boss with tips about how to conduct himself against one of the most vaunted debaters in politics. They fretted about Mr. Bush's potential to foster a goofball image of himself, and his coaches let it be known that one meaningless but dangerous gaffe could cause his campaign to unravel. Now, the tables have turned. As the nominees prepare for their encounter in Winston-Salem, N.C., it is Mr. Gore who faces the most scrutiny as he tries not to say or do anything that will cement an image that he puffs up stories and is not to be trusted. Although the polls remain largely as they have been for weeks --  with the race a statistical dead heat -- the numbers have tilted ever so slightly in Mr. Bush's favor since the Boston debate. And while Mr. Gore preferred the traditional style of the debate last week, with two lecterns, the format tonight is one that Mr. Bush fought for: the two candidates and the moderator sitting around a table. Mr. Gore's aides, gathered at a resort in Longboat Key, Fla., for debate rehearsals, acknowledged yesterday to feeling considerable frustration about the news coverage and the polls. They say Mr. Gore demonstrated himself to be superior to Mr. Bush on policy in that first debate. And they complained that the press set a higher standard for Mr. Gore's performance. As a result, they said the news media seized upon and inflated the significance of the exasperation he showed at Mr. Bush's comments and Mr. Gore's acknowledged misstatement about the details of a disaster inspection trip to Texas. The vice president's aides said they were taking steps, large and small, to improve his performance. They even said that more care would be taken with Mr. Gore's makeup, which made him appear coated with rouge. While a week ago Mr. Gore went out of his way to portray himself as relaxed and confident before the first debate, yesterday the Bush campaign assumed that role. ''No new makeup, no new clothes, no new nothing,'' said Mark McKinnon, Mr. Bush's top media adviser. ''We're dancing with who brung us.'' That does not mean all is smooth for Mr. Bush: Because he performed better than many expected in last week's encounter, now the expectations are higher for the Texas governor. And Mr. Bush still has to worry about a nagging sense among many voters found in polls that he is not as swift as Mr. Gore and not as steeped in policy. Some Republicans said they were nervous because the debate was likely to delve into raging foreign policy matters like Yugoslavia and the Middle East in which Mr. Bush is less agile than Mr. Gore. In a mock debate at Mr. Bush's Texas ranch on Sunday, there was a particular emphasis on foreign policy. The advisers who attended the prep session included three of his top foreign policy advisers, Paul D. Wolfowitz, Robert B. Zoellick and Condoleezza Rice. On Monday night, Mr. Bush held a session in the governor's mansion in Austin on foreign policy alone. Gore aides said they hoped that just as Mr. Bush had benefited from low expectations last week, Mr. Gore's shortcomings in the first debate may lower the bar for him on the remaining two. They maintained that it would be easier for Mr. Gore to correct his problems, which primarily concern personality, than for Mr. Bush to demonstrate a presidential command of the issues. ''I think it's easier to stop sighing than to understand domestic and foreign policy,'' said one Gore aide, who added that the vice president ''is relaxed and knows what he needs to fix.'' Mr. Gore's advisers said they were optimistic that the round-table format, though requested by the Bush campaign, would work to Mr. Gore's benefit by discouraging the candidates from attacking and thus keeping the focus more on issues. ''Format does affect demeanor,'' one aide said. ''It's much harder to rip someone's lungs out when you're that close to them.'' The aides said Mr. Gore was well aware of his weaknesses. They emphasized that their understanding from the producers of the first debate was that there would be no cutaway camera shots of the candidate who was not speaking at the moment. ''That doesn't excuse the breathing, but that's what we were told,'' said one aide. Indeed, some Gore aides have humorously taken to greeting reporters and each other with exaggerated sighs. To reinforce the point, Mr. Gore's aides have shown him selected excerpts of his performance in the first debate. And they showed him a tape of the ''Saturday Night Live'' skit, which surgically mocked Mr. Bush as well as the vice president. In the parody, Mr. Bush, asked to sum up his campaign with a single word, blurts, ''Strategary.'' Mr. Gore's character repeatedly used the word ''lockbox.'' ''He thought it was hilarious,'' one Gore aide said. But the aide said Mr. Gore also recognized that the skit demonstrated that the image of his exasperation had taken root in the popular culture. Mr. Bush's aides said the governor did not watch the skit but that his aides joked about it with him. Since neither side declared outright victory after the first debate, both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore may feel pressure tonight to be more aggressive. In the third debate there will be even less opportunity to point to each other's weaknesses because the format will include questions from citizens. The risk of attacking, of course, is that the candidates could appear mean-spirited. ''This is really the last opportunity they will have face to face to draw sharp comparisons,'' said Alan Schroeder, a journalism professor at Northeastern University who is an authority on presidential debates. ''They could go either way.'' Noting that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush will be sitting close to each other, he added, ''They could go negative or they might find themselves intimidated by their proximity into backing off in the way the vice-presidential candidates found themselves doing.'' Mr. Bush's advisers, acknowledging that there were points in the first debate when the governor could have responded more cogently to Mr. Gore's criticism of his proposals, said the governor was sharpening his rebuttals. They made clear that Mr. Bush was not about to shrink from taking on Mr. Gore, if need be. ''The governor will set the record straight,'' said Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist. ''But he'll handle it in an appropriate way.'' He added, ''the Gore campaign is clearly panicking here.'' ''Gore needs to come from his heart and not his head, and stay away from stretching the truth even one inch,'' he said. ''Bush has got to dig down and search his soul to focus on what he truly believes in about issues he doesn't have experience with. He can't only talk about education.'' Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas will debate tonight in the second of three encounters between the two presidential candidates. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATES  Correction:  October 12, 2000, Thursday  A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's debate preparation misstated the day on which his aides showed him a tape of a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody of his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. It was Monday, not Tuesday. A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's debate preparation misstated the day on which his aides showed him a tape of a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody of his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. It was Monday, not Tuesday.
 Neither George W Bush nor Al Gore has yet been able to pull ahead in presidential campaign, even as their weaknesses become magnified in minds of voters; Bush has edge in three new national polls, Gore in two, but both are well within sampling error range; graph (M) Neither Gov. George W. Bush nor Vice President Al Gore has yet been able to pull ahead in the presidential campaign, with each man's weaknesses becoming magnified in the minds of voters, according to five national polls out this week. Mr. Bush has the edge in three of the surveys, Mr. Gore in two, but they are well within each poll's sampling error. In general, according to the polls, Mr. Bush, the Republican candidate, is seen as more affable than Mr. Gore, while Mr. Gore, the Democratic nominee, is seen as more capable than Mr. Bush. Neither Gov. George W. Bush nor Vice President Al Gore has yet been able to pull ahead in the presidential campaign, with each man's weaknesses becoming magnified in the minds of voters, according to five national polls out this week. Mr. Bush has the edge in three of the surveys, Mr. Gore in two, but they are well within each poll's sampling error. In general, according to the polls, Mr. Bush, the Republican candidate, is seen as more affable than Mr. Gore, while Mr. Gore, the Democratic nominee, is seen as more capable than Mr. Bush. When the polls are averaged, Mr. Bush's support is 45 percent, Mr. Gore's 44 percent, with Ralph Nader and Patrick J. Buchanan at less than 5 percent each. One survey, a CBS News poll, found Mr. Bush's voters to be somewhat more enthusiastic than Mr. Gore's, though each man's supporters express reservations about their chosen candidate. In that nationwide telephone poll taken Friday through Monday, with 687 likely voters, Mr. Bush is backed by 42 percent, Mr. Gore by 43 percent, Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate, by 4 percent and Mr. Buchanan, the Reform party nominee, by 2 percent. The effect of the first presidential debate between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore is unclear. While the polls indicate that a plurality of voters said Mr. Gore won the debate, which was held on Oct. 3, that does not appear to have translated into any appreciable new support for Mr. Gore. The Pew Research Center began its poll on Oct. 4, the day between the presidential and vice presidential debates, and ended it on Sunday. In that poll of 722 likely voters, Mr. Bush had the support of 45 percent of the voters, Mr. Gore 44 percent, Mr. Nader 5 percent and Mr. Buchanan less than 1 percent. The poll was conducted by Princeton Survey Research Associates, which also conducted a poll for Newsweek. The Newsweek poll was also begun between the debates but ended before the weekend. The poll of 636 likely voters, taken Wednesday through Friday, put Mr. Bush at 43 percent, Mr. Gore at 44 percent, Mr. Nader at 6 percent and Mr. Buchanan at 1 percent. The standard poll was conducted by Yankelovich Partners for Time Magazine and CNN, on Wednesday and Thursday, with 636 likely voters. Mr. Bush was the choice of 47 percent of the respondents, Mr. Gore, 45 percent, Mr. Nader, 4 percent and Mr. Buchanan, 1 percent. That poll, which had shown a lead of nine percentage points for Mr. Gore before the debates, showed an eight-point lead for Mr. Bush earlier this week. Now, the poll shows Mr. Bush with a three-point edge over Mr. Gore, 47 percent to 44 percent, with Mr. Nader and Mr. Buchanan, respectively, garnering 3 percent and 1 percent.
 George Bush has the distinction of ordering the largest presidential limousine ever made. ''Bush wanted to be seen in the biggest car imaginable,'' Mr. Brinkley said. ''It was 263 inches, with a 7.5-liter V-8 engine and C-6 auto transmission. Compare that to Truman's Lincoln Continental, at 145 inches. It was called the Bushmobile.'' As for the next president, Al Gore or George W. Bush, their driving habits appear to be the opposite of their public personas. Despite a famous drunken incident in Washington in 1973, when he drove along the street late at night dragging a clanking garbage can, Mr. Bush is known as a sturdy, cautious driver with a penchant for nondescript cars. ''When he drove down to Midland, Tex., he was driving a 1970 Cutlass, which was really worn out,'' said Elizabeth Mitchell, who wrote ''W: Revenge of the Bush Dynasty.'' ''His friends used to make fun of him for it. There's actually no indication that he was a wild driver. He is a guy who was extremely spontaneous and wild in many ways, but driving was not one of the examples.'' Mr. Gore, whose perceived stolidity and goody-goody nature plagued his presidential quest before he started to loosen up, is actually the wilder of the two drivers. ''In his early days in Congress, he had kind of a lead foot,'' said Bill Turque, a Newsweek columnist and author of ''Inventing Al Gore: A Biography.'' ''Tom Luken, the Ohio congressman, told me that they were at this event at the Four Seasons in Georgetown. They got word that they had 15 minutes to get back to the House for a vote. Well, Luken says, 'We have no chance to do this, there's rush-hour traffic.' Gore says, 'Watch me,' and jumps into the car, invoking the tradition that allows members of Congress to break traffic rules if it's on a vote.''
 But the new T-Bird may already be making its mark. Over the summer, The New York Observer commissioned the satiric artist Drew Friedman to caricature Vice President Al Gore and United States Senator Joseph I. Lieberman at the Democratic National Convention. He showed them both wearing sunglasses and in a red Thunderbird with the top down, the giant Hollywood sign in the background.
 George W Bush lands on Al Gore's Tennessee doorstep, and charges opponent has spent so much time in Washington that he has lost touch with home state (S) Gov. George W. Bush landed on his opponent's doorstep today, at least politically speaking, to portray Vice President Al Gore as someone who had spent so much time in Washington that he had lost touch with voters even in his home state. Bolstered by a recent poll that showed Mr. Bush with a slight but statistically insignificant advantage here, he made a barbed joke about the fact that Mr. Gore might not be able to count on a victory in Tennessee, which he represented for 16 years in Congress. Gov. George W. Bush landed on his opponent's doorstep today, at least politically speaking, to portray Vice President Al Gore as someone who had spent so much time in Washington that he had lost touch with voters even in his home state. Bolstered by a recent poll that showed Mr. Bush with a slight but statistically insignificant advantage here, he made a barbed joke about the fact that Mr. Gore might not be able to count on a victory in Tennessee, which he represented for 16 years in Congress. ''I know I'm not supposed to carry it,'' Mr. Bush told several thousand cheering people at a rally in an airport hangar here. ''They tell me, 'You know, Tennessee's all wrapped up. After all, the man used to live here.' '' ''He used to call this state home,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But it seems like it was so long in the distant past, he forgot to trust the people of Tennessee. He forgot what it's like to be out here with the hard-working people.'' As he did last week, when he traveled to West Virginia on the day before the first debate, Mr. Bush was again drawing attention to a state where the vice president seems to be performing below expectations. It was a way to cast Mr. Gore as an unappealing contender, even though polls suggest that the two candidates are running neck and neck. To further rib Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush alluded to a June news report about tenants of Mr. Gore's in Carthage, Tenn., who said that their frequent complaints about overflowing toilets and clogged sinks had been ignored. Mr. Gore subsequently promised to have the necessary repairs made. ''Tennessee is a fine place to live,'' Mr. Bush told the crowd today. ''I guess it, though, depends who your landlord is.'' The audience's laughter filled the hangar, which sported signs that read, ''No More Gore'' and ''A Gore-Free Tennessee.'' The Bush campaign's communications director, Karen P. Hughes, also roasted Mr. Gore as she talked about the debate, clearly seeking to direct voters' attention to some of the foibles and quirks that he exhibited in the candidates' previous face-off. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said that the coach had been with Mr. Gore since the primaries. He added that Mr. Bush ''should bring in a magician'' to help him sell his claim that his policies would benefit Americans more. At the Tennessee rally, Mr. Bush offered his first public response to the newly aggressive Democratic campaign to dissect and disparage his record in Texas. ''I understand that my opponent is fixing to go down to Texas, or somebody on his team is, and kind of try to tear down our state,'' Mr. Bush said in a genial, what-else-would-you-expect voice. ''Come on down! We welcome the talk about the Texas record, because it's a state where both Republicans and Democrats have worked together.'' Mr. Bush returned again and again to the promise that he would be able to find common ground for Republicans and Democrats. His campaign released a long list of Democrats from around the country who were supporting Mr. Bush, and several of them -- including Griffin B. Bell, who served as the United States attorney general under President Jimmy Carter -- appeared with Mr. Bush today. But Mr. Bush hammered hardest at his sustained assertion that Mr. Gore's proposals favored federal mandates over individual autonomy, which he said reflected the fact that Mr. Gore was ''of Washington, for Washington and by Washington.'' By contrast, Mr. Bush said: ''We want to free the people of this great country. And that's why things are going well in Tennessee, because we stand on the side of the people of this great state, whether they be Republican or Democrat or open-minded independent.''
 So it is not surprising that though abortion rights have been constitutionally protected for a generation, the political and cultural battle over this issue rages undiminished 27 years after Roe v. Wade. As Vice President Al Gore said in his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush, the issue of abortion rights ''is on the ballot in this election, make no mistake about it.'' It emerged as a point of difference in the vice-presidential debate and the one on Sunday between Hillary Rodham Clinton and Rick Lazio in the Senate race in New York, and is animating Congressional and state legislative races across the nation. So it is not surprising that though abortion rights have been constitutionally protected for a generation, the political and cultural battle over this issue rages undiminished 27 years after Roe v. Wade. As Vice President Al Gore said in his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush, the issue of abortion rights ''is on the ballot in this election, make no mistake about it.'' It emerged as a point of difference in the vice-presidential debate and the one on Sunday between Hillary Rodham Clinton and Rick Lazio in the Senate race in New York, and is animating Congressional and state legislative races across the nation. The two presidential candidates have starkly different positions. Mr. Gore, who early in his political career opposed federal funding for abortion, now supports federal funding and is resolutely pro-choice. Mr. Bush is pro-life, though he seems eager to avoid extended debate on this matter so as not to alienate moderate voters. Mr. Gore says he will appoint justices who will respect women's reproductive rights. Mr. Bush, who says he will not impose a pro-life litmus test on a Supreme Court nominee, cites Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas as his models. Both justices believe the Roe decision was wrong and should be overturned. The president's power in this arena is not limited to Supreme Court appointments. Veto threats by President Clinton have killed several measures in Congress to limit abortion rights, and his pro-choice stance has also helped to curb efforts to restrict access to contraception. Just last week a bill was introduced in the House to severely restrict the use of RU-486, the abortion pill recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Mr. Gore has said he fully supports the F.D.A. decision on the drug. Mr. Bush, however, has questioned the F.D.A.'s review process. Although he has said he cannot overturn the approval, he might have to decide whether to sign or veto a bill to deny vast numbers of women access to the drug.
 The Republicans, and Gov. George W. Bush, have a 2 to 1 advantage in cash on hand over the Democrats and Vice President Al Gore. Party officials said today that the Republicans had about $50 million in the bank and the Democrats had $25 million. The money will go to issue advertising and get-out-the-vote efforts between now and the Nov. 7 election. For their part, Democratic Party officials, who in the past have criticized the $100 million raised by Governor Bush's campaign, said they had actually narrowed the wide financial gap enjoyed in past election years by the Republicans. ''We would never enter, or win, a money race with the Republican Party because that is not what our party is all about,'' said Jenny Backus, press secretary for the Democratic National Committee. ''However, we have enjoyed tremendous success and momentum, thanks to the excitement surrounding the Gore-Lieberman ticket and our positive, substantive vision for the future.'' Last week in Boston, more than 150 fund-raisers attended a dinner at the Palm restaurant and then headed to the auditorium to watch the first debate between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush.
 Voters in Circleville, Ohio, in middle of one of most competitive states in presidential race, express same considerable doubts about both George Bush and Al Gore that they had when campaign began; photos (M) Joan Rovy, 75, a retired secretary here, usually votes for Democrats. But she said she just could not commit herself to Vice President Al Gore. Joan Rovy, 75, a retired secretary here, usually votes for Democrats. But she said she just could not commit herself to Vice President Al Gore. Joseph Ewing, 34, a firefighter, usually votes for Republicans. But after watching Gov. George W. Bush of Texas tackling a foreign policy question in the debate last week, he said he was not sure what to do. ''He's inexperienced,'' Mr. Ewing said. ''He was having trouble even in the debate when they were asking him the Yugoslavia question.'' The theme that emerged was that Mr. Bush had yet to inspire great confidence, while Mr. Gore was still fighting the impression that he cannot be trusted. The uncertainty is not unique to Circleville, a working-class community that is roughly split between Republicans and Democrats and is known far and wide for its annual pumpkin festival and the gigantic pumpkin-shaped water tower that looms over the roughly 12,000 residents. Even among the voters nationwide who support Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore, 4 in 10 have reservations about their candidate, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll. Four years ago, only 3 in 10 expressed reservations about the nominees. In their second debate, in Winston-Salem, N.C., on Wednesday, the contenders will seek to allay the voters' lingering doubts. But judging from the interviews in this town about 30 miles south of Columbus, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have a tough sell. When asked about Mr. Gore, the first response of voter after voter -- even some supporters -- was that he has trouble telling the truth. Voters raised the matter themselves with no prompting. They seemed to be reacting to the instances in last week's debate, or the news coverage of it, in which Mr. Gore embellished events. Mr. Gose, who owns the Pumpkin Patch Farm Market, said he planned to vote for Mr. Bush. But he is hardly thrilled with the Republicans. ''You don't see Bush signs around here,'' he noted. Toni Lewis, 44, a bus driver, said she would probably vote for Mr. Gore because as vice president ''he's already in the spot where he can take over.'' But she was deeply troubled by how Mr. Gore presented himself. Ms. Lewis's friend John Peele, 46, a prison worker, piped in, saying Mr. Gore would be more acceptable than Mr. Bush, who he said was ''not capable of taking over the country.'' Fred Brown, 65, a retired minister who backed Ross Perot four years ago, said he was so put off by Mr. Gore that he would probably back Mr. Bush. ''He's got his dad to lean back on,'' Mr. Brown said. ''I can't stand the lying man. I embellish, but I can get away with it. I'm not running for president.'' Unlike the sentiments expressed about the vice president, not one overriding concern about Mr. Bush  stood out with voters. Still, many expressed reservations about him, the most common being whether he had sufficient depth of knowledge or experience to be president. ''Gore seemed a lot more intelligent to me than Bush,'' Jason Overly, 24, an electrician, said of the debate. ''Gore seems superior. That's very important. You have to be smart to be president.'' Rob Dolby, 24, who owns a collectibles business, said he was torn over whom to vote for, and may even end up with Mr. Bush, but was distressed by the governor's use of vulgar language to describe a reporter. ''Bush made those comments off the cuff,'' he said. ''It was a slip-up. But you want a kind of godly guy in office.'' ''I'll probably vote for Gore because Bush won't raise the minimum wage,'' said Walt Seymour, a warehouse worker in his 40's. ''But Clinton has more backbone. Gore has never impressed me as being as firm as Clinton. I didn't vote for him because he had sex. I don't care if he's gay. I voted for him because he's a good president.'' Republicans are not enamored of Mr. Bush, either. Many said after watching the vice-presidential debate that they would favor Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, over Mr. Bush himself. ''I watched the debate and I thought Gore was more comfortable than Bush,'' said Robert Alphin, 48, a highway equipment operator, who is not sure whom to vote for. ''They're both about the same.'' The politician who impressed Mr. Alphin most -- and seemed far more in command of issues than Mr. Bush -- was Mr. Cheney. Mr. Alphin said he liked Mr. Cheney's delivering his answers in the vice-presidential debate by looking directly at the moderator ''instead of talking to the TV screen.'' Like many interviewed, he did not remember the name of Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. Mr. Alphin's suggestion: ''There should be a Gore-Cheney ticket. They'd probably win in a landslide!'' If he ends up voting for Mr. Bush, Mr. Lutz said, ''it's not that I like Bush so much'' but that Mr. Gore is not genuine. ''My problem with Gore is I don't know which Gore he is today,'' he said. ''Each time he appears he's somebody a little different.'' Ned R. Young, 80, a retired electrical engineer, said he was backing Mr. Bush because he was tired of paying high taxes. ''I've watched my taxes go from $340 a year to $1,400 a year,'' Mr. Young said. ''Bush will do a better job on leadership. Bush said in the debate he would be better able to work with Democrats and Republicans in Congress. I never heard Gore make that statement.'' Without prompting, Mr. Young mentioned how Mr. Bush often mangled words. ''I'm not worried about how people speak,'' he said. ''That's a picky, picky thing.'' Down the street, Mary K. May, 84, a retired geography teacher, who has lived in a white brick house at Franklin and Washington Streets for 76 years, sounded more lukewarm about Mr. Bush. Both candidates, she complained, were obsessed with soliciting voters for donations. ''Bush is more honest, more reasonable, even though he doesn't have the experience Gore has had the last eight years,'' Michael Smith, 32, an engineer, said over lunch at Goodwin's Family Restaurant. But sounding hardly thrilled by the prospects, Mr. Smith added, ''It seems like I can't say I'm proud of my government.''
