 Two new Republican National Committee commercials attacking Vice Pres Al Gore for proposing budget Republicans say would turn projected surpluses into deficits assessed (M) The Republican National Committee released two new commercials this week attacking Vice President Al Gore for proposing a budget that it asserted would turn projected surpluses into deficits and endanger the nation's prosperity. The advertising is part of an effort by the Republicans to put Mr. Gore on the defensive over his proposals for new spending and to neutralize any advantage that the strong economy might give Mr. Gore. It also tries to blunt Mr. Gore's attacks on Mr. Bush's tax plan, which Democrats say disproportionately favors the wealthy. The Republican National Committee released two new commercials this week attacking Vice President Al Gore for proposing a budget that it asserted would turn projected surpluses into deficits and endanger the nation's prosperity. The advertising is part of an effort by the Republicans to put Mr. Gore on the defensive over his proposals for new spending and to neutralize any advantage that the strong economy might give Mr. Gore. It also tries to blunt Mr. Gore's attacks on Mr. Bush's tax plan, which Democrats say disproportionately favors the wealthy. One of the commercials focuses exclusively on the scale of Mr. Gore's spending plans. The other contrasts Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan with Mr. Gore's spending proposals. ON THE SCREEN -- Opens with a white screen and the words ''Whose economic plan is best for you?'' Then flashes to a screen with a chart labeled ''Bush: Tax Cut Plan,'' showing how people at various income levels would do under Mr. Bush's proposal. Next comes a chart comparing the spending proposals made by President Clinton with those made by Mr. Gore. Concludes with text on a white screen saying that Mr. Gore's plan would undermine the economy. THE SCRIPT -- Announcer: ''Whose economic plan is best for you? Under George Bush's plan, a family earning under $35,000 a year pays no federal income taxes, a 100 percent tax cut. Earn $35-50,000? A 55 percent tax cut. And Al Gore's plan? Three times the new spending President Clinton proposed, so much it wipes out the entire surplus and creates a deficit again. Al Gore's deficit spending plan threatens America's prosperity.'' ACCURACY -- The chart describing the effects of the Bush tax plan is somewhat misleading. Many families making less than $35,000 a year already pay no federal income taxes. Mr. Bush's plan would remove more of them from the income tax rolls, mainly by doubling the child credit. But the claims in the commercial are based on a family with two children; single people and families with fewer than two children would not fare as well. The assertion that Mr. Gore is proposing three times the spending sought by Mr. Clinton is based on a comparison of the 1992 Clinton campaign's agenda with Mr. Gore's proposals this year. Mr. Clinton made his proposals at a time when the government was running a record budget deficit and was constrained from expanding or adding programs. Mr. Gore is proposing ways to allocate a large and growing surplus. The comparison is based on a study by the National Taxpayer's Union, a conservative research group, which says Mr. Gore's spending plans total $2.9 trillion over 10 years. Mr. Gore puts the number at between $870 billion and $1 trillion. SCORE CARD -- Mr. Bush has sought to frame the debate as one about who would best take advantage of the nation's prosperity, rather than about who gets the credit for it. The new advertising is intended to suggest that Mr. Gore is an old-style tax-and-spend liberal who will squander the surplus, while emphasizing that Mr. Bush is giving a tax break to lower and middle income families. But the more that Mr. Bush pushes economic issues, the more he risks reminding voters that the country has rarely, if ever, had it this good.
 Today Mr. Clinton joined hundreds of Americorps volunteers in Philadelphia to expound on the service program's importance. He publicized a letter from 49 governors, including Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, backing it.
 Theory and Practice in Drug Plans  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush both agree that elderly citizens should have government-subsidized prescription drug insurance. But both of their proposals deviate from the ideal model of economic insurance, which would seem to prescribe catastrophic coverage with a deductible and co-payment. Alan B. Krueger: Economic Scene. [C2.]
 Correction of Oct 11 article, which misstated date on which Vice Pres Al Gore's campaign aides showed him tape of television parody of his first debate with Gov George W Bush A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's debate preparation misstated the day on which his aides showed him a tape of a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody of his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. It was Monday, not Tuesday. A front-page article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's debate preparation misstated the day on which his aides showed him a tape of a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody of his first debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. It was Monday, not Tuesday.
 University of Wisconsin political science professors, commenting on second presidential debate, describe it as vastly different from first debate; see Gov George W Bush as winner; Prof Charles O Jones says conversational format worked hardship on Gore; Prof Kenneth Goldstein holds Bush fought Gore to draw, which is bad for Gore; Prof Virginia Sapiro holds format disabled Gore to degree; Prof David Cannon says both appeared to do what they had to do; photo (M) But is that so this year? The initial encounter between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush produced a highly unusual impact, if the polls are accurate; Mr. Gore ''won'' the debate, in the view of voters, but Mr. Bush picked up more ground in the race for the White House. That is such an equivocal judgment that it may prove tentative. It may well remain open to major revision almost until Election Day, now less than four weeks off. But is that so this year? The initial encounter between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush produced a highly unusual impact, if the polls are accurate; Mr. Gore ''won'' the debate, in the view of voters, but Mr. Bush picked up more ground in the race for the White House. That is such an equivocal judgment that it may prove tentative. It may well remain open to major revision almost until Election Day, now less than four weeks off. If Wisconsin voters are as malleable this year as they have shown themselves to be in the past, there was much tonight that might have prompted rethinking -- especially as regards style. While the candidates broke little new substantive ground, Mr. Gore seemed much less preachy and Mr. Bush seemed less perplexed when confronted with detailed queries on foreign policy, speaking with apparent ease about past crises in Nigeria, Haiti and the Balkans. Four professors of political science at the University of Wisconsin, commenting on the debate at the request of The New York Times, described it as vastly different, in many respects, from the candidates' initial meeting. In varying degrees, they described Mr. Bush as this evening's winner. Dr. Charles O. Jones, professor emeritus of political science, said the conversational format worked a hardship on Mr. Gore, because ''it's hard for a fighter to sit down.'' ''I thought Bush did very well,'' Professor Jones said. ''There's no longer any stature gap between the two of them. I also thought Bush looked more presidential tonight.  What he had to do was show command, and he did it. As he said, the presidency is not just the president; it's a team, and I was very impressed by how well Governor Bush's team has prepared him on foreign policy, how well he absorbed it and how skillfully he used it. He did that as well on several of the complicated domestic issues.'' On the other hand, Professor Jones said, Mr. Gore did not fully ''establish his personal authenticity.'' Prof. David Cannon said: ''This was certainly very different in tone, and there was a remarkable lack of major disagreements, especially at first. Some that exist were not brought out, like affirmative action, where they're on diametrically opposed sides. But both appear to have done what they had to do. Bush was quite articulate on foreign affairs -- he named names, he discussed policies -- and the vice president was friendlier, less condescending.'' It was not so much that the nominees backed away from previous policy divergences; they made their differences on health care and gun control just as clear as in the past.  Mr. Gore criticized Mr. Bush's record in Texas, and Mr. Bush again painted his opponent as a creature of Washington and big government. But for the most part they cloaked their differences in polite language. ''Bush fought him to a draw,'' said Prof. Kenneth Goldstein. ''He didn't get blown away on foreign policy, not at all, which I thought he would.  That's bad for Gore. Bush mangled a few verbs and a few ideas. But it comes down in the end to who you think this election is about, and for whatever reason, it's about Al Gore.  He has to connect. But he hasn't, and it's not enough just to show that he would have won a debate when they were in high school.'' ''Gore's handlers got him to sit back and relax,'' Professor Sapiro said. ''But that is a very hard style for him, because he's an aggressive, hard-hitting debater by nature, and I thought the change disabled him to a certain degree. Bush looked a lot more certain and a lot stronger this time, and he was funny, too.'' When Mr. Gore speaks in Milwaukee at midday tomorrow, it will be his sixth appearance in Wisconsin in the general-election campaign. Mr. Bush has been here six times, too.  Both parties continue to advertise heavily here. But Mr. Bush later discussed the Middle East in some detail, showing a surer hold on specifics than he did in talking about foreign affairs last week. Mr. Gore, for his part, refrained from the superciliousness that he had exhibited as Mr. Bush dealt with the several subjects last week. That had grated on many voters. Both men were careful not to slam the other's point of view, something that the voters dislike; indeed, they sounded courtly at times. Almost 40 uninterrupted minutes were devoted to foreign policy, much more than in any other presidential debate in the last few electoral campaigns. Though the two men clearly disagreed on the worth of nation-building missions, Mr. Bush said the discussion sounded at times like ''a love fest.'' Each made small, sometimes ironic jokes that reinforced the sense of good will and lowered the political temperature. Because Mr. Bush is much less experienced in foreign policy, the fact that Mr. Gore often said he agreed with Mr. Bush on many points may have redounded to the governor's advantage.
 Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee for president, is a critic of the pharmaceutical industry and has said brand-generic agreements unfairly deny consumers the benefits of competition. His Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has not addressed this specific issue, but the pharmaceutical industry has been generally supportive of his candidacy. Whatever the law's shortcomings, however, it has benefited consumers. A study last year, done for a generic company by Paul MacAvoy, a Yale University economist who advised Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush, found that from 1985 to 1997, consumers saved $112.5 billion by buying generic drugs.
 Gore and Bush Meet In 2nd Campaign Debate  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, seated side-by-side, agreed more than they disagreed in a subdued and generally cordial debate on foreign policy and domestic matters like racial profiling, gun control and same-sex marriage.
 Editorial holds Gov George W Bush may have gained more than Vice Pres Al Gore from kinder, gentler atmosphere of second presidential debate; notes he strove to look smarter and Gore to be less off-putting; sees Gore gambling that he will gain in long run with voters inclined toward him on issues but troubled by his officious manner Like two students dutifully taking a makeup exam, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush tried earnestly and politely last night in their second debate to make a better impression on Americans than they did the first time. Their goals were obvious. Mr. Bush wanted to look smarter, and Mr. Gore, chastened by criticism over the last week, wanted to be less off-putting. Both succeeded, but at first blush the Texan may have gained more from the kinder, gentler atmosphere. Mr. Bush thrived in the low-intensity environment, appearing markedly more confident and sure-footed than he had in the past. But Mr. Gore could get a payoff in the days ahead. He had clearly made a bet that by abandoning his bullying tactics of the first debate, he might gain in the long run with voters inclined toward him on issues but troubled by his officious manner. In the foreign policy sphere Mr. Gore was, as ever, more in command of the details. But Mr. Bush came across as solid and better briefed on the issues than he was last week. Indeed, the governor's misgivings about using American troops on ''nation-building'' missions framed the discussion. His cautious approach gave Mr. Gore a chance to promote his more muscular, interventionist view to deal with genocide and other humanitarian crises. He described the nation-building feared by Mr. Bush as within the tradition of American foreign policy since the days of the Marshall Plan in Europe after World War II. Like two students dutifully taking a makeup exam, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush tried earnestly and politely last night in their second debate to make a better impression on Americans than they did the first time. Their goals were obvious. Mr. Bush wanted to look smarter, and Mr. Gore, chastened by criticism over the last week, wanted to be less off-putting. Both succeeded, but at first blush the Texan may have gained more from the kinder, gentler atmosphere. Mr. Bush thrived in the low-intensity environment, appearing markedly more confident and sure-footed than he had in the past. But Mr. Gore could get a payoff in the days ahead. He had clearly made a bet that by abandoning his bullying tactics of the first debate, he might gain in the long run with voters inclined toward him on issues but troubled by his officious manner. In the foreign policy sphere Mr. Gore was, as ever, more in command of the details. But Mr. Bush came across as solid and better briefed on the issues than he was last week. Indeed, the governor's misgivings about using American troops on ''nation-building'' missions framed the discussion. His cautious approach gave Mr. Gore a chance to promote his more muscular, interventionist view to deal with genocide and other humanitarian crises. He described the nation-building feared by Mr. Bush as within the tradition of American foreign policy since the days of the Marshall Plan in Europe after World War II. The exchanges came in a relatively informal setting at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C. Mr. Bush had sought a more casual venue as a better showcase for his personal charm, and indeed he seemed to grow in confidence as the debate wore on. ''Seems like we're having a great love fest here tonight,'' he remarked, almost as if amused at the way Mr. Gore seemed to be on good behavior -- ''defanged,'' as some commentators put it. The vice president, conscious of the need to avoid being overbearing or committing trivial errors, at times did not look like his normal self, and it changed the chemistry of the encounter. Only at the end did he address the subject explicitly. Mr. Bush, in answer to a question about his opponent's credibility, repeated the charge that Mr. Gore had engaged in exaggerations and falsehoods. The vice president parried the accusation, acknowledging that he had gotten ''some of the details'' wrong about a student's having to stand for lack of desks but that his larger contention about overcrowded classrooms remained correct. As to the overarching question of his reliability, Mr. Gore insisted that even if he got details wrong, ''if I'm elected president, I'll work my heart out to get the big things right for the American people.'' The shift of emphasis toward more discussion of foreign policy issues was obviously dictated by events. Except for a general criticism that the Clinton administration had been too quick to intervene in Haiti and other places, Mr. Bush did not level major criticisms at Mr. Gore. He noted, however, that the coalition against Saddam Hussein of Iraq had unraveled since the end of the gulf war, prompting Mr. Gore to observe dryly that it was the administration of President Bush, the governor's father, that had left Mr. Hussein in power. The candidates' polite demeanor lifted somewhat when they sparred over health care and the environment. Mr. Gore charged that Texas was either 49th or 50th in extending health care to uninsured women and children, failing to take advantage of the federal child health insurance program. Noting the governor's claims to be compassionate, the vice president sharply declared that he was not challenging Mr. Bush's ''heart'' so much as his priorities. Mr. Bush fired back that on the Clinton-Gore watch the number of uninsured Americans had increased, and that the vice president ''can make any excuse he wants.'' The debate occurred at a moment of almost exquisite closeness in the presidential contest. Several recent polls have shown Mr. Bush slightly ahead of Mr. Gore, his best showing since before the Democratic convention in Los Angeles in August. A lot will depend on the public's final impressions of the debate last night, rather than on the flash polls and post-debate spin. Last week many voters thought Mr. Gore had ''won'' on substance but lost on style. The underlying truth is that while most Americans have made up their minds about the candidates and their positions, enough voters are uncertain about the measure of these two men to keep the race unpredictable. It may stay that way until the very end.
 George W Bush's record as Texas governor plays central role in presidential debate as Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore clash over state's problems (M) Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas played a central role in tonight's presidential debate as the governor and Vice President Al Gore clashed over the state's problem of uninsured residents, its environment and a hate crimes bill that failed to pass the State Legislature in 1999. Mr. Gore, who has criticized Mr. Bush's record in Texas on and off for months, prompted the most heated exchange when he cited statistics that rank the state at the bottom or near it in several national health indexes, including having 1.4 million uninsured children, among them about 600,000 who are eligible for Medicaid but are not yet enrolled in it. Mr. Gore said Texas ranked 49th in the number of uninsured women and children. Asked by the moderator, Jim Lehrer, whether Mr. Gore's statistics were inaccurate, Mr. Bush did not directly respond, instead emphasizing his administration's recent enrollment of roughly 110,000 uninsured children in the federal Child Health Insurance Program, or CHIP, and its overall spending of $4.7 billion on the uninsured in Texas. Mr. Bush also said that the percentage of uninsured Texans compared with the state's total population had gone down while the percentage of uninsured Americans had risen. Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas played a central role in tonight's presidential debate as the governor and Vice President Al Gore clashed over the state's problem of uninsured residents, its environment and a hate crimes bill that failed to pass the State Legislature in 1999. Mr. Gore, who has criticized Mr. Bush's record in Texas on and off for months, prompted the most heated exchange when he cited statistics that rank the state at the bottom or near it in several national health indexes, including having 1.4 million uninsured children, among them about 600,000 who are eligible for Medicaid but are not yet enrolled in it. Mr. Gore said Texas ranked 49th in the number of uninsured women and children. Asked by the moderator, Jim Lehrer, whether Mr. Gore's statistics were inaccurate, Mr. Bush did not directly respond, instead emphasizing his administration's recent enrollment of roughly 110,000 uninsured children in the federal Child Health Insurance Program, or CHIP, and its overall spending of $4.7 billion on the uninsured in Texas. Mr. Bush also said that the percentage of uninsured Texans compared with the state's total population had gone down while the percentage of uninsured Americans had risen. ''You can quote all the numbers you want,'' Mr. Bush replied, ''but I'm telling you, we care about our people in Texas.'' These problems, of course, predate Mr. Bush and can be traced to a host of causes, including the state's historic poverty levels, particularly along the border with Mexico. But Mr. Bush's administration has been criticized as failing to do enough to address health concerns. During the 1999 legislative session, Mr. Bush lobbied to limit the coverage levels for the federal CHIP program to children with family incomes of 150 percent of the poverty line, though the federal law allowed coverage of up to 200 percent of poverty. Ultimately, the lawmakers approved the higher level, thereby providing coverage for 200,000 children who would have been excluded under Mr. Bush's proposal. The governor signed the bill into law. On the environment, Mr. Gore noted that Houston has ''just become the smoggiest city in the country, and Texas is No. 1 in industrial pollution.'' Mr. Bush countered that while Texas is ''a big industrial state,'' it had reduced its industrial waste by 11 percent since he took office in 1995. He also noted that the state had cleaned up 450 formerly polluted industrial sites since then. Mr. Bush referred to a 1999 electric deregulation law that included a stipulation that utilities must make mandatory reduction in their emissions of nitrogen oxide, one of the building blocks of smog. Mr. Bush signed this bill, but his emphasis during that session was another bill that created a voluntary program to bring outdated petrochemical plants into compliance. These plants, more so than utilities, are the state's leading industrial polluters. Environmentalists have criticized this law as ineffective, and one group reported this month that it had amounted to reductions of less than 1 percent of emissions since 1999. Mr. Bush has argued that the cuts are greater. Mr. Gore criticized Mr. Bush for not supporting an expanded and toughened hate crimes bill before the Texas Legislature last year. Mr. Bush replied, ''We're happy with our laws on the books.'' The measure to which Mr. Gore referred, the most contentious issue  before the Legislature in 1999, was named after James Byrd Jr., the black man who was dragged to death in Jasper, Tex., a year earlier. Mr. Bush never said during the legislative session whether he would have signed the proposed legislation, but he did not push for its adoption. In the debate tonight, Mr. Bush declared that the three men convicted of killing Mr. Byrd had been sentenced to death. In fact, two received the death penalty and one was sentenced to life in prison.
 As a practical matter, the fate of the rules may rest with the outcome of the national election. While neither Vice President Al Gore nor Gov. George W. Bush has outlined his views on the rules, the issue has split largely along party lines.
 Alan B Kruger's 'Economic Scene' column says Vice Pres Al Gore's plan for government-subsidized prescription drug insurance is very expensive but would provide protection against escalating prescription drug costs and skirt the problem in drug insurance market known as 'adverse selection'; says Gov George W Bush's plan is less expensive but probably unworkable; graph (M) ONE of the few things that Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush agree on is that elderly citizens should have government-subsidized prescription drug insurance. The Gore plan is much more generous and gives more details than the Bush plan, but both proposals deviate from the ideal model of economic insurance. The reasons reveal as much about politics as they do about economics. ONE of the few things that Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush agree on is that elderly citizens should have government-subsidized prescription drug insurance. The Gore plan is much more generous and gives more details than the Bush plan, but both proposals deviate from the ideal model of economic insurance. The reasons reveal as much about politics as they do about economics. So the candidates have devised voluntary plans that offer subsidized premiums to entice people to buy coverage. Mr. Gore would subsidize half the premium and Mr. Bush 25 percent. Many experts question whether Mr. Bush's subsidy is sufficiently generous to attract enough people to avoid crippling adverse selection problems. Instead of a deductible, Mr. Gore's plan would reimburse beneficiaries for 50 percent of their first $2,000 (rising to $5,000 in 2008) of drug costs a year; none of their next $3,000 ($1,500 in 2008); and all of the rest. No participant would ever have to pay more than $4,000 out of pocket. Why tilt benefits to the front end and put the deductible in the middle? To attract enough older people -- who do not always act rationally when it comes to insurance -- and thereby skirt the problem of adverse selection. Almost everyone receives some reimbursement under the Gore plan because more than 85 percent of older people take at least one prescription drug annually. The politics are such that ''the principle of making sure the median participant would benefit mattered more than the principles of optimal insurance,'' said Mark McClellan, a professor of economics and medicine at Stanford University who worked on the Clinton-Gore plan. But front-loading benefits attracts participants at a high cost. Congressional Budget Office figures imply that the front-end coverage accounts for about two-thirds of gross outlays in President Clinton's proposal, a close cousin of Mr. Gore's plan. Mr. Bush would initially hand off drug insurance for the poor elderly to the states -- a responsibility many governors don't want. (For a candidate running against ''big government,'' this approach has the curious effect of creating 50 government bureaucracies.) Most elderly people who lack insurance have incomes above 150 percent of the poverty line, so they would be unaffected by this part of the plan anyway. Mr. Bush said he would form a White House task force to devise a proposal that relies on private insurance plans, a government plan and H.M.O.'s to cover all the elderly. The voluntary sorting of the elderly with high expenses into the most generous plans would probably cause this market to eventually unravel. Mr. Bush also said he would seek catastrophic coverage for all out-of-pocket Medicare costs, including drugs, in excess of $6,000 a year, paid for by unspecified cuts elsewhere in Medicare. Although the instinct to provide catastrophic coverage is a good one, it is doubtful enough could be cut from Medicare to finance it. ''An elderly person cannot possibly know what situation they would be in if Bush won and got his current ideas passed into law,'' said Uwe Reinhardt, a health economist at Princeton University. Bismarck, the father of social insurance, was fond of paraphrasing Voltaire: the best should not be the enemy of the good. The Gore plan is very expensive but it would provide protection against escalating prescription drug costs and solve adverse-selection problems; the Bush plan is less expensive but probably unworkable. In this case, the best would be for the elderly to recognize that the goal of insurance is to provide a cushion against unexpected catastrophes, not a regular check for anticipated expenses.
 Analysis of foreign policy issues raised in presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; both candidates seem to see little electoral advantage in fighting over issue, with each politely warning of foreign entanglements they might avoid; Gore portrays self as interventionist Democrat; Bush seems reluctant internationalist (M) For the better part of a year now, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have gingerly stepped around much detailed discussion of how America should exercise its unchallenged economic, diplomatic and military power around the world. For the better part of a year now, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush have gingerly stepped around much detailed discussion of how America should exercise its unchallenged economic, diplomatic and military power around the world. Mr. Gore portrayed himself as the interventionist Democrat, the man who would be driven largely by ''a question of values'' and who would consider an act of genocide enough of a challenge to American interests to consider sending troops abroad. He stopped short, however, of saying the Clinton administration should have done so to stop the genocide in Rwanda six years ago. Mr. Bush was the reluctant internationalist, the man who allowed that ''we've got to do a lot of work in Africa to promote democracy and trade'' and then insisted that America should keeps its troops out of Africa and Haiti, or anyplace else where the mission sniffed of ''nation-building.'' He never defined that phrase, but he made clear that he thought the purpose of the American military was to fight wars, not rebuild countries. And in Mr. Bush's world view, America's traditional allies mattered far more than remote, poor or strategically inconsequential nations. ''There's got to be priorities,'' he said, ticking off the Middle East, Europe, the Far East and ''our own hemisphere,'' a list that conspicuously omitted Africa and many of the world's poorest nations. ''I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say, 'This is the way it's got to be,' '' Mr. Bush said, sounding much like the Democrats sounded in the aftermath of the Vietnam War. Later he added, ''I just don't think it's the role of the United States to walk into a country, say, ' We do it this way; so should you.' '' That left Mr. Gore free to sound more like the Republicans of two decades ago -- certain that America's role is to make others in the world exercise their long-suppressed desire to ''be like us more.'' He described himself, as he did in an interview last week, as a nation-builder and proud of it. Once again, he invoked President Harry S. Truman's use of the Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe, seeming to suggest that it was the kind of role Mr. Bush would have opposed. ''We were nation-building,'' Mr. Gore said. ''And it was economic, but it was also military.'' Pressed by the moderator, Jim Lehrer, about when they would have committed troops and when they would have backed off, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush politely quibbled. But these  were quibbles with a deeper message that suggested significantly different standards of when American intervention makes sense. Lebanon, where American marines died in a huge car-bomb blast? ''I thought that was a mistake,'' Mr. Gore said. Grenada, where President Ronald Reagan, in the name of saving American medical students, made a clumsy but successful stand against a tiny government that seemed to be defying American wishes and influence? ''I supported that,'' he said, along with the Bush administration's ouster of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's dictator. But he had second thoughts about Somalia, a decision of ''the Bush-Quayle administration,'' he said, unable to avoid reference to one of the Republican Party's less admired vice presidents. Mr. Bush, treading carefully, had problems with Somalia, too, not the mission his father began but the one President Clinton finished. Later, pressed about where he might pull back American forces, which he said were overcommitted, Mr. Bush had a hard time. He would keep them in Korea, he said, and in Europe. But he also said he would hand off peacekeeping to other, regional players; he cited Australia's role last year in East Timor as a superb example of where someone else provided the troops while the Pentagon gave advice and a bit of logistical help. He said he would like to withdraw American troops from the Balkans, but not immediately. The only place he named from which he would withdraw troops at once was Haiti, where there are only a handful. Governor Bush may have left viewers with the incorrect impression that the United States is alone in maintaining ground troops to keep the peace in Bosnia and Kosovo. The dynamic of the interventionist Mr. Gore and the more reluctant Mr. Bush also played out beyond the military realm. As on other foreign policy issues, the two men gingerly approached the question of when America should put up its own money, or the International Monetary Fund's, to stop financial crises. Here, Mr. Bush was more specific. Yet that is exactly what the I.M.F. and the United States Treasury did in Mexico, an intervention that was supported by Mr. Bush, whose home state, Texas, would have borne the brunt of a more severe Mexican economic collapse. Without noting that Mr. Gore had been the architect of much of the Clinton administration's Russia policy, Mr. Bush charged that the administration had blindly lent to corrupt regimes. ''We went into Russia,'' he said. ''We said, 'Here's some I.M.F. money,'  and it ended up in Viktor Chernomyrdin's pocket.'' He referred to the former Russian prime minister, who was Mr. Gore's counterpart in long negotiations over Russian reforms. Mr. Gore was clearly on the defensive, and said he was uncomfortable with the I.M.F. ''I've seen them make some calls that I thought were highly questionable,'' he said, without giving specifics. Mr. Bush chose not to answer, at least directly.
 Transcript of second presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; photo (L) Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night in Winston-Salem, N.C., between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS. Welcome to this second Election 2000 debate between the Republican candidate for president, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the Democratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore. These debates are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The format and the rules are those negotiated by representatives of the two campaigns. Only the subjects tonight and the questions are mine. The format tonight is that of a conversation. The only prevailing rule is that no single response can ever, ever exceed two minutes. The prevailing rule for the audience here in the hall is, as always, absolute quiet, please. Good evening Governor Bush, Vice President Gore. At the end of our 90 minutes last week in Boston, the total time each of you took was virtually the same. Let's see if we can do the same tonight, or come close. Governor Bush, the first question goes to you. One of you is about to be elected the leader of the single most powerful nation in the world, economically, financially, militarily, diplomatically, you name it. Have you formed any guiding principles for exercising this enormous power? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Let's go through some of the specifics now. New question, Vice President Gore. The governor mentioned the Middle East. Here we're talking at this stage in the game about diplomatic power that we have. What do you think the United States should do right now to resolve that conflict over there? MR. LEHRER -- So you don't believe, Vice President Gore, that we should take sides in this and resolve this right now? A lot of people are pushing -- hey, we, the United States, should declare itself and not be so neutral in this particular situation. MR. GORE -- Well, when I got to be a part of the current administration it was right after I was one of the few members of my political party to support former President Bush in the Persian Gulf war resolution. And at the end of that war, for whatever reasons, it was not finished in a way that removed Saddam Hussein from power. I know there are all kinds of circumstances and explanations. But the fact is that that's the situation that was left when I got there. And we have maintained the sanctions. Now I want to go further. I want to give robust support to the groups that are trying to overthrow Saddam Hussein. And I know there are allegations that they're too weak to do it. But that's what they said about the forces that were opposing Milosevic in Serbia. And you know, the policy of enforcing sanctions against Serbia has just resulted in a spectacular victory for democracy just in the past week. And it seems to me that having taken so long to see the sanctions work there building upon the policy of containment that was successful over a much longer period of time against the former Soviet Union in the Communist bloc, it seems a little early to declare that we should give up on the sanctions. I know the governor's not necessarily saying that, but you know, all of these flights that have come in, all of them have been in accordance with the sanctions regime, I'm told, except for three, where they notified. And they're trying to break out of the box, there's no question about it. I don't think they should be allowed to. MR. GORE -- Well, of course, in that, again -- no, I think that that was ill considered. I did support it at the time. It was in the previous administration, in the Bush-Quayle administration, and I think in retrospect the lessons there are ones that we, that we should take, take very, very seriously. MR. LEHRER -- And Bosnia and you've already talked about Kosovo. But the reverse side of the question, governor, that Vice President Gore mentioned, for instance, 600,000 people died in Rwanda in 1994. There was no U.S. intervention, there was no intervention from the outside world. Was that a mistake not to intervene? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, do you agree with -- with the governor's views on nation-building, the use of military, our military to -- for nation-building as he described it then defined it? MR. LEHRER -- First, a couple of follow-ups from the vice presidential debate last week. Vice President Gore, would you support or sign as president a federal law banning racial profiling by police and other authorities at all levels of government? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- New subject in question, Vice President Gore. How do you see the connection between controlling gun sales in this country and the incidence of death by accidental or intentional use of guns? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Let me put that directly to you, Vice President Gore. The reason you brought this up is that, are you suggesting that those numbers and that record will reflect the way Governor Bush will operate in this area of health insurance as president? MR. LEHRER -- New question. New subject. Vice President Gore, on the environment, in your 1992 book you said ''We must make the rescue of our environment the simple organizing principle for civilization and there must be a wrenching transformation to save the planet. Do you still feel that way? MR. BUSH -- A brownfield is an abandoned industrial site that just sits idle in some of our urban centers. And people that are willing to invest capital in the brown fields don't want to do so for fear of law suit. I think we ought to have federal liability protection, depending upon whether or not standards have been met. Book you mentioned that Vice President Gore wrote, he also called for taxing, big energy taxes in order to clean up the environment. And now that the energy prices are high, I guess he's not advocating those big energy taxes right now. MR. LEHRER -- Last question for you, governor, and this flows somewhat out of the Boston debate. You, your running mate, your campaign officials have charged that Vice President Gore exaggerates, embellishes and stretches the facts, etc. Are you -- do you believe these are serious issues, this is a serious issue that the voters should use in deciding which one of you two men to vote for on Nov. 7? MR. BUSH -- Well, we all make mistakes. I've been known to mangle a syllable or two myself, you know. But you know what I mean. I think credibility is important. It's going to be important to be -- for the president to be credible with Congress, important for the president to be credible with foreign nations. And, yes, I think it's something that people need to consider. This -- this isn't something new. I read a report or a memo from somebody in his 1988 campaign -- I forgot the fellow's name -- warning then-Senator Gore to be careful about exaggerating claims. And, you know, I thought during his debate with Senator Bradley, saying he altered the E.I.T.C. when it didn't happen. I mentioned the last -- MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- Gentlemen, it's time to go to the closing statements and Vice President Gore, you have two minutes. MR. GORE -- Jim, one of the issues that I would like to close with in my statement is education, because it's an example of the overall approach that I think is important. This race is about values, it's about change, it's about giving choices to the American people. And education is my No. 1 priority because I think that it's the most important big, major change that we can bring in our country. I agree with Governor Bush that we should have new accountability, testing of students. I think that we should require states to test all students, test schools and school districts and I think that we should go further and require teacher testing for new teachers also. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. Thank you Vice President Gore, Governor Bush. See you next week. Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night in Winston-Salem, N.C., between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS. Welcome to this second Election 2000 debate between the Republican candidate for president, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the Democratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore. These debates are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The format and the rules are those negotiated by representatives of the two campaigns. Only the subjects tonight and the questions are mine. The format tonight is that of a conversation. The only prevailing rule is that no single response can ever, ever exceed two minutes. The prevailing rule for the audience here in the hall is, as always, absolute quiet, please. Good evening Governor Bush, Vice President Gore. At the end of our 90 minutes last week in Boston, the total time each of you took was virtually the same. Let's see if we can do the same tonight, or come close. Governor Bush, the first question goes to you. One of you is about to be elected the leader of the single most powerful nation in the world, economically, financially, militarily, diplomatically, you name it. Have you formed any guiding principles for exercising this enormous power? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Let's go through some of the specifics now. New question, Vice President Gore. The governor mentioned the Middle East. Here we're talking at this stage in the game about diplomatic power that we have. What do you think the United States should do right now to resolve that conflict over there? MR. LEHRER -- So you don't believe, Vice President Gore, that we should take sides in this and resolve this right now? A lot of people are pushing -- hey, we, the United States, should declare itself and not be so neutral in this particular situation. MR. GORE -- Well, when I got to be a part of the current administration it was right after I was one of the few members of my political party to support former President Bush in the Persian Gulf war resolution. And at the end of that war, for whatever reasons, it was not finished in a way that removed Saddam Hussein from power. I know there are all kinds of circumstances and explanations. But the fact is that that's the situation that was left when I got there. And we have maintained the sanctions. Now I want to go further. I want to give robust support to the groups that are trying to overthrow Saddam Hussein. And I know there are allegations that they're too weak to do it. But that's what they said about the forces that were opposing Milosevic in Serbia. And you know, the policy of enforcing sanctions against Serbia has just resulted in a spectacular victory for democracy just in the past week. And it seems to me that having taken so long to see the sanctions work there building upon the policy of containment that was successful over a much longer period of time against the former Soviet Union in the Communist bloc, it seems a little early to declare that we should give up on the sanctions. I know the governor's not necessarily saying that, but you know, all of these flights that have come in, all of them have been in accordance with the sanctions regime, I'm told, except for three, where they notified. And they're trying to break out of the box, there's no question about it. I don't think they should be allowed to. MR. GORE -- Well, of course, in that, again -- no, I think that that was ill considered. I did support it at the time. It was in the previous administration, in the Bush-Quayle administration, and I think in retrospect the lessons there are ones that we, that we should take, take very, very seriously. MR. LEHRER -- And Bosnia and you've already talked about Kosovo. But the reverse side of the question, governor, that Vice President Gore mentioned, for instance, 600,000 people died in Rwanda in 1994. There was no U.S. intervention, there was no intervention from the outside world. Was that a mistake not to intervene? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, do you agree with -- with the governor's views on nation-building, the use of military, our military to -- for nation-building as he described it then defined it? MR. LEHRER -- First, a couple of follow-ups from the vice presidential debate last week. Vice President Gore, would you support or sign as president a federal law banning racial profiling by police and other authorities at all levels of government? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- New subject in question, Vice President Gore. How do you see the connection between controlling gun sales in this country and the incidence of death by accidental or intentional use of guns? MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. LEHRER -- Let me put that directly to you, Vice President Gore. The reason you brought this up is that, are you suggesting that those numbers and that record will reflect the way Governor Bush will operate in this area of health insurance as president? MR. LEHRER -- New question. New subject. Vice President Gore, on the environment, in your 1992 book you said ''We must make the rescue of our environment the simple organizing principle for civilization and there must be a wrenching transformation to save the planet. Do you still feel that way? MR. BUSH -- A brownfield is an abandoned industrial site that just sits idle in some of our urban centers. And people that are willing to invest capital in the brown fields don't want to do so for fear of law suit. I think we ought to have federal liability protection, depending upon whether or not standards have been met. Book you mentioned that Vice President Gore wrote, he also called for taxing, big energy taxes in order to clean up the environment. And now that the energy prices are high, I guess he's not advocating those big energy taxes right now. MR. LEHRER -- Last question for you, governor, and this flows somewhat out of the Boston debate. You, your running mate, your campaign officials have charged that Vice President Gore exaggerates, embellishes and stretches the facts, etc. Are you -- do you believe these are serious issues, this is a serious issue that the voters should use in deciding which one of you two men to vote for on Nov. 7? MR. BUSH -- Well, we all make mistakes. I've been known to mangle a syllable or two myself, you know. But you know what I mean. I think credibility is important. It's going to be important to be -- for the president to be credible with Congress, important for the president to be credible with foreign nations. And, yes, I think it's something that people need to consider. This -- this isn't something new. I read a report or a memo from somebody in his 1988 campaign -- I forgot the fellow's name -- warning then-Senator Gore to be careful about exaggerating claims. And, you know, I thought during his debate with Senator Bradley, saying he altered the E.I.T.C. when it didn't happen. I mentioned the last -- MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. LEHRER -- Gentlemen, it's time to go to the closing statements and Vice President Gore, you have two minutes. MR. GORE -- Jim, one of the issues that I would like to close with in my statement is education, because it's an example of the overall approach that I think is important. This race is about values, it's about change, it's about giving choices to the American people. And education is my No. 1 priority because I think that it's the most important big, major change that we can bring in our country. I agree with Governor Bush that we should have new accountability, testing of students. I think that we should require states to test all students, test schools and school districts and I think that we should go further and require teacher testing for new teachers also. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. Thank you Vice President Gore, Governor Bush. See you next week.
 Most riveting is the voice of the warden, simply because of his position. When Gov. George W. Bush's office calls Huntsville and authorizes that day's execution, it is the warden who goes to the cell and says, ''It's time.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush use second presidential debate as exercise in image repair and improvement; Gore's quest for softer, warmer, more truthful touch reflects acknowledgment of where he erred in first debate; Bush seeks to show comfort with complicated information president should master (M) For Vice President Al Gore, the second presidential debate was basically an act of contrition, a sustained and sometimes lightly self-mocking acknowledgment of where he had gone wrong the first time around. Almost every boast was qualified, every criticism carefully tempered. After saying that people all around the world admired the United States, Mr. Gore quickly added, ''I don't think that's just the kind of exaggeration that we take pride in as Americans; it's really true.'' For Vice President Al Gore, the second presidential debate was basically an act of contrition, a sustained and sometimes lightly self-mocking acknowledgment of where he had gone wrong the first time around. Almost every boast was qualified, every criticism carefully tempered. After saying that people all around the world admired the United States, Mr. Gore quickly added, ''I don't think that's just the kind of exaggeration that we take pride in as Americans; it's really true.'' Before hitting Gov. George W. Bush with statistics that denigrated his record in Texas, he looked and sounded pained and self-effacing, as if he wished he did not have to do this and could only hope he was getting it right. Across the table, Mr. Bush was rummaging through a trove of big words. He talked about not letting the American military ''atrophy.'' He expressed concern over any ''abrogation'' of agreements with allies. And he found something ''egregious''  twice in about five minutes. He also went through a roll call of Middle Eastern countries, naming ''Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait.'' With geographic chops like these, Mr. Bush seemed to be asking voters, how could anyone doubt his capacity for world leadership? Mr. Bush even mentioned Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former prime minister of Russia, without having to, and managed to pronounce his name correctly. For all the serious talk about serious issues, what the candidates engaged in tonight was largely an exercise in image repair and image improvement. Mr. Gore sought a softer, warmer, more truthful touch. Mr. Bush sought an aura of comfort, not distress, with all the complicated information a president must, or at least should, master. Answering questions from the moderator, Jim Lehrer, about foreign policy, Mr. Bush adopted a tone so calm, content and convivial he might have been reminiscing with a grandmother about favorite holiday memories. Mr. Gore's televised odyssey of forensic self-correction was apparent from the first television shot of him: he bore no resemblance to a pumpkin. At last week's debate, because of  an unfortunate makeup error, Mr. Gore had sported an orange complexion. But tonight, it was replaced by a more appropriate, life-like hue. He was obviously eager to shed his reputation in some quarters as a bully, so he repeatedly prefaced efforts to box Mr. Bush into various corners with apologetic caveats like: ''Maybe I heard the previous statements wrong, governor.'' He was just as obviously intent on not monopolizing the speaking time, so Mr. Gore responded to a suggestion from Mr. Lehrer that another rebuttal yield to a new topic of debate by chirping: ''Far be it from me to suggest otherwise.'' He even offered a frank, forthright apology for his factual errors from a week ago, complete with an almost hangdog stutter. ''I -- I'm sorry about that,'' Mr. Gore said. ''And I -- I -- I'm going to try to do better.'' And the sigh master was gone, allowing a different purveyor of awkward nonverbal utterances to emerge. Enter Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush seemed to have a cold, and his failure at times to suppress his sniffles and snorts was perhaps an unintended byproduct of what he was trying to accomplish. He clearly wanted to seem so utterly comfortable with the thrust and parry that his demeanor banished any sense among voters that he might be out of his depth. He was also aiming for notes of naturalness that Mr. Gore could only fantasize about. As for seriousness, the Texas governor's effort to convey that began when he first sat down. There was a pen and several sheets of paper in front of him, and he conspicuously scribbled faster and longer than Mr. Gore, who was undoubtedly happy to let Mr. Bush one-up him in this department. An exchange with Mr. Lehrer toward the end was the clearest indication of Mr. Bush's agenda. Mr. Bush made reference to the initials ''E.I.T.C.,'' prompting a request from Mr. Lehrer that he explain the reference. ''Earned income tax credit,'' Mr. Bush said, subsequently adding, in a self-satisfied vein: ''A lot of initials for a guy who's not from Washington, isn't it?'' So Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore made little, mincing shows of respect for each other. ''It seems like we're having a great love-fest tonight,'' Mr. Bush remarked at one point, an assessment with which Mr. Lehrer seemed to agree. He was forced, time and again, to ask the candidates if they might take the time and trouble to specify what their differences were, because they were so often sounding so much alike. This was the kind of utterly tame affair in which Mr. Gore, at one juncture, could actually be heard to say: ''I also believe in the golden rule.'' But there was acid just under the surface, and it occasionally bubbled up. Mr. Gore made a point of referring to the ''Bush-Quayle'' administration, cunningly evoking with that second name a politician, like the Texas governor, who was ridiculed for his verbal unsteadiness. Mr. Bush just so happened to evoke ''Mrs. Clinton,'' circa 1993, when she was pressing a health plan that included more federal control than most Americans wanted. He tied Mr. Gore to her, and the careful viewer could sense the barely suppressed chortle as he did so. Mr. Gore stared back at Mr. Bush icily. But he did not respond with a sigh, and he did not lapse into a lecture, and he did not even seize this dastardly claim of Mr. Bush's as an excuse to ask for more speaking time.
 Some analysts have suggested that Microsoft wants to draw out the legal battle in the hope of getting a more sympathetic ear in the White House if George W. Bush takes over the presidency in January. The Justice Department's case, which will be heard by a panel of seven appellate judges, will ultimately be supervised by the next administration. Nineteen states are also plaintiffs in the case.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush meet in televised campaign debate; agree more than they disagree in event that is often closer to cordial conversation than debate; heed advise not to put off voters by seeming strident; many of questions by moderator, Jim Lehrer, are on issues on which they have few differences; Gore, late in debate, questions Bush's record in Texas and Bush holds Gore's tendency to embellish raises credibility questions; Gore apologizes for previous misstatements; photos (M) Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore agreed more than they disagreed last night in an event  that was often closer to a cordial conversation than a debate as they exchanged views on tense foreign conflicts and domestic matters like  racial profiling, gun control and same-sex marriage. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore agreed more than they disagreed last night in an event  that was often closer to a cordial conversation than a debate as they exchanged views on tense foreign conflicts and domestic matters like  racial profiling, gun control and same-sex marriage. But last night, breaking with their campaigns' scathing commercials and their own oratory, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush were respectful, and at times even complimentary. The civility prompted Mr. Bush to volunteer at one point that it seemed ''like we're having a great love-fest tonight.'' [Transcript, Page A22.] Not until the last 15 minutes of the evening did the candidates grow slightly combative, with Mr. Gore questioning Mr. Bush's record as governor of Texas, and Mr. Bush asserting that the vice president's tendency to embellish raised questions about his credibility. That prompted the vice president to take the unusual step of apologizing for his previous misstatements. Even when they did clash, the jabs were cloaked in decorous tones. At one point, Mr. Gore, who was hardly bashful at deriding his rival in the first debate, seemed to almost apologize when he turned to Mr. Bush and said of health care proposals in Texas: ''I'm sorry to tell you, there is a record here.'' But their exchanges showed Mr. Gore to be more willing to use American force to intervene in regional conflicts. The vice president said that a case of genocide almost automatically engaged American interests and that it was appropriate for troops to stay on to help ensure a democratic transition -- a use of American power that Mr. Bush derided as ''nation-building.'' For example, Mr. Gore supported American intervention in Haiti, which Mr. Bush characterized as a mistake. Mr. Bush sought to present himself as a statesman by repeatedly saying he agreed with many of the administration's decisions. He also tried to demonstrate that he was as conversant on such matters as Mr. Gore, who has been at the center of many of the nation's most crucial decisions about international affairs. Mr. Bush made clear that he was strongly against sending troops and resources into failed states. In a nod to the nearly two weeks of bloodshed in Israel, Mr. Bush said, ''I think during the campaign, particularly during this difficult period, we ought to be speaking with one voice. And I appreciate the way the administration has worked hard to calm the tensions.'' Mr. Bush, like Mr. Gore, often spoke in generalities about his foreign policy philosophy. ''If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us,'' Mr. Bush said of people outside this country. ''If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us.'' Mr. Gore emphasized his involvement in foreign policy and described a much more activist and broader moral mission for the United States in the plight of other countries. Just as they did when they took the stage in Boston last week, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore confronted a frustrating and even tormenting reality when last night's debate began: while Mr. Bush has edged up slightly, he and the vice president are mired in a race that is a statistical dead heat. If for no other reason, the stakes in this debate were even greater than in last week's because Election Day is only 26 days away. The third and final debate is next Tuesday in St. Louis. In many ways, the candidates sought to dispel the same critiques and stereotypes that have plagued them in the campaign. Mr. Bush sought to show that he was no bumbler and that he could comfortably navigate the ins and outs of policy, particularly foreign affairs. Mr. Gore, who is well known as a policy maven, tried to demonstrate that he was a likable politician and not an unappealing brawler. He succeeded in halting the audible sighs that marked his performance last week; in a contrast to last week, he at times nodded affirmatively when Mr. Bush was speaking. At times, there was a marked contrast between Mr. Gore's seeming efforts to restrain himself from appearing belligerent and Mr. Bush's relaxed, even expansive, demeanor near the end of the encounter. Over all, the feel and the format of last night's debate seemed decidedly more casual than the first one. For one thing, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush had already endured the drill once before. But the setting was somewhat more intimate. Rather than stand at lecterns, the candidates sat at a table with Mr. Lehrer. The Bush campaign had pressed for the format in the debate negotiations. Mr. Bush's aides said he was far more comfortable in a more conversational format. It was the first time participants in a presidential debate sat at a table in that format. Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush had blocked hate crimes legislation, and he asserted that the governor presided over a state that ranked last in health insurance for families. ''Texas ranks 49th out of the 50 states in children with health care,'' Mr. Gore said, ''49th for women with health care and 50th for families with health care.'' For his part, Mr. Bush said the vice president had fought for a government-run health care system in the first two years of the Clinton administration. ''That was fortunately stopped in its tracks,'' Mr. Bush said. Governor Bush said Mr. Gore was ''absolutely wrong'' if he was trying to suggest that Mr. Bush was a hard-hearted person who did not care about children. Mr. Bush acknowledged that a  health insurance program for children ''got a late start'' in Texas. But, he insisted, ''we're reducing the number of uninsured as a percentage of our population'' in Texas, while the comparable figure is increasing nationally. Mr. Gore said he was not questioning the purity of Mr. Bush's heart, but challenging his priorities and values. In Texas, Mr. Gore said, Mr. Bush ''opposed a measure put forward by Democrats in the Legislature to expand the number of children that would be covered, and instead directed the money toward a tax cut, a significant part of which went to wealthy interests.'' On the question of Mr. Gore's embellishments, Mr. Lehrer asked Mr. Bush if he thought the vice president did indeed ''stretch the facts,'' and whether that was something the voters ought to consider. ''We all make mistakes,'' Mr. Bush responded. ''I have been known to mangle a syl-ABBLE or two myself.'' The deliberate mispronunciation was, of course, an allusion to several word gaucheries Mr. Bush has committed of late, and it brought a flurry of laughter. Turning suddenly serious, Mr. Bush said a president's credibility is important, both at home and abroad, and is something the voters should consider. ''This isn't something new,'' he said of Mr. Gore, bringing up a memorandum from the latter's short 1988 presidential campaign in which a staff aide warned him to stick to the facts. Looking back to their first debate, Mr. Gore admitted that he had tripped himself up on some facts. ''I got some details wrong, and some examples,'' he said. ''I'm sorry about that, and I'm going to try to do better.'' In one area where both candidates seemed to agree, Mr. Gore said he would support legislation to ban racial profiling. And he repeated a pledge that his first act as president would be to issue an executive order banning the practice. Mr. Bush agreed but added that he did not want to ''federalize'' the local police. ''It's very important that we not overstep our bounds,'' he said. But in a sharp moment reminding viewers of his firm enforcement of the death penalty, Mr. Bush pointed to the racially motivated murder of James Byrd, a black man dragged to his death in East Texas in June 1998. Mr. Gore then politely suggested that Mr. Bush was blurring his stance on hate-crimes legislation, saying that the governor had barred such legislation in Texas. Both candidates said they opposed marriages for gays and lesbians. ''I'm not for gay marriage,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I think marriage is a sacred institution between a man ad a woman.'' Mr. Gore agreed, but then added, ''I think we should find a way to allow some kind of civic unions.'' He invoked Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, who in the vice-presidential debate last week joined Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, in sounding tolerant of such unions. Mr. Bush said he was not sure what kind of view Mr. Gore was describing, and added, ''I can just tell you, I'm a person who respects other people.'' The vice president also expressed his support for legislation to prevent gays and lesbians from being fired from their jobs because of their sexual orientation and asked the governor to lend his support. Mr. Bush replied, ''I don't know the particulars of this law.'' On gun control, Mr. Gore said he would ''not do anything that would affect the rights'' of hunters or sportsmen or homeowners seeking to protect their families. Mr. Gore said assault weapons were a particular problem. He said he favored closing the gun show loophole, for which he cast a deciding vote in the Senate. The Congress has failed to complete action on the bill, he said. Mr. Gore said the government should strengthen enforcement of gun laws, keep schools gun free and issue child safety trigger locks on mandatory basis. Mr. Bush echoed the importance of enforcing gun laws, saying criminals must know with ''certainty'' that they will be punished for using a weapon illegally. He said he supported instant background checks at gun shows. Texas has been an innovator, Mr. Bush said, in distributing free trigger locks. On the environment, an issue that has fascinated Mr. Gore for years, the vice president was asked whether he stood by his earlier statements that environmental protection should be the central priority in the new century. He said he did, explaining, ''I think that in this 21st century, we will soon see the consequences of what's called global warming. What's happening is the level of pollution is increasing, significantly.'' THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW  Correction:  October 13, 2000, Friday  An article yesterday about the debate on Wednesday between Vice President Al Gor e and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas misattributed a quotation in some copies. It was Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''If we're an arrogant nation, they'll res ent us. If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us.'' e and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas misattributed a quotation in some copies. It was Mr. Bush, not Mr. Gore, who said, ''If we're an arrogant nation, they'll res
 Presidential campaigns, seeking to meticulously control and refine way candidates are perceived, set exacting ground rules for second televised debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; rules also reduce potential for gaffes (M) The moment agreed upon by the campaigns for last night's debate in Winston-Salem, N.C., was 9:01 and 30 seconds, Eastern time, on the button. And since Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore were to take their seats onstage at exactly 8:58 p.m., that meant anything they might say to each other in the three and a half minutes before the debate could not be heard by television viewers. The moment agreed upon by the campaigns for last night's debate in Winston-Salem, N.C., was 9:01 and 30 seconds, Eastern time, on the button. And since Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore were to take their seats onstage at exactly 8:58 p.m., that meant anything they might say to each other in the three and a half minutes before the debate could not be heard by television viewers. And at the same time, it is a way to reduce the potential for gaffes. And not just obvious ones, like the vulgar aside about a reporter that Mr. Bush made to his running mate (and an open microphone). As last week's debate in Boston demonstrated, any small mannerism or affectation, whether an audible sigh or sniffle, or a dusting of rouge on a candidate's cheeks, was potential grist for interpretation and criticism by voters and political analysts. There was no such interlude in the first presidential debate in Boston. Spokesmen for the campaigns and the Commission on Presidential Debates confirmed that the microphones were already on when Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore walked to their lecterns at the University of Massachusetts on Oct. 3. Although the broadcast networks begin their coverage of all the debates at 9 p.m., Eastern time, cable channels like C-Span start up in the hall at 8:30 p.m. Spokesmen for Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore differed yesterday over when the microphone policy was to take effect. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said it was supposed to have been put into effect before the Boston debate. But Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager, said the agreement that ''the mikes do not go live until production time'' was negotiated this week. Several people involved in the negotiations said the Bush and Gore campaigns had sought, for example, to bar the networks from showing a candidate's reaction while his opponent spoke. A senior Bush adviser said the two campaigns agreed early in the negotiations that only one image should be broadcast, but the adviser added that the agreement was not binding on the networks. The commission also decided that for the North Carolina debate, it would supply to the pool network only one audio transmission, mixing the sound from all the microphones on the stage. In Boston, it provided three transmissions: the ''mixed'' feed, and one each from the microphones of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Viewers of that network, he said, could hear Mr. Lieberman tell Mr. Cheney that he thought the debate went rapidly. Mr. Scully added that they could also hear Mr. Cheney reply that he had not even worn a watch, a reference, perhaps, to a moment in the 1992 debates, when President George Bush sneaked a highly visible peek at his.
 Yesterday morning, Mr. Vinroot's campaign Web site announced that the campaign would pay $500 for the best photograph of Vice President Al Gore with Mike Easley, the Democratic candidate. Like many other Southern Democrats, Mr. Easley, the state attorney general, has been conspicuously absent from several of Mr. Gore's appearances. LIEBERMAN DRAWS DONORS  In preparing for his run for president, former Senator Bill Bradley cultivated ties to Silicon Valley, as a source of ideas and cash. Now, he is helping his former rival, Vice President Al Gore, and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, tap into those connections.
 That conclusion is also true for the tax cut plan proposed by Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican candidate, has presented a more sweeping package that would benefit far more New Yorkers by reducing taxes for people with all levels of income. Middle-class families will ''fare better under Lazio's plan than under Clinton's, although most will receive less tax relief than under Governor Bush's plan,'' writes the author of the report, Edmund J. McMahon Jr. ''Lazio's plan is particularly beneficial to families earning the median income or above in New York City's suburbs.'' Both packages are dwarfed by the Bush proposal, which would give New Yorkers $11.1 billion in reductions. The Gore plan would save taxpayers in the state $3.5 billion, according to the report.
 But Richard N. Haass, a Brookings Institution scholar who served on the National Security Council under President Bush and has published two lengthy studies of sanctions and their effectiveness, disagreed.
 Correction of Oct 10 article on West Village party for Vice Pres Al Gore and family: Fran Lebowitz, guest, is writer, not photographer A report on Public Lives page on Tuesday about a party held in a West Village loft for Vice President Al Gore and his family referred incorrectly in some copies to Fran Lebowitz, a guest. She is a writer, not a photographer. A report on Public Lives page on Tuesday about a party held in a West Village loft for Vice President Al Gore and his family referred incorrectly in some copies to Fran Lebowitz, a guest. She is a writer, not a photographer.
