 George W. Bush has said that if he is elected, he will bring about a new attitude of bipartisanship in Washington (Week in Review, Oct. 8). He may be sincere about his intentions, but he will need the active help of his party's Congressional leaders. George W. Bush has said that if he is elected, he will bring about a new attitude of bipartisanship in Washington (Week in Review, Oct. 8). He may be sincere about his intentions, but he will need the active help of his party's Congressional leaders. After reflecting on the attitudes of Tom DeLay, Dennis Hastert and Trent Lott toward bipartisanship, as demonstrated by their speeches and actions during their Congressional careers, I must conclude that Mr. Bush's wishes for bipartisanship will remain just that, regardless of who wins the presidency.
 Rep Sanford D Bishop Jr, moderate black Democrat who has continued to win re-election to Congress from Georgia despite shift in his district's makeup from 60 percent black to 60 percent white, faces challenge from black Republican, Dylan Glenn; both say race is no longer election issue; Yvonne L Hughes, who recently won election to Orleans Parish, La, Juvenile Court despite well-publicized dispute with state Ethics Board over campaign filings, faces new charges that she accepted fees from criminal defendants without doing any work for them; Hotline, Internet political tip sheet, reports polls in various states show Gov George W Bush leads in 26 states, worth 227 electoral votes, while Vice Pres Al Gore leads in 23 states, worth 281 electoral votes; Pew Research Center, noting 96 percent of voters told pollsters in 1996 that they planned to vote on Election Day but only 48.8 percent voted, reports 97 percent of voters say they plan to vote; photo (M) Again, Mr. Bishop faced no primary opponent. But he is up against an aggressive Republican in the fall, Dylan Glenn, an economic development specialist and former aide to the Bush White House. Polls Put Gore in Lead In Electoral College Gov. George W. Bush of Texas led in 26 states, worth 227 electoral votes. Vice President Al Gore led in 23 states, worth 281 electoral votes.
 As Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush slap new slogans on the screen, baffle the electorate with arguments over prescription drugs and try to one-up each other in televised debates, it is worth rereading the best speech announcing a presidential candidacy of this campaign. Or reading it for the first time, since it got minimal attention when delivered and cannot be found even today on the candidate's Web sites. Ralph Nader's speech on Feb. 21 declaring his sure-thing quest for the Green Party's nomination was an angry, principled and coherent condemnation of the current state of American politics. Although his anger sometimes swerves into petulance and his principles into dogmatism, his speech presented a stark and provocative contrast to those of the Republican and Democratic candidates, who sounded as if they had the same pollsters. In their June 1999 announcements, Gore and Bush emphasized exactly the same themes: opposing drugs in schools, involving religious organizations in social welfare programs, promoting foreign trade and using prosperity to help the American family. This speech is the most compelling contemporary document in ''The Ralph Nader Reader,'' a collection of articles and speeches that span his career before, during and after the years when he had more influence on his country than Al Gore and George W. Bush have had, combined. But it pales in comparison with the best of Nader's earlier writings. ''The Safe Car You Can't Buy'' (1959), '' 'Brown Lung': The Cotton-Mill Killer'' (1971) and the essential ''Remarks Before the Conference on Property Tax Reform'' (1970) have the details of the problems and the urgency and specifics of suggested solutions that made him the scourge of big business until the late 1970's. So perhaps his Green Party candidacy has the internal logic of providing a refuge for liberal Democrats who feel betrayed by the party's drift to the center. Of course, had he run instead in the Democratic Party primaries, he would have got some intense exposure, participation in winter debates and perhaps influence on Gore's proposals. He would not have become president, but he won't this way either. In fact, this useful book undercuts Nader's campaign argument that the major party candidates are ''tweedledum and tweedledee'' with ''few major differences.'' Whatever Gore may have done to keep business happy with him -- and despite his recent attacks on the drug and oil industries, he has done quite well at the Wall Street trough -- he has hardly been a corporate welfare recipient of the sort Nader condemned in these words: ''Local governments are anteing up three, four, five hundred million dollars to lure very profitable baseball, football and basketball sports moguls who don't want to share the profits. Corporate sports are being subsidized by cities.'' That is, on the other hand, a fair description of how the Texas Rangers got a new ballpark out of the city of Arlington when George W. Bush owned the team. Unless its $135 million price tag puts it below Nader's threshold. Then there is one of Bush's proudest boasts about his first year as governor, the 1995 passage of tort reform legislation, an idea Gore does not support. That same year, Nader was writing about comparable legislation pending in Congress, warning that ''if the wrongdoers' lobby prevails, the local control that judges and juries have had over wrongdoers will be severely limited.''
 As a New Englander with deep roots of my own and a passionate interest in the region's literary history, I was hoping for just such a glimpse when I visited the Adams National Historical Park in Quincy last April. Perhaps, too, in this election  year rife with comparisons of the Bushes  to the Adamses, I was hoping to gain a bit  of insight into the nature of political families.
 A VAST CONSPIRACY: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, by Jeffrey Toobin. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.) In this account of how some unanswered questions about an Arkansas land deal led to the Starr report and the impeachment trial of President Clinton, the author argues that the legal system is increasingly supplanting the political system. The result is an ''admirably clear, vigorously written, plain-spoken and common-sensical book,'' Thomas Powers wrote here earlier this year. In Shrub: The Short but Happy Political Life of George W. Bush, by Molly Ivins and Lou Dubose (Vintage, $8.99), two Texas journalists launch a relentless, if good-natured, broadside against the Republican presidential nominee, primarily taking aim at his record as governor and deal maker. ''It serves as a useful, opinionated brief for the prosecution,'' Peter Applebome said here earlier this year. A VAST CONSPIRACY: The Real Story of the Sex Scandal That Nearly Brought Down a President, by Jeffrey Toobin. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.) In this account of how some unanswered questions about an Arkansas land deal led to the Starr report and the impeachment trial of President Clinton, the author argues that the legal system is increasingly supplanting the political system. The result is an ''admirably clear, vigorously written, plain-spoken and common-sensical book,'' Thomas Powers wrote here earlier this year. In Shrub: The Short but Happy Political Life of George W. Bush, by Molly Ivins and Lou Dubose (Vintage, $8.99), two Texas journalists launch a relentless, if good-natured, broadside against the Republican presidential nominee, primarily taking aim at his record as governor and deal maker. ''It serves as a useful, opinionated brief for the prosecution,'' Peter Applebome said here earlier this year.
 Melinda Henneberger article questions whether Democratic Presidential candidate Vice Pres Al Gore has compulsion to exaggerate in his storytelling; says in tight presidential race Gore's storytelling is no minor issue, with Republicans clearly exaggerating Gore's exaggerations and Democrats worrying that perception they are peddling could wind up losing him the race; photos (M) ONE of Vice President Al Gore's favorite stories is about the time he fell for a trick played on him as a cub reporter at the Nashville Tennessean. He was writing obituaries one night when a funeral director called to report that a Swedish gynecologist, a certain Trebla Erog, had passed away. Subsequent calls -- secretly placed by one of Mr. Gore's colleagues, Jerry Thompson -- kept adding dramatic details. Finally, he learned that the doctor's distraught wife had died, too, on her way to the hospital. As Mr. Gore told it at a memorial service for Mr. Thompson earlier this year, he not only fell for the gag, but shouted at his editors to hold page one: ''This thing is getting better all the time!'' But hearing the story told this way alarmed the vice president's former editor, Frank Ritter, who has a signed photo of the Gores in his office. ONE of Vice President Al Gore's favorite stories is about the time he fell for a trick played on him as a cub reporter at the Nashville Tennessean. He was writing obituaries one night when a funeral director called to report that a Swedish gynecologist, a certain Trebla Erog, had passed away. Subsequent calls -- secretly placed by one of Mr. Gore's colleagues, Jerry Thompson -- kept adding dramatic details. Finally, he learned that the doctor's distraught wife had died, too, on her way to the hospital. As Mr. Gore told it at a memorial service for Mr. Thompson earlier this year, he not only fell for the gag, but shouted at his editors to hold page one: ''This thing is getting better all the time!'' But hearing the story told this way alarmed the vice president's former editor, Frank Ritter, who has a signed photo of the Gores in his office. ''Thompson and I set him up on Trebla Erog'' -- Albert Gore spelled backwards -- ''but Al caught on pretty quickly,'' Mr. Ritter said in an interview several months back. It was another reporter, Mr. Ritter explained, who had been taken in. ''But Al made himself the goat. It was funny, funny, but it didn't happen that way. I said to my honey, 'I'm worried. He's just said he invented the Internet and he and Tipper were the models for ''Love Story.'' He ought to be more careful.' '' In fact, he is careful, sometimes excruciatingly so. In more than a dozen long interviews for a series of biographical articles over the last six months, Mr. Gore constantly monitored his own storytelling, self-editing as he spoke, trying hard to stick to what he knew to be true. ''Now, this is a family anecdote,'' he'd say, ''that like a lot of family anecdotes I can't really vouch for.'' In a tight presidential race his colorized storytelling is no minor issue, with Republicans clearly exaggerating the exaggerations and Democrats worrying that the perception they're peddling could wind up losing him the race. Suddenly, details, details, could decide it all. That's probably because in a healthy economy, the heir to a still popular president, a man of considerable experience who a majority of Americans agree with on the issues, has as yet been unable to close the sale. For lack of a better way to get a handle on why this is so, the issue of Mr. Gore's exaggerations seems to be standing in for larger, fuzzier questions about his personal appeal. Various friends, who allow that he has a habit of exaggerating, have various theories about why: That it's all in the tradition of southern storytelling. Or that it's the legacy of his political parents. His father, Senator Albert Gore, was himself considered a standout exaggerator in his day, even by Mr. Gore and his mother, both of whom have been quoted to that effect. Or they point to the way Mr. Gore was raised, by parents who always had one eye on his political future. They were improving his resume before he was old enough to have one. When he was six, an item in the Knoxville News-Sentinel had Senator Gore bragging that Little Al had ''out-talked a senator'' when he got his dad to buy him a 98-cent bow and arrow set rather than the 49-cent model the senator had chosen: ''He's a budding politician. There may be another Gore on the way to the political pinnacle. He's just six years old now. But with his experiences to date, who knows what may happen?'' How could Mr. Gore be expected to know what was real and what was hype? Many times in our interviews, Mr. Gore cast his life much as his parents would have, and was protective of them, surely lying more to himself than to me when he said that no, he was never lonely as a kid -- though virtually all his boyhood friends remember he was, terribly. Some of the stories about his stories are also wrong. He did work hard on his family's farm. He did not claim to have discovered Love Canal. On Imus last week, the Republican consultant Mary Matalin even accused Mr. Gore, inaccurately, of lying about having been at his sister Nancy's deathbed. Still, it is no lie that Mr. Gore has a problem, and a problem of his own making. The public seems to accept -- if not to expect -- politicians to sandpaper the facts a bit when presenting their record. Not much was made of George W. Bush's misstatement in the most recent debate that all three men tried for the murder of James Byrd, the black man killed in Jasper, Tex., were sentenced to death -- though it seems unlikely that the fact that one got a lesser sentence could have escaped his notice. In Mr. Gore, on the other hand, we see someone stretching the truth for weird, inscrutable reasons, in ways we don't understand; Is it just to keep his skills up? BUT the explanation that best captures the many stories I've heard Mr. Gore tell came from Mike Kopp, who worked for him for years and says that usually, he embellishes in an effort to connect. Of course, a more natural politician might not have to work so much, try so hard or stretch so far, to make those connections. Which is why Mr. Gore's exaggerations might not be so hard to understand after all.
 More striking is the way consumers now shape their spending patterns to prove how antimaterialist they are. It won't do to be seen pampering yourself with Faberge eggs or caviar. But when you're spending money on something useful, the sky's the limit. A code of Extravagant Utility prevails. You can't have a mere winter coat to protect you from normal American winters. You've got to have a Himalayan-tested, Gore-Tex-Cordura-Polartec composite parka, with microfilament hood design, polyurethane coat-welded seams and universal radial hinges, durable enough to keep you warm on your next trip to Pluto yet collapsible enough to fit in your back pocket, in case you find yourself in one of those hell-on-earth ordeals that Jon Krakauer is always writing about. We don't want to look like languid aristocrats. We want to look like rugged, practical people whose down-to-earth (yet adventurous) lives just happen to require the most expensive gear.
 Ronald Steel Op-Ed article on foreign policy issue that Al Gore and George W Bush will not discuss: US is a great imperial power; says great powers may be admired or emulated, but they are rarely loved; drawing (M) It was an eerie coincidence. On Wednesday night, Al Gore and George W. Bush debated foreign policy for some 40 minutes. The next day, the tense confrontation between Israelis and Palestinians erupted into virtual open warfare, and in Yemen, the American Navy destroyer Cole was bombed in a terrorist attack that took the lives of 17 sailors. It was an eerie coincidence. On Wednesday night, Al Gore and George W. Bush debated foreign policy for some 40 minutes. The next day, the tense confrontation between Israelis and Palestinians erupted into virtual open warfare, and in Yemen, the American Navy destroyer Cole was bombed in a terrorist attack that took the lives of 17 sailors. Neither George Bush nor Al Gore wants to change that role in any kind of real way -- but they, and we as a country, have failed to address its repercussions. Instead, in this presidential campaign, we have focused on essentially rhetorical differences. In the debate, Mr. Gore presented himself as a committed liberal interventionist in the Woodrow Wilson tradition. He defended the American intervention in Bosnia on humanitarian grounds, and also went on to argue that ''genocide or ethnic cleansing . . . can bring into play a fundamental American strategic interest, because I think it's based on our values.'' This explanation hardy differed from that of Mr. Bush, who also opposed humanitarian intervention in Rwanda and supported the intervention in Bosnia (because of our interests in NATO). Although he opposed sending troops to Haiti to promote democracy, he supported interventions in Lebanon, Grenada, Panama and the Persian Gulf. ''We can't be all things to all people in the world,'' Mr. Bush declared, nor should we ''walk into a country and say, we do it this way, so should you.'' For all their supposed differences, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush agree more than they disagree. They both believe in a powerful military, in strong alliances held together by America's armed forces, direct economic and political intervention where it serves American interests and the active discouragement of any potential rival power. Mr. Bush may have spoken gently during the debate about the virtues of displaying ''humility.'' But what he meant was the humility of the strong, not of the weak. Moreover, both men labored to portray their vision of American foreign policy as good not only for the United States but for the world. This is true no matter what we do. It is particularly true if the United States more actively pursues what Mr. Gore has referred to as the policy of ''forward engagement'' --  of ''addressing problems early in their development before they become crises.'' This is the way the world works, and it does little good, except perhaps for our self-esteem, to proclaim, as Mr. Gore did in the debate that, ''this nation is now looked on by peoples on every other continent and the peoples from every part of this earth as a kind of model for what the future could be.'' Nor can we realistically be a ''humble nation,'' in Mr. Bush's phrase, in anything but rhetoric if we expect to retain our full power and influence. The suicide bombers in Yemen help remind us that virtue is not its own reward. Great powers may be admired or emulated, but they are rarely loved. Both George Bush and Al Gore know this, even though they think that voters' tender sensibilities may be offended to hear it. But we and they have to recognize our nation as the great imperial power it has become.
 Editorial on different approaches presidential candidates Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush would take towards foreign policy; says Bush believes in team concept that would rely on seasoned advisers, while Gore would be more inclined to rely on his own instincts and experiences (M) Once again the United States has been jolted by foreign crises in the midst of a presidential campaign. Indeed, the turmoil in Israel, the deaths of American sailors in Yemen and the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia all serve as reminders that we are not just choosing a chief architect of domestic policy on Nov. 7. We are also choosing a commander in chief and the nation's principal diplomat. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush expressed substantial agreement in their debate last week on the centrality of America's role in an unstable world. But recent events underscore that variations in approach can be very important in dealing with real-world events. To begin with, the candidates seem to envision different processes. Mr. Bush spoke of a team concept that would rely on seasoned advisers. Mr. Gore would be more inclined to rely on his own instincts and experience. In that context, he argued for a more muscular projection of American influence, including military intervention, in overseas trouble spots. He described himself as a ''hard-liner'' in favor of action during debates over the Balkans among advisers to President Clinton. By contrast, Mr. Bush argued for a more cautious approach, calling for the earliest possible withdrawal of American troops in the Balkans. He warned against using American troops for ''nation-building'' and said that any foreign involvement must be based on a strict definition of vital national interest. He argued quite properly for the importance of having an exit strategy from the outset. Once again the United States has been jolted by foreign crises in the midst of a presidential campaign. Indeed, the turmoil in Israel, the deaths of American sailors in Yemen and the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia all serve as reminders that we are not just choosing a chief architect of domestic policy on Nov. 7. We are also choosing a commander in chief and the nation's principal diplomat. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush expressed substantial agreement in their debate last week on the centrality of America's role in an unstable world. But recent events underscore that variations in approach can be very important in dealing with real-world events. To begin with, the candidates seem to envision different processes. Mr. Bush spoke of a team concept that would rely on seasoned advisers. Mr. Gore would be more inclined to rely on his own instincts and experience. In that context, he argued for a more muscular projection of American influence, including military intervention, in overseas trouble spots. He described himself as a ''hard-liner'' in favor of action during debates over the Balkans among advisers to President Clinton. By contrast, Mr. Bush argued for a more cautious approach, calling for the earliest possible withdrawal of American troops in the Balkans. He warned against using American troops for ''nation-building'' and said that any foreign involvement must be based on a strict definition of vital national interest. He argued quite properly for the importance of having an exit strategy from the outset. As a page that has generally been reluctant to endorse military intervention, we like Mr. Bush's cautious attitude. But presidents seldom get to confront neat, well-ordered foreign policy problems. Indeed, with the post-cold-war era, the world is getting messier. The difficulty in foreign policy is not enunciating home principles but applying them in complex situations. The governor said, for example, that the American hemisphere was a region of vital interest but declared without explanation that intervention to restore democracy in Haiti was inappropriate. Surely if America wants to exert leadership in the years ahead, it cannot automatically dismiss peacekeeping and nation-building missions. Mr. Gore, in trying to draw distinctions between himself and the less-experienced governor, outlined a more aggressive response to America's role as the sole superpower. He called for engagement overseas to protect American values as well as interests, and to deal with humanitarian crises. He spoke of his views as in line with the Marshall Plan and the establishment of NATO after World War II. We think Mr. Gore is on the right track in trying to define a foreign policy that deals with the increasing prevalence of genocidal conflict. But he offered no assurances on what limits he might place on such involvements. Defining such limits is the essence of presidential leadership. Mr. Bush was right, of course, that such decisions are taken in consultation with allies and advisers. But it is naive to think that presidential decision-making rests on the consensus of experts alone. Sometimes seasoned advisers disagree or err or get bad intelligence. All recent presidents have come to understand the need to cut through what their advisers say, and in some cases disagree with the best of them. Evan Thomas's new biography of Robert Kennedy reminds us of how Central Intelligence Agency officials and others led President  Kennedy and his brother astray on Cuba. President Reagan listened to the best of his cabinet, including Secretary of State George Shultz, who is now advising Mr. Bush, in keeping the marines in Lebanon in 1983, with disastrous consequences. Mr. Clinton has spoken ruefully of his failure to question his advisers vigorously in Somalia and Bosnia early in his term. That is why Americans, in choosing the next president, need to reflect on the temperament and experience of the man seeking the office and not simply on his assurances that he will bring the best advisers into the White House with him.
 Mr. Stroud, who could not be reached by telephone today, was injected into the presidential campaign on Friday when Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican nominee, repeated his criticism of the Clinton administration's decision to release the oil and singled out the apparent lack of qualifications of Stroud Enterprises, before he knew the company's bid was dropped. ''Vice President Gore called for this release and he should take responsibility for what has occurred,'' Mr. Bush said.
 Had the gloom-haunted Edward Gorey found a way to have a love child with Dorothy Parker, their issue might well have been Lemony Snicket, the pseudonymous author of a multivolume family chronicle brought out under the genteel appellation ''A Series of Unfortunate Events.''
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed article on performances of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush on foreign affairs during second debate; says Gore had such a bad second debate that his foreign affairs IQ is not giving him edge it should as world turns dark; holds Gore was in straitjacket the whole debate, forcing himself to look humble because he looked too arrogant in first debate; adds humble act was self-defeating; says Bush's performance on foreign affairs was much better than Gore's; says the more Gore shows hlmself, the less people seem to like him; holds we will see whether Bush's foreign affairs tutorial has staying power in next debate (M) Going from cruise control to cruise missiles, we face the eerie specter of a St. Louis town hall meeting on Tuesday with Al Gore and George W. Bush debating in the midst of chaos. It is easy to imagine the Bush inner circle, always reliving the glory days of Desert Storm, swinging into action on the strategy of another Middle East war. You know Poppy is peppering his son with e-mails like ''Talk to Condi. Get with Wolfowitz. Very tricky. Water's edge. Nation with one voice.'' If W., who has been winging it on foreign affairs, had given a shakier debate performance Wednesday, the race might be over. With the scary backdrop of the Middle East, Al Gore could have jumped ahead as he grimly told Americans he had to leave Iowa's pumpkin-strewn campaign stages to join ''the principals'' of the National Security Council in the situation room. But in Winston-Salem, W. was like Peter Pan. You knew there were wires holding him up as he flew Around the World With 80 Coaches. (He had finally figured out what was going on in East Timor.) But the Bush team did a pretty good job of hiding those wires for an hour and a half. And W. ended up with bonus points from the first debate when it turned out that his suggestions that the Russians be called on to help push out Slobodan Milosevic -- which Mr. Gore haughtily dismissed -- turned out to be what the Clinton administration was already doing. Al Gore, by contrast, had such a bad second debate that his foreign affairs I.Q. is not giving him the edge it should as the world turns dark. Gore was reacting to Gore, like the sheriff in ''Blazing Saddles'' who holds a gun to his own head and takes himself hostage. W. seemed almost like a bemused spectator at the vice president's split-personality psychodrama. And since Mr. Gore was afraid to show his smarts and his contempt for W., the pair came across as a couple of regular guys running for student body president. You knew what the transparent Mr. Gore was thinking, of course, when he was forcing himself to give that self-effacing little smile: I know I'm smarter. I'm just not allowed to say so. The scene conjured up that hilarious ''Saturday Night Live'' sketch from 1988, with Jon Lovitz playing Michael Dukakis and Dana Carvey doing his papa Bush. Mr. Gore's confidants always worried that his biggest problem would be that he does not know who he really is, and there was a danger he would turn the race into a personality crisis. Now we will see whether W.'s foreign affairs tutorial has staying power. And whether Mr. Gore can put aside his own identity crisis and deal with the world's.
 ''It's not worth the risk,'' said Richard N. Haass, director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution who served on the National Security Council under President George Bush. ''Yemen has a bad record, and it's still a place where the government is unable or unwilling to take certain steps against certain terrorist groups. We must become more selective and more wary of who we do normal operations with.''
 Scene at political forum in Brooklyn's Park Slope neighborhood debating merits of Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader and Democrat Al Gore described; photos; THE SETTING -- Ralph Nader may not be included in the presidential debates, but on Tuesday night, inside the cozy auditorium of Public School 321, Park Slope's purple-turtleneck and grizzled-beard set made a place for him. Below walls hung with hand-painted quilts, 200 residents filed in for a local version of the Nader-Gore debate that never was. THE SETTING -- Ralph Nader may not be included in the presidential debates, but on Tuesday night, inside the cozy auditorium of Public School 321, Park Slope's purple-turtleneck and grizzled-beard set made a place for him. Below walls hung with hand-painted quilts, 200 residents filed in for a local version of the Nader-Gore debate that never was. Drinking lattes and knitting earth-tone sweaters, the audience listened to former State Senator Catherine Abate, a guest of the Central Brooklyn Independent Democrats, say a vote for Mr. Nader meant a vote for Gov. George W. Bush. Ronnie Dugger, founding editor of The Texas Observer and a former New York Green Party senate candidate, and a guest of the Park Slope Greens and the South Slope Greens, said Vice President Al Gore already had a sure victory in New York, and that a vote for Gore was a vote for corporate oligarchy. THE BUZZ -- ''It's mostly a Green crowd here, but we are not enemies,'' Ms. Raider murmured as the audience applauded as Mr. Dugger stated Mr. Nader's support for legalizing marijuana and ending capital punishment. Most Park Slope residents are Democrats or Greens, Ms. Raider said. Later this month, another debate will include a Bush backer. ''I stand by everything Mr. Nader stands for,'' one woman said. ''But I'm voting for Al Gore because I don't want Bush to get in.'' Afterward, amid tables laden with leaflets, one man hawked tickets to Mr. Nader's Madison Square Garden appearance while another recruited participants for an anti-Bush performance art piece involving trash cans and salad tongs.
 Al Gore: 39  NUMBER OF JOKES FROM LAST WEEK: 21  % CHANGE FROM LAST WEEK: +86% George W. Bush: 27  NUMBER OF JOKES FROM LAST WEEK: 30  % CHANGE FROM LAST WEEK: -10% 'The Brains of a Supermodel'  ''These debates are like a fashion show. Like Bush has the brains of a supermodel and Gore's got the makeup of one.'' -- Jay Leno ''I think we've come a long way as a country. We've come from George Washington who could not tell a lie, to Bill Clinton who could not tell the truth, to Al Gore who can't tell the difference.'' -- Jay Leno ''Bush is making his opening statement and he says, 'It's time for change,' and I said, 'You know, I agree with that,' and I changed over to the Mets game.'' -- David Letterman Al Gore: 39  NUMBER OF JOKES FROM LAST WEEK: 21  % CHANGE FROM LAST WEEK: +86% George W. Bush: 27  NUMBER OF JOKES FROM LAST WEEK: 30  % CHANGE FROM LAST WEEK: -10% 'The Brains of a Supermodel'  ''These debates are like a fashion show. Like Bush has the brains of a supermodel and Gore's got the makeup of one.'' -- Jay Leno ''I think we've come a long way as a country. We've come from George Washington who could not tell a lie, to Bill Clinton who could not tell the truth, to Al Gore who can't tell the difference.'' -- Jay Leno ''Bush is making his opening statement and he says, 'It's time for change,' and I said, 'You know, I agree with that,' and I changed over to the Mets game.'' -- David Letterman
 Republicans have mounted skillful and sustained 18-month drive to portray Vice Pres Al Gore as flawed and untrustworthy; see character issue as key tool in quest to retake presidency in time of peace and prosperity; drive detailed (M)/ When Vice President Al Gore felt the need during the last presidential debate to say he was sorry that he ''got some of the details wrong'' in recent anecdotes, the admission was not just a sign that Mr. Gore had hurt himself with another misstatement. When Vice President Al Gore felt the need during the last presidential debate to say he was sorry that he ''got some of the details wrong'' in recent anecdotes, the admission was not just a sign that Mr. Gore had hurt himself with another misstatement. Republican strategists say that long before Gov. George W. Bush and Mr. Gore emerged as their parties' respective nominees, they already knew that during a time of peace and prosperity, character would be one of their most important arguments for retaking the White House. And many in the Republican Party began using mockery to question Mr. Gore's veracity even before the nation was put through the turmoil of President Clinton's lies about his relationship with a White House intern. ''I can hardly remember a time when it wasn't on our radar screen that Al Gore had a propensity to both exaggerate and fabricate,'' said Clifford May, the spokesman for the Republican National Committee. One of the first salvos came in December 1997, when the committee announced it had started a contest to come up with a slogan for Mr. Gore after he told reporters that the hero and heroine in the novel ''Love Story'' were modeled after him and his wife, Tipper. (Erich Segal, the author, soon said that his protagonist, Oliver Barrett IV, was only partly based on Mr. Gore, while Jenny Cavilleri had nothing to do with Tipper Gore.) ''The R.N.C. wants your best 'Love Means . . .' slogan for Al and Tipper Gore,'' the party said in a press release. One of its suggested entries was ''Love means never having to tell the truth.'' So when Mr. Gore said in an interview with CNN in March 1999 that ''during my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative in creating the Internet,'' Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, issued this mocking statement: ''During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative in creating the paper clip.'' But, she said, Mr. Armey's aides then became an informal clearinghouse for efforts in Congress to poke fun at Mr. Gore, such as readings on the House floor of the most oblique or provocative sections of his book ''Earth in the Balance.'' On the day Mr. Gore formally announced his candidacy in Carthage, Tenn., his family's hometown, Jim Nicholson, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, had a more elaborate stunt. He rode in a wagon pulled by mules to the Westin Fairfax Hotel on Embassy Row in Washington where Mr. Gore lived for much of his youth. ''He has tried to pass himself off as this hardscrabble, homespun central Tennessee farm boy and that is not what he is,'' said Mr. Nicholson, playing off the fact that Mr. Gore had told The Des Moines Register that he had learned to slop hogs and clear land on the family farm. Friends later told reporters that Mr. Gore's father had kept him on a backbreaking work schedule during summers on the family farm. The Republicans got help as well from an unexpected source. When the Democratic primary fight became bitter, former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey insisted that Mr. Gore had deliberately distorted his policy positions in what he called a ''pattern of misrepresentation.'' At one point, Mr. Bradley spat out, ''Why should we believe that you will tell the truth as president if you don't tell the truth as a candidate?'' The Bush campaign subsequently used that remark at the top of its press releases. And they say that portraying Mr. Gore as an embellisher helps them raise doubts about Mr. Gore's assaults on Mr. Bush's proposals. But Mr. Gore's aides say the Republicans have blown up trivial misstatements to turn the campaign away from such matters as tax cutting, health care and Social Security. ''The Republicans have always known they would lose the campaign if it actually focused on issues that mattered in people's lives,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore.
 Top strategists, politicians and party officials in campaigns of both Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush are anxious and jittery amid presidential race that is too close to call; debate whether candidates should dare dramatic moves to try to pull ahead or play it safe in final weeks before vote; prominent Democrats hold Gore should be far more forceful in stressing his accomplishments and his differences with Bush; photo (M) The presidential race is so agonizingly tight for both sides that it has set off a lively debate over whether Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush should dare reach for something dramatic to try to pull ahead in the next three weeks or play it safe and hope for the best on Election Day. The presidential race is so agonizingly tight for both sides that it has set off a lively debate over whether Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush should dare reach for something dramatic to try to pull ahead in the next three weeks or play it safe and hope for the best on Election Day. After weeks of seesawing polls, several surveys said the competition nationally and in swing states was too close to call. But perhaps because some polls suggest that Mr. Bush has nudged ahead after the first two debates, Democratic officials seem slightly -- just slightly -- more tense than their Republican counterparts. In fact, while many Republican officials counsel Mr. Bush to keep moving forward pressing his issues, prominent Democrats are more critical of the Gore operation. They say that Mr. Gore must be far more forceful in accentuating his accomplishments -- and his differences with Mr. Bush. Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, complained that in the debates Mr. Gore did not sufficiently counter Mr. Bush's assertion that he was a uniter who would deal better with Democrats and Republicans in Congress. Mr. Gore, Mr. Kerrey said, needs to underscore his achievements on everything from the budget to trade pacts. ''Gore's got to say, 'I delivered,' '' Mr. Kerrey said. ''You're saying we didn't do anything? Were you on this planet in '95 and '96? Bill Clinton and Al Gore almost got run out of the Democratic Party for working with Republicans. How about the crime bill? How about the balanced budget act? How about GATT? How about Nafta?'' James Carville, an architect of President Clinton's victory in 1992, said he did not understand why either Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush does not do something bold to overtake his rival. Yet Mr. Carville had no suggestions about what audacious moves either side could make. William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, had a similar outlook. ''If you're 10 points down or 15 points down, you've really got to throw the long bomb,'' Mr. Daley said. ''Right now this race is so close it's not about throwing the Hail Mary pass. What if you come up short?'' If attention to foreign policy continues to escalate, Mr. Gore could capitalize on his much richer foreign affairs experience and the tendency of Americans to rally behind an administration in a time of crisis. On the other hand, if voters disapprove of how the White House is handling matters of war and peace, they may turn to Mr. Bush. Republicans, after all, are rated in polls as more capable of handling foreign policy. ''It has as much risk or maybe even slightly more to hurt Al Gore,'' Mr. Engler said. ''If something does go completely haywire, it may be that the seeds were sewn long ago'' in the Clinton administration. In the short term, at least, the bloodshed in the Middle East has knocked campaign news off the front pages. As a result, it may be even harder for Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush to make any breakthrough in the polls. Mr. Caddell said the Gore team must be particularly uneasy. ''I'm sure the Gore people are having a very rough time after last week,'' he said. ''They think they won the first debate, and yet everything turns sour. That has to be very debilitating.'' Gore campaign officials say they feel enormous pressure because they have less to spend than the Republicans, who are spreading resources in more states. Advisers to Mr. Gore said they would decide after the St. Louis debate whether to give up on some major states -- Ohio and Louisiana are among the possibilities -- and pump resources elsewhere. ''Because the race is so close, you feel pressure within the campaign to open up, break out,'' said Tad Devine, a Gore strategist. ''You feel pressure from institutions that are supporting you. You feel pressure from individual states to make decisions about scheduling and resource allocation.'' Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's top strategist, said he did not feel such pressure. ''We have the resources and the volunteer enthusiasm to conduct an aggressive air and ground game in all the battleground states and then some,'' he said. Mr. Rove said he did not expect either candidate to break ahead in the polls until the end. ''The people who are left out there, available to both sides, are going to move begrudgingly,'' he said. Democrats seemed more distressed than Republicans about their candidate, particularly after the second debate. Many said that the vice president, troubled that he came across as imperious in the first debate, was too timid in the second one. ''I'd have to give Bush the points,'' Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, said after the second debate. ''Gore was off his game a little because of the criticism he took in the first debate.'' Mr. Torricelli said he was worried that Mr. Gore might be too afraid to shoot back at Mr. Bush. ''Al Gore, in particular, needs to change the dynamic of the race,'' he said. ''Bush has succeeded in convincing people that there are only marginal differences on issues. I know this has been a few difficult weeks for Al Gore, but it's critical that he not lose his confidence. He has to be aggressive. That's the only means of winning.'' Even for those who give Mr. Bush the edge in the second debate, that benefit may be fleeting because coverage was eclipsed by the Middle East. But people in both parties also said the race could turn on mechanical factors, like which party is most successful in prodding voters to the polls. Senator Durbin, for one, recalled a recent conversation he had with Mr. Gore: ''I said that my experience tells me something very good and something very bad is going to happen to you before the election, and that I hope the good thing is better than the bad. He said, 'I paid a lot of dues to get here.' I said, 'I know, but some things are out of your control. This could all change in a heartbeat.' ''
 Abraham P Ordover letter on Sen Frank H Murkowski's Oct 9 Op-Ed article urging exploration for oil and gas along Alaska's Arctic coastal plain and charging that Vice Pres Al Gore sand Sen Joseph Lieberman present false choice in suggesting that nation must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection; says neither presidential candidate has courage to engage either auto industry or carbon-based power industry, which will not seriously invest in alternatives as long as it has reserves of carbon fuel Gov. George W. Bush speaks of oil and coal as if we had never faced this problem before. Vice President Al Gore acknowledges the need for new energy sources. But neither candidate has the courage to engage either the auto industry or the carbon-based power industry, which will not seriously invest in alternatives as long as it has reserves of carbon fuel.
 The comments put some distance not only between Mr. Lazio, the Republican candidate for United States Senate from New York, and Mr. Clinton, but also between Mr. Lazio and the Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, who has expressed support for the president's mediation efforts in the Mideast and said that the United States must ''speak with one voice.'' The comments put some distance not only between Mr. Lazio, the Republican candidate for United States Senate from New York, and Mr. Clinton, but also between Mr. Lazio and the Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, who has expressed support for the president's mediation efforts in the Mideast and said that the United States must ''speak with one voice.''
 No Room for Error As Election Day Nears  The presidential race is so tight that it has set off a lively debate over whether Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush should try to pull ahead or play it safe and hope for the best on Election Day. Top strategists and politicians on both sides are jittery and readily acknowledge that they could lose. Voters in many Southern states are steeped in doubt and ambivalence about Vice President Al Gore. Many of Ralph Nader's supporters say they are aware that a vote for Mr. Nader might only help Gov. George W. Bush. But they still plan to side with the Green Party. The issue of the uninsured has flared anew with a round of charges and countercharges about the Bush record in Texas. But many health policy experts say that the 42.6 million Americans without health insurance are drawing far less attention now than in previous campaigns. No Room for Error As Election Day Nears  The presidential race is so tight that it has set off a lively debate over whether Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush should try to pull ahead or play it safe and hope for the best on Election Day. Top strategists and politicians on both sides are jittery and readily acknowledge that they could lose. Voters in many Southern states are steeped in doubt and ambivalence about Vice President Al Gore. Many of Ralph Nader's supporters say they are aware that a vote for Mr. Nader might only help Gov. George W. Bush. But they still plan to side with the Green Party. The issue of the uninsured has flared anew with a round of charges and countercharges about the Bush record in Texas. But many health policy experts say that the 42.6 million Americans without health insurance are drawing far less attention now than in previous campaigns.
 Ralph Nader supporters at big New York City rally defend their support for Nader, even though it boosts Gov George W Bush by drawing votes away from Vice Pres Al Gore, interviews; Nader scores political and corporate establishment for controlling America and excluding him from presidential debates, speech; photos (M) Yet for all of the enthusiasm of the adoring crowd, Mr. Nader has not exactly rocked the presidential race, having been stalled for months at about 4 percent in national polls. And in recent weeks, with Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas locked in a stubbornly tight race, Democrats have intensified their appeals to Nader supporters, particularly in swing states. People interviewed at the Garden were well aware of the problem: that a vote for Mr. Nader would only help Mr. Bush. Most said that while this made them think harder about their vote, they would still side with Mr. Nader and the Green Party because, as Mr. Nader likes to say, both front-runners are corporate mendicants in favor of the death penalty, globalization and corporate donations, and are thus interchangeable. ''I have to live with myself,'' said Jennifer Maslowski, a 29-year-old fine arts appraiser and freelance writer in Manhattan who, though leaning toward Gore earlier this week, was so moved at the rally that she pulled out her cell phone to call her mother in upstate New York and got her to promise to switch to Nader, too. ''My life is not going to change very much if either Bush or Gore are elected,'' Ms. Maslowski said. Michael Moore, the filmmaker,  lambasted the front-runners. ''A vote for Gore is a vote for Bush,'' he said. ''If they both believe in the same thing, wouldn't you want the original than the copy? Wouldn't you want Bush? Sirloin or hamburger? Which would you go for?'' Even if the race in New Jersey were tighter, he would still refuse to vote for Mr. Gore. ''I'm not afraid of Bush,'' said Mr. Davis, who didn't vote in 1996 because he did not like any of the choices. ''I'm just a disgruntled citizen.'' For Chrissy Fiorentini, a 19-year-old student at Columbia, the candidate with the most promise was Bill Bradley, and she worked as a campaign volunteer. But after Mr. Bradley lost, she was so repulsed by the Gore campaign that she decided to help Mr. Nader's campaign try to reach the 5 percent vote needed for federal funds in the 2004 election. ''Gore just betrayed everyone in the Democratic party,'' said Ms. Fiorentini, whose top issues include universal health care, the death penalty and world trade. Many Nader supporters wished aloud that that they could have it both ways: to watch Mr. Bush lose, and make Mr. Gore sweat. ''Hoping that Bush will win is too much to ask of anybody; he's so nasty,'' said Ms. Maslowski, the fine arts appraiser. ''But I hope it'll be close, and I hope Gore knows why he's losing votes.''
 Environmental Communications Public Media Center vice president Susan Alexander letter on Sen Frank H Murkowski's Oct 9 Op-Ed article urging exploration for oil and gas along Alaska's Arctic coastal plain and charging that Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph Lieberman present false choice in suggesting that nation must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection; says Murkowski fails to recognize that real choice in deciding whether to drill Arctic National Wildlife Refuge for oil is between short-term profits for big oil companies or lasting legacy of rare and incomparable wilderness for future generations
 University of British Columbia Prof Emeritus Thomas H Alden letter on Sen Frank H Murkowski's Oct 9 Op-Ed article urging exploration for oil and gas along Alaska's coastal plain and charging that Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph Lieberman present false choice in suggesting that nation must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection; says Murkowski is right that America's dependence on foreign oil has reached perilous level, but he does not mention that this is largely result of 12 years of failure by Republican Congress to enhance fuel-efficiency standards for automobiles and to close loophole that has allowed large increase in production of sport utility vehicles
 David Narum letter on Sen Frank H Murkowski's Oct 9 Op-Ed article urging exploration for oil and gas along Alaska's Arctic coastal plain and charging that Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Joseph Lieberman present false choice in sugging that nation must choose between Arctic oil and environmental protection; says real question is not whether oil production and environmental protection can coexist but whether oil consumption and environmental protection can coexist
 Gabrielle B Britton letter on Oct 11 editorial on women's right to choose abortion; says it is disheartening that Gov George W Bush and Republican Party do not trust people (and women in particular) when it comes to their bodies It is disheartening that Gov. George W. Bush continues to emphasize that the American people should be trusted with the surplus, while the Republican platform simultaneously calls for a constitutional ban on abortion.
 Mr. Grucci lives in East Patchogue and never went beyond Bellport High School. A burly man not known as an enthusiastic campaigner or for accessibility, he is nevertheless a seasoned politician who also has the Conservative, Right to Life and Independence lines. In an interview last week, Mr. Grucci said that if he were elected he would vote to protect Social Security, end the tax penalty on married couples, abolish inheritance taxes, guard budget surpluses against spending sprees and improve health care and education in ways proposed by the Republican presidential candidate, George W. Bush.
 Doubts About Gore in South  Vice President Al Gore is hoping to avoid a Southern shutout, but he seems to be struggling even in states where he hoped to do well. Doubts About Gore in South  Vice President Al Gore is hoping to avoid a Southern shutout, but he seems to be struggling even in states where he hoped to do well.
 Matthew Miller article on contrasts between presidential candidates Al Gore and George W Bush over government spending priorities notes they fail to discuss fact that vast bulk of $1.8 trillion federal budget is already earmarked and that, before long, presidents will have little discretionary power; photo (M) To listen to Al Gore and George W. Bush, you'd think this election represents a clash between radically different visions of what the federal government will spend money on in the years ahead. Gore seems to want to throw new cash everywhere -- preschools, teacher salaries, personal savings accounts. Bush, by contrast, pledges a government that trusts ''real people,'' not Washington bureaucrats, to do what's best with their money. To listen to Al Gore and George W. Bush, you'd think this election represents a clash between radically different visions of what the federal government will spend money on in the years ahead. Gore seems to want to throw new cash everywhere -- preschools, teacher salaries, personal savings accounts. Bush, by contrast, pledges a government that trusts ''real people,'' not Washington bureaucrats, to do what's best with their money. Federal spending, in short, is already so big (and fixed) relative to either man's aspirations that even their boldest proposals merely tinker at the margins. Bush's ''risky'' tax cut of $1.3 trillion over 10 years, for example, comes to roughly 5 percent of projected revenues over that period. Al Gore says he'll mount a ''revolution'' in education with a 3 percent bump in national school spending. Spending hovered between 21 and 23 percent of G.D.P. under presidents Reagan and Bush. Thanks to economic growth and spending restraint, spending has more recently declined to 18.7 percent and is headed toward 16 percent. The least understood fiscal fact of our time is that Clinton was coaxed into balancing the budget downward. If we were still spending at Reagan-Bush levels, government would have roughly $300 billion a year more to play with -- enough for seven new departments of education, say, or a shiny new Pentagon. Instead, after two terms, a ''liberal'' president still can't lift Pell grants back to the value they had in the 1970's, or shake loose a few extra billion to fully fund Head Start. So far, we've covered only the government's official spending. Plenty of de facto spending gets done under the guise of tax subsidies, the back door to the A.T.M. Tax breaks for mortgage interest payments and employer-provided health care, for example, come to roughly $150 billion a year. Because tax deductions are worth more to people in higher tax brackets, such policies perversely shower bigger subsidies on citizens the richer they are. These subsidies will quietly rise by another $50 billion over the next five years. ''Elect me,'' the subtitles under both a Bush and Gore stump speech could well read, ''and I'll hike health and housing subsidies for millionaires, while renters and the uninsured fend for themselves.'' As Joe Lieberman might say, ''Is this a great country, or what?'' For now, however, the federal government is stuck in a holding pattern. If Eliot Ness symbolized the fed in the 1930's and Neil Armstrong in the 1960's, the figures that embody the millennial American state are anonymous. They are the countless clerks in bland offices who this year will process 887 million Medicare claims and 542 million Social Security payments. Right this minute one of them is sitting at a computer tapping away at the keys, and if you close your eyes and use a little imagination, you can hear her clickety-clack blend with the echo from thousands of other federal claims processors across the land, until the mad rhythm of finger against keyboard surges in a crescendo worthy of George Orwell, or at least Rod Serling. This is the sound of your government at the dawn of the 21st century, and there's little that you -- or Al Gore and George W. Bush, for that matter -- are going to do about it.
 The presidential candidates, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, welcomed the news of the Middle East meeting. At a campaign speech in Detroit today, Mr. Gore said he was praying for the families of the American soldiers killed and injured in Yemen, and for the success of the Monday meeting. ''I think that we need a lot of prayers to make sure that meeting is a success,'' he said. Mr. Bush issued a statement from his ranch in Texas: ''I welcome this development. I hope that Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Barak will do everything possible to stop the violence so that our longstanding goal of peace in the Middle East can be achieved.''
 Arkansas Democrats loved Al Gore back in 1988, when the state was one of only five where he won the party primary on his first presidential campaign. But now, even the Democratic Party headquarters of this rapidly growing city north of Little Rock is steeped in doubt and political ambivalence, much like the rest of the state and several of its Southern neighbors. ''I have to admit, even I'm not that enthusiastic about Gore,'' said Bill Yates, a city councilman who was staffing the party office downtown, while sitting beneath a Gore-Lieberman poster. ''I'll probably vote for him, but most people around here are pretty embarrassed about what Clinton did, and that's going to rub off on Gore. He'll be very lucky if he wins the state.'' Arkansas Democrats loved Al Gore back in 1988, when the state was one of only five where he won the party primary on his first presidential campaign. But now, even the Democratic Party headquarters of this rapidly growing city north of Little Rock is steeped in doubt and political ambivalence, much like the rest of the state and several of its Southern neighbors. ''I have to admit, even I'm not that enthusiastic about Gore,'' said Bill Yates, a city councilman who was staffing the party office downtown, while sitting beneath a Gore-Lieberman poster. ''I'll probably vote for him, but most people around here are pretty embarrassed about what Clinton did, and that's going to rub off on Gore. He'll be very lucky if he wins the state.'' Arkansas, along with Tennessee and Florida, has been one of the states where Mr. Gore is hoping to avoid a Southern shutout, but despite three visits and a barrage of television advertisements, he has not been able to establish a lead here. Although the state has voted Democratic in 26 out of 33 presidential elections, a poll conducted two weeks ago for The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette showed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas at 45 percent and Mr. Gore at 43 percent, with a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. Tennessee, Mr. Gore's home state to the east, is similarly divided, and to the south in Louisiana, which the Clinton-Gore ticket won handily in 1992 and overwhelmingly in 1996, Mr. Bush has been consistently ahead. A survey late last month by Southern Media and Opinion Research for several Louisiana television stations showed Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore 44 percent to 38 percent among registered, likely voters, with a margin of sampling error of four percentage points. In interviews this week, many residents in Arkansas and Louisiana were quite specific in their criticisms of Mr. Gore, repeatedly voicing three themes that are leading them to think seriously about voting for Mr. Bush. Most often cited is the vice president's failure to separate himself from Mr. Clinton's scandals, which remain an open wound to many Arkansans. His support for gun control is unpopular among men here and elsewhere in the South, despite his insistence that he would not affect the rights of hunters. And there is also a widespread if tentatively voiced sense that Mr. Gore's personality is simply not as ''Southern'' as Mr. Bush's, that he lacks the easy backslapping boyishness that is the lubricant of the region's politics. There were, of course, many Gore supporters at the rally, some of whom voiced enthusiasm for his tax plan and doubts about Mr. Bush's intelligence and ability. Many of them, however, said they would vote Democratic simply because they always had. Both candidates are spending an unusual amount of time and money contesting the state's six electoral votes, but Art English, a political science professor at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, said Mr. Bush's five visits -- which included a stop at Central High School, the civil rights shrine -- have been more successful, drawing more media attention and more enthusiastic crowds. Vaughn McQuary, chairman of the Arkansas Democratic Party, said he believed Mr. Gore would eventually win the state once older voters focused on his Medicare plan, but Mr. McQuary acknowledged that the vice president's stand in favor of greater gun control was hurting him. ''The Republicans have done a pretty good job pounding on the gun issue,'' he said. ''Hey, I'm a big duck hunter, and I know Al Gore isn't going to do anything to keep anyone in Arkansas out of a duck blind. But we have to do a better job of communicating that to people, because it's a big issue here.'' Louisiana, with its heavy dependence on the oil and chemical industries, has not looked favorably on Mr. Gore's environmentalist passions, and many residents consider Mr. Bush a more familiar next-door neighbor, particularly considering his oil background. But Mr. Gore's valedictorian persona could not be more at odds with the raffish personal character that the state's voters have traditionally admired in a politician and enjoyed in Mr. Clinton. Bernard Pinsonat, who conducted the Southern Media poll, said Mr. Gore is likely to get almost all the black votes in Louisiana, but at this point is supported by only a quarter of white voters. Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, always drew at least 35 percent of the white vote, Mr. Pinsonat said. One of those white voters -- Jackie Berthelat, 46, who works in the pharmaceutical industry and was cradling an infant at the Lakeside Mall in Metairie, a suburb of New Orleans -- said he was supporting Mr. Bush purely in opposition to Mr. Gore. ''It's what Gore is like to me as a candidate,'' Mr. Berthelat said. ''I find him extremely boring, I don't find him trustworthy and I think he fabricates a lot of stories.'' Pam Washington, 52, an assistant at a New Orleans Montessori school, said her support for Mr. Gore would be more fervent if she were not so worried about his penchant for exaggeration.
 Vice Pres Al Gore urges get-out-the vote effort on his behalf, telephone conference call with black ministers; also seeks to spur loyalists in second conference call with Hispanic officials and volunteers in his campaign offices around nation (M)o With the presidential election in a dead heat, Vice President Al Gore sought to mobilize his campaign's ''get out the vote'' drive today by imploring black preachers to push for his election from their pulpits. ''I'm asking you in your sermons to do the work of the Lord here on earth,'' Mr. Gore declared in seeking vocal advocates for his candidacy. ''I ask for your help in getting that message out urgently tomorrow.'' With the presidential election in a dead heat, Vice President Al Gore sought to mobilize his campaign's ''get out the vote'' drive today by imploring black preachers to push for his election from their pulpits. ''I'm asking you in your sermons to do the work of the Lord here on earth,'' Mr. Gore declared in seeking vocal advocates for his candidacy. ''I ask for your help in getting that message out urgently tomorrow.'' The vice president spoke to the black ministers in a telephone conference call from Air Force Two as he flew from Detroit to Washington. He also participated in a second conference call with Hispanic officials and volunteers in Gore campaign offices around the country, including Texas, Florida, California and New York. Analysts have predicted an especially low turnout in the Nov. 7 elections, and the Gore campaign has already begun to ''activate the base,'' political jargon for firing up its most loyal backers to make sure they vote and get others to the polls. Mr. Gore spoke first with black ministers, including Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks, former executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Dr. Hooks said that some African-Americans did not know Mr. Gore's record. By way of explaining it, Dr. Hooks, who said he had known the vice president since ''his daddy had him clean out pigsties,'' said, ''His heart is right, his mind is fixed, his spirit is on fire.'' In a closing prayer, the Rev. Ronald Williams of Portland, Ore., asked God, on behalf of Mr. Gore, to ''strengthen him against those who would attempt to weaken him.'' And he asked God for ''success in voter registration and success in voter turnout and success and victory on Election Day.'' In his second phone call, which he laced with Spanish phrases, Mr. Gore turned his attention to the ''colonias,'' the poor settlements along the Texas border. Hispanic leaders have criticized Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival, for never having visited a colonia, and Mr. Gore highlighted that today. Mr. Gore referred to remarks made Friday by Mr. Bush's secretary of state, Elton Bomer, defending the governor. ''You don't have to go to Alaska to know it's cold,'' Mr. Bomer said, ''and I don't think you have to go to colonias to know what it's like.'' Mr. Gore said today, ''That is a cold comment in itself,'' and said ''it speaks volumes'' about Texas and the Bush administration. He added that when Texas had the largest budget surpluses, ''instead of devoting resources to improving the colonias, he made his priority a tax cut for wealthy interests.'' As if speaking at a rally, Mr. Gore enumerated his priorities: health care and education, protecting Social Security and Medicare, offering middle-class tax cuts, protecting the environment and enforcing civil-rights laws. ''This is time for leadership,'' he said. ''This is time for passion.''
 The campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has all but conceded New Jersey to the Democrats, just the way it gave up on New York and Massachusetts at the beginning of the game, and that means that the Democrats take New Jersey's 15 electoral votes for granted. Mr. Bush has not pleaded for votes in New Jersey since attending a fund-raising event during the summer, and the same goes for the rest of the party heavyweights, who use the state as an ATM but not as a hunting ground for votes. Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's vice presidential running mate, was in the state for an appearance recently, of course, and thousands of commuters to the seashore will no doubt go to the polls next month with the memory of Vice President Al Gore shutting down the Garden State Parkway in rush hour so he could get to Jon Bon Jovi's $850,000 fund raiser for him. David Rebovich, a political scientist at Rider University, says that New Jersey Republicanism may be in bad odor with the rest of the party. Although it has a Republican governor and a Republican-controlled statehouse, the state's Republican Party is distinctly liberal by, say, Texas standards, and it got a black eye in the Iowa Republican debates last year when the conservative Gary L. Bauer, otherwise forgotten, demanded that Mr. Bush promise to never, ever pick Governor Whitman as a running mate. ''George Bush didn't write off New Jersey,'' Mr. Bodman said. ''He wrote off New York and the New York media market. When you have a limited amount of money, $68 million or whatever it is, it comes down to a fiscal decision.'' And any decision to buy expensive New York television advertising to reach New Jerseyans alone went out the window when Mr. Gore chose Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut, thereby undercutting the Bush's ancestral ties to Connecticut and making any media campaigns there pointless.
 In the 2000 campaign, when George W. Bush used a vulgarity near an open mike, The Dallas Morning News noted the difference between a minor slip and a major blunder: ''Analysts differ over whether it is a soon-to-be-forgotten blip or a blooper with staying power.'' Electronic media that wanted to shield their listeners bleeped the blip.
 Presidential race again turns to Mideast, with Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush talking of hopes and prayers for peace and their aides battling over charges that Bush camp exploits turmoil for political gain; Gore, campaigning in Detroit, is notably vigorous and aggressive, confidently attacking Bush; photo (M) The presidential campaign turned again toward the Middle East today, as Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush talked of hope and prayers for peace and their aides battled over charges that the Bush camp was exploiting the turmoil for political gain. On a day that the vice president  attacked Mr. Bush on policy issues, Mr. Gore's spokesman, Chris Lehane, accused Republicans of ''injecting campaign rhetoric and presidential politics'' into the crisis. The presidential campaign turned again toward the Middle East today, as Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush talked of hope and prayers for peace and their aides battled over charges that the Bush camp was exploiting the turmoil for political gain. On a day that the vice president  attacked Mr. Bush on policy issues, Mr. Gore's spokesman, Chris Lehane, accused Republicans of ''injecting campaign rhetoric and presidential politics'' into the crisis. On Friday, Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney, used events in the Middle East to bolster calls for decreasing America's dependence on foreign oil and for strengthening the military. ''Given the situation, people ought to be careful, be responsible,'' Mr. Lehane said. Mr. Bush's senior adviser, Ari Fleischer, dismissed today's accusation as a smoke screen. ''Mr. Lehane's comments are a mark of Al Gore's weak leadership at a time when his campaign is struggling,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''The crisis in the Middle East should not prevent our nation from discussing the implications of this administration's failure to have an energy policy. Governor Bush will continue to credit the administration in its efforts to stop the violence in the Middle East, but he will not hesitate to critique the administration's failed energy policies.'' The candidates themselves were more circumspect. Mr. Bush, who was in Texas preparing for Tuesday's debate, issued a statement after President Clinton announced a summit on Monday in Egypt: ''I welcome this development. I hope that Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Barak will do everything possible to stop the violence so that our longstanding goal of peace in the Middle East can be achieved.'' Mr. Gore said his prayers were with the families of the sailors killed and injured in the attack on the Navy destroyer in Yemen. Mr. Gore continued: ''As we grieve for those who were affected by the violence there, we think not only of the Americans, we think also of the Palestinians and the Israelis and the suffering that the families on both sides have felt.'' Mr. Lehane said the summit would not alter Mr. Gore's schedule, which called for him to leave Washington on Sunday evening for St. Louis, where he will prepare for the debate. At a rally in this fiercely contested state today, Mr. Gore delivered a spirited, turn-the-tables speech to a partisan crowd by accusing Mr. Bush of using ''fuzzy math'' to justify his policies on tax cuts, Social Security and health care. Mr. Bush introduced that term into the campaign when he used it repeatedly to criticize Mr. Gore in their first debate. Today, Mr. Gore appropriated the phrase, even as he argued that the differences between him and Mr. Bush were more about priorities than numbers. Mr. Gore's tone was notably vigorous and aggressive, a discernible change from his flat delivery in a speech in Iowa on Friday. He confidently, almost mockingly, assailed Mr. Bush for his campaign proposals and his record as governor. After telling of a health maintenance organization that had declined to pay for the treatment of a heart attack because it was not considered an emergency, Mr. Gore said, ''To those on the other side, maybe the absence of a heart isn't considered an emergency, but to us it is.'' Mr. Gore arrived in Michigan only a day after Mr. Bush departed and as a new poll showed Mr. Bush gaining on Mr. Gore in Michigan.. The poll, taken on Wednesday and Thursday by EPIC/MRA, a Lansing firm, gave Mr. Gore a lead of 45 percent to 42 percent over Mr. Bush. That gap was within the margin of sampling error of four percentage points. Previous polls by the same organization had Mr. Gore ahead by six  percentage points in late September and by eight percentage points in mid-September. Speaking to a crowd dominated by union members and African-Americans, Mr. Gore charged that Mr. Bush has failed to explain how he would pay for his proposal to allow workers to invest part of their Social Security deductions in the stock market, at an estimated cost of $1 trillion. That plan would eventually bankrupt the system, Mr. Gore said. He also used a study released this week by the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, to assert that Mr. Bush had been wrong when he said in Wednesday's debate that ''the percentage of uninsured in Texas has gone down while the percentage of uninsured in America has gone up.'' ''What I believe I heard last week was him saying the uninsured population in America went up and the uninsured population in Texas went down,'' Mr. Gore said of Mr. Bush. ''But what the figures seem to show is exactly the reverse. Now what is the phrase that describes that kind of calculation?'' ''I believe you're right,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Fuzzy math.'' Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said Mr. Gore had distorted the study by failing to acknowledge that the economy in Texas had raised incomes and therefore reduced the number of people eligible for Medicaid.
 In May, as he bickered with Gov. George W. Bush over the wisdom of allowing individuals to invest portions of their Social Security withholding taxes, Vice President Al Gore made a startling admission: he hadn't made a single dollar from the bull market. In fact, Gore explained, to avoid any conflicts of interest or the appearance thereof, he didn't even own stock, and hadn't since 1976, when he first joined Congress. The man fighting for ultimate stewardship of American fiscal policy had taken a pass on the greatest investment opportunity of our time in favor of an interest-bearing checking account. The vice president clearly expected that the news would inspire confidence; instead, it inspired Fortune magazine to suggest he could be ''a financial dolt.'' In this era of skyrocketing returns, what inspires confidence is the knowledge that an enormous chunk of your personal wealth derives from securities, especially those in the risky but potentially lucrative technology sector. Stock-market savvy has saturated every corner of society. (Liberty Financial now markets a special mutual fund to clients as young as 11.) By opting out, Gore lost serious street cred -- or at least Wall Street cred. In May, as he bickered with Gov. George W. Bush over the wisdom of allowing individuals to invest portions of their Social Security withholding taxes, Vice President Al Gore made a startling admission: he hadn't made a single dollar from the bull market. In fact, Gore explained, to avoid any conflicts of interest or the appearance thereof, he didn't even own stock, and hadn't since 1976, when he first joined Congress. The man fighting for ultimate stewardship of American fiscal policy had taken a pass on the greatest investment opportunity of our time in favor of an interest-bearing checking account. The vice president clearly expected that the news would inspire confidence; instead, it inspired Fortune magazine to suggest he could be ''a financial dolt.'' In this era of skyrocketing returns, what inspires confidence is the knowledge that an enormous chunk of your personal wealth derives from securities, especially those in the risky but potentially lucrative technology sector. Stock-market savvy has saturated every corner of society. (Liberty Financial now markets a special mutual fund to clients as young as 11.) By opting out, Gore lost serious street cred -- or at least Wall Street cred.
 The White House should support such a proposal, if only for purely political reasons. Any blowup from forced negotiations would undoubtedly damage the election campaigns of Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
 IT could have been a scene right out of a Candace Bushnell story. Three 30-something blondes were trying on leather pants, crowding in front of a mirror. Although they didn't know each other, the women had arrived simultaneously at Three Star Leather, an Upper East Side tailor, and were now bonding over the buttery hides. IT could have been a scene right out of a Candace Bushnell story. Three 30-something blondes were trying on leather pants, crowding in front of a mirror. Although they didn't know each other, the women had arrived simultaneously at Three Star Leather, an Upper East Side tailor, and were now bonding over the buttery hides.
 But he also carries his political persuasion. There are two ''Geeks for Gore'' pocket pro- tectors, which he has not yet used, from an Elton John concert and fund-raiser in Silicon Valley a few weeks ago. ''I think Elton John is awesome,'' said Mr. Doerr, a big contributor to the Democratic Party and also a fan of Paul Simon and James Taylor, whose music he called rock from my genera- tion. But he also carries his political persuasion. There are two ''Geeks for Gore'' pocket pro- tectors, which he has not yet used, from an Elton John concert and fund-raiser in Silicon Valley a few weeks ago. ''I think Elton John is awesome,'' said Mr. Doerr, a big contributor to the Democratic Party and also a fan of Paul Simon and James Taylor, whose music he called rock from my genera- tion.
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 Eisenhower gained an almost immediate benefit, said David Bushman, curator of the museum's package of screenings. In 1948, each presidential candidate trekked up to 30,000 miles to shake half a million hands; Eisenhower's commercials were sent out to 19 million television sets across the country and sealed his victory, Mr. Bushman said. Eisenhower's Democratic opponent, Adlai E. Stevenson, refused to appear in television advertisements, saying they showed contempt for the American people and proclaiming, ''This isn't Ivory Soap versus Palmolive.'' Apparently learning from his and Goldwater's gaffes, Nixon stayed away from reporters during the 1968 election and ran an image-laden campaign designed for television consumption. ''The events staged for the campaign become the campaign itself,'' Mr. Bushman said. ''For the first time, the staged event superseded reality.'' One of the most notorious presidential campaign advertisements appeared in 1988, when supporters of the Republican candidate, George Bush, broadcast a photograph of Willie Horton, a menacing-looking black man who had been imprisoned for murder and rape and then released on a prison furlough program in Massachusetts initiated by Mr. Bush's opponent, Michael S. Dukakis, the state's governor. Playing on racial fears, the ''revolving door'' ad helped make 1988, in the opinion of many, the nadir of political TV advertising. Largely in reaction, a greater scrutiny of political ads began with the 1992 campaign, as newspapers began to examine their truthfulness and balance. The resulting ''ad watches,'' combined with voters' increased disgust with attack ads, has resulted in cleaner, more issue-oriented ads today, Ms. Jamieson said. When Gov. George W. Bush's campaign released a commercial earlier this year ridiculing Vice President Al Gore and referring to his fund-raising visit to a Buddhist temple, it was criticized by many officials in Mr. Bush's own party.
 Mr. Castro, who has nearly outlasted nine American presidents, has shown no indication that he will get along with the 10th. In August, he remarked that George W. Bush and Al Gore were ''the most boring and insipid'' candidates in American history. On Canadian television, he said: ''I'm against both of them, I'd like another candidate. But there are only these two and my position is this: I don't like either of them.''
 Many health policy experts say 42.6 million Americans without health insurance have drawn far less attention in presidential race between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush than they had hoped; say candidates' proposals are on far smaller scale than those proposed in 1992 by their counterparts, Bill Clinton and Pres Bush; cite political collapse of Clinton's attempt at universal health insurance, Bill Bradley's failed effort to build his Democratic presidential campaign around issue and eclipsing of issue by debate over prescription drug coverage for elderly; table of proposals; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore has accused Gov. George W. Bush of ignoring the plight of the uninsured in Texas, which ranks near the bottom in health coverage. Mr. Bush has attacked Mr. Gore as just another liberal who wants a ''government-run health care system.'' Vice President Al Gore has accused Gov. George W. Bush of ignoring the plight of the uninsured in Texas, which ranks near the bottom in health coverage. Mr. Bush has attacked Mr. Gore as just another liberal who wants a ''government-run health care system.'' The issue of the uninsured has flared anew in the presidential campaign, with a fierce exchange in the last debate and a new round of charges and countercharges about the Bush record in Texas. But many health policy experts say that at least so far, the 42.6 million Americans without health insurance have drawn far less attention in this campaign than the experts would have  hoped, given the budget surplus and the booming economy. Both candidates have offered proposals to expand coverage, but neither plan is on the scale proposed by their counterparts in 1992, Bill Clinton and President Bush. Governor Bush's proposal to use tax credits to help people buy private insurance ''is simply dwarfed by his father's plan,'' said Uwe Reinhardt, an expert on health policy at Princeton. Mr. Gore would expand the existing Children's Health Insurance Program to ensure that all children have access to affordable coverage by 2005, a popular goal that gets high marks from health advocacy groups. But it also falls well short of the goal of health care for all, or universal coverage, that his party insisted on in 1992. Mr. Bush, for example, recently asserted that Mr. Gore ''likes Hillary-Care,'' adding, ''He wants to nationalize the health care system of America.'' (Not exactly. Contrary to Republican dogma, the exceedingly complicated Clinton plan would not have nationalized the health care system; it would have required employers to provide insurance and created regulatory structures to oversee benefits and premiums.) Senator Bill Bradley's failed effort to build his Democratic presidential campaign around the cause of universal coverage also probably had a chilling effect, several analysts said.  Throughout the fall and winter last year, Mr. Gore picked apart the Bradley plan as unwieldy and unworkable. ''The high point of talking about the uninsured was the Gore-Bradley debate,'' said Stuart Butler, a health expert at the Heritage Foundation, a research group. But it was not, in the end, a pretty moment. Dr. Gail Wilensky, a health adviser to Governor Bush and a top health official in his father's administration, said: ''Right before an election is a hard time to know where you are.  But potentially, come February or March, we may be able to make a move. And what we've clearly learned in the last eight years is that prosperity alone is not going to make this problem go away.'' The two candidates' proposals reflect their different philosophical approaches. Mr. Bush would use refundable tax credits -- up to $2,000 for families and $1,000 for individuals -- to help low- and moderate-income families buy health insurance on the private market. The full tax credit would be available to families with incomes up to $30,000 and would gradually phase out at higher incomes, with a cutoff at $60,000. Mr. Bush would also provide $8 billion in additional money over 10 years to  community health centers. The main criticism of Mr. Bush's plan is that the tax credits are too small. ''He's offering $1,000 for an individual policy that on average costs $2,000, and $2,000 for a family policy that on average costs $6,000,'' said Dr. Judith Feder, dean of policy studies at Georgetown University, and a former top health adviser in the Clinton Administration. For a family making $30,000 or less, Dr. Feder argued, that's the equivalent of ''giving a 10-foot rope to people in a 30-foot hole.'' Mr. Gore would expand eligibility for the Children's Health Insurance Program to cover all children in families with incomes up to about $42,000; children in families with higher incomes, whose parents did not have coverage through their employers, would be allowed to buy into the program, with the help of a new federal tax credit. That credit, 25 percent of the health insurance premium, would be aimed at middle-income people who had to buy insurance on their own. Moreover, the children's program would be expanded to cover uninsured low-income parents. Mr. Gore is proposing to spend more money on expanding coverage -- his campaign puts the price tag at $146 billion over 10 years, to Mr. Bush's $75.1 billion in the same time period -- and his focus on children and their parents has earned praise from advocacy groups. But several health care experts said that a more notable step would be to combine the Bush and Gore proposals. ''I think there's a possibility of a real compromise after the election,'' Mr. Butler said, with conservatives willing to accept some expansion of the children's program  and liberals willing to accept a greater use of tax credits for more moderate income people.
