 After Edward Gorey died in April, Andreas Brown, one of the executors of his estate, visited Gorey's 200-year-old 15-room house in Yarmouth Port, Mass. Mr. Brown began searching through closets, crannies -- in Gorey's words, ''beneath the floor, behind the door'' -- and possibly up the chimney. Amid the cosmic disarray, he discovered hundreds of stories and sketches, some finished, some unfinished, left behind by this grand master of the macabre. This is, Mr. Brown said, a trove of Goreyiana, with ample material for many future books and for plays based on his work. After Edward Gorey died in April, Andreas Brown, one of the executors of his estate, visited Gorey's 200-year-old 15-room house in Yarmouth Port, Mass. Mr. Brown began searching through closets, crannies -- in Gorey's words, ''beneath the floor, behind the door'' -- and possibly up the chimney. Amid the cosmic disarray, he discovered hundreds of stories and sketches, some finished, some unfinished, left behind by this grand master of the macabre. This is, Mr. Brown said, a trove of Goreyiana, with ample material for many future books and for plays based on his work. On one trip to the Gorey house, he was accompanied by Kevin McDermott, a producer and actor who has been involved in several theatrical anthologies of Gorey's work, including one called ''Amphoragorey,'' a musical presented in 1999 in Provincetown, Mass. Among the items they found were drawings Gorey had started for ''The Admonitory Hippopotamus,'' an unpublished story that was a featured part of the Provincetown show. The show, with some revisions and now titled ''The Gorey Details,'' is scheduled to open tonight at the Century Center for the Performing Arts in Manhattan. Presumably the hippo will be more admonitory than it was on Cape Cod. ''The Admonitory Hippopotamus, or Angelica and Sneezeby'' is a vintage Gorey story. A girl of 5 is playing cards with her brothers in a gazebo when suddenly she sees a spectral hippopotamus ''rising from the ha-ha.'' ''Fly at once!'' commands the hippo. ''All is discovered!'' The narrator of this musical is Ogdred Weary, one of Gorey's anagrammatized alter egos (along with Dogear Wryde and Regera Dowdy). He is played by Mr. McDermott, who bears a passing resemblance to the artist. He is tall (though shorter than Gorey) and has a piratical mustache (though no beard) and a properly sepulchral voice. During the last decade of his life Gorey was involved in a series of theatricals on Cape Cod, including a puppet show of his own invention. He gave his permission for the Provincetown musical but did not participate in it. After he saw it, however, he returned many times and made some suggestions, one that the title be changed to ''Hidden Turnips.'' There are frequent allusions to that vegetable in his work. Apparently he looked forward to the New York version but died before the production could be arranged. ''The Gorey Details,'' directed by Daniel Levans, credits Gorey as author. Several pieces in the revue derive from ''Tinned Lettuce,'' an earlier Gorey anthology presented at New York University. These include ''The Object Lesson'' and ''The Nursery Frieze'' and, as a refrain, the mysterious letters ''Q.R.V.'' Through countless references, ''Q.R.V.'' became a Gorey signature, letters chosen, he said, precisely because they had no meaning. ''Gorey Details'' begins with Ogdred Weary riding onstage on a bicycle, reciting words from ''Q.R.V'': ''Haiku, Glue, Seppaku Maru, Wiggle, Wuggle, Wuggily Ump,'' followed by his comment, ''I really must write something today.'' The musical is a tribute to Gorey's long involvement with theater, which began when he was a student at Harvard University in the late 1940's. He and his roommate, the poet Frank O'Hara, joined the Poets Theater in Cambridge, where Gorey was active as a playwright and designer. His books have an irrepressible streak of theatricality, but it was not until ''Dracula'' on Broadway in 1977 that he immersed himself (somewhat) in a large stage project. The concept and the design of that show were based on his crosshatched art. His major interest at the time, in addition to his work, was the ballet. During this period he attended every performance of George Balanchine dances at the New York City Ballet. He remained stage-struck as well as balletomaniacal, which is why so many of his tales have references to those performing arts and to opera. In ''The Weeping Chandelier'' (in the first act of ''Gorey Details''), Theodora runs away from her home with three bats, Flip, Flop and Righty-ho. As a quartet, they create a variety act in which she plays the castanets while the bats perform on a tightrope. Together they become the rage of Europe until Theodora marries the Duque de Sangre y Trueno in the Church of the Whited Sepulcher. Then she retires from the stage, as do her batty partners. Throughout his life Gorey had a great affinity for creatures other than human and lived with an entourage of cats. (After his death they were given to cat-loving friends and relatives.) Significantly, the primary beneficiary of his estate is a charitable trust to be established for animals and other creatures. Money will go to needy cats and dogs, various invertebrates including insects, and, of course, bats like Flip, Flop and Righty-ho. One probable recipient is a bat conservancy in Austin, Tex. Just before the afternoon rehearsal began, Mr. Levans described Gorey's art as ''eccentric, honest, extreme and very precise: there's little room for embellishment, and if one begins to embellish, you've left the Gorey world.'' In performance, he said, the approach was to ''flip the page, next picture, flip the page, move on.'' Overseeing the action, the director advised his actors, ''Can we get a little more Goreyesque?,'' and they performed the piece again. After her final voyage Ms. DeSalvo climbed aboard Mr. Levine's back. At 86, Angelica, now the dowager Duchess of Paltry, was last seen riding away on an admonitory hippopotamus.
 WEDNESDAY  Alliant Energy Corp  Apartment Invt & Mgmt Co  AptarGroup Inc  Bush Inds Inc  California Wtr Svc Group  Charter One Finl Inc  Chittenden Corp  Colonial Bancgroup Inc  Dana Corp  Detroit Diesel Corp  Equitable Res Inc  Mallinckrodt Inc New  Minnesota Pwr Inc  PG&E Corp  Pinnacle West Cap Corp  Rohm & Haas Co  Simon Ppty Group Inc New  Standard Mtr Prods Inc  Stanley Wks  TCW Conv Secs Fd Inc  Teco Energy Inc  Vastar Res Inc
 Three Texas state legislators said today that Gov. George W. Bush had exaggerated state spending on health care for uninsured people in Texas, taking credit for large amounts of charity care provided by private doctors and hospitals. The legislators, all Democrats, made the assertions in separate interviews today and in a letter to Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic candidate for president. The Bush campaign rejected the criticism. Three Texas state legislators said today that Gov. George W. Bush had exaggerated state spending on health care for uninsured people in Texas, taking credit for large amounts of charity care provided by private doctors and hospitals. The legislators, all Democrats, made the assertions in separate interviews today and in a letter to Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic candidate for president. The Bush campaign rejected the criticism. Mr. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, has repeatedly accused Mr. Gore of embellishing and distorting the truth. Aides to Mr. Gore said he would try to turn the tables on Mr. Bush this week, highlighting instances in which Democrats believe the governor has overstated his commitment to the health and welfare of indigent Texans. On three occasions in their debate last week, Mr. Bush said, ''We spent $4.7 billion a year in the state of Texas for uninsured people.'' However, a recent report by the state comptroller says $3.5 billion, or three-fourths of that amount, resulted from charity care provided by doctors and hospitals and care financed by local governments or charitable institutions. The letter to Mr. Gore, to be released at a political event in St. Louis on Monday, says Mr. Bush's statements on health care in Texas were misleading. Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said Governor Bush did not mean to imply that all of the $4.7 billion was state money. ''The governor was merely explaining that, contrary to Al Gore's distortions, people in Texas do have access to health care,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''We have a double safety net to make sure that people who don't have insurance receive the care they need.'' But the Democratic state legislators contend that Mr. Bush bears some of the responsibility. In the debate, Mr. Bush acknowledged that the Children's Health Insurance Program ''got a late start'' in Texas. The reason, he said, is that the State Legislature ''meets only four months out of every two years.'' But the legislators said Mr. Bush had resisted their efforts to make coverage available to children in families with incomes up to twice the poverty level (up to $28,300 for a family of three). Mr. Bartlett confirmed that Mr. Bush had initially wanted to limit eligibility to families with incomes up to 1.5 times the poverty level. He said Mr. Bush was concerned about the cost and the ''spillover effects'' on other programs, particularly Medicaid. Governor Bush ultimately accepted the more generous eligibility criteria favored by the State Legislature, but Democratic legislators said he had helped delay coverage for needy Texas children. Governor Bush and legislative leaders of both parties insisted that decisions about how to spend the money should be made by the State Legislature, which did not meet until 1999.
 The high price of oil has dominated political discussion around the globe in recent months, with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries agreeing to increase crude oil production by 3 percent, or 800,000 barrels, in September in an effort to decrease prices, which reached more than $37 a barrel earlier this year. President Clinton released 30 million barrels of oil from the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve a week and half later to further dampen the price of oil after Vice President Al Gore injected the issue into the presidential campaign. Reacting broadly to news of Chevron's acquisition of Texaco, Mr. Gore's spokesman said: ''Given the fact that oil companies saw their profits rise by more that 300 percent in the past year, it raises the question whether big oil is getting too big.'' A spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush, whose business career began in the oil fields of West Texas, said,  ''These are legal and technical matters and should be decided by regulators without political interference.''
 Gov. George W. Bush has written that ''by far the most profound'' decision he or any governor can make is whether to proceed with an execution. ''I get the facts, weigh them thoughtfully and carefully, and decide,'' Mr. Bush wrote in his autobiography. What he did not say is that he normally does this in 15 minutes. Gov. George W. Bush has written that ''by far the most profound'' decision he or any governor can make is whether to proceed with an execution. ''I get the facts, weigh them thoughtfully and carefully, and decide,'' Mr. Bush wrote in his autobiography. What he did not say is that he normally does this in 15 minutes. A review of Mr. Bush's daily schedules, correspondence and other documents, obtained after requests made under public-information laws in Texas, underscores that he has devoted himself remarkably little to policy details -- including whether to go ahead with executions -- and instead spent most of his time wooing legislators, the public and the news media. Yet this may have made him more effective as governor, not less. Even many Democrats in Texas praise Mr. Bush, saying he has appointed unusually well-qualified people, avoided disabling scandals or controversies and succeeded in getting a popular agenda passed into law. It is impossible to know clearly what a Bush presidency would be like from his years as governor, in part because Mr. Bush has held office for just five years and has never been tested by a recession or other crisis. But his experience here in Austin can help form some tentative ideas about how he might operate as president. The 900-page stack of Mr. Bush's schedules and correspondence obtained from the governor's office portrays a governor who works short hours and spends little time studying specific issues or working on executive matters. The schedules show that Mr. Bush typically had his first office meeting about 9 a.m., took two hours of ''private time'' at lunch for a run, and then wrapped up his last meeting by about 5 p.m. Aides acknowledge Mr. Bush's impatience with long meetings and briefing papers. But they praise this as a Reagan-style assertion of a chief executive's responsibility to dictate broad principles and then delegate minor matters. The detachment from policy details may arise in part because Texas law gives a governor very limited powers -- he cannot commute a death sentence, for example, but only delay its implementation for 30 days. And it may partly arise because Mr. Bush shows great trust in those to whom he delegates authority, such as the people he appoints to the board of pardons and paroles. He almost always follows the board's recommendations. A spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, Linda Edwards, said he might spend more than 15 minutes reviewing a death penalty case -- the meeting might go longer than scheduled, or he might make a follow-up call later -- and that the time schedule reflected Mr. Bush's confidence in his legal advisers. Ms. Edwards said the advisers might have spent hours reviewing a death penalty case before discussing it with the governor. The schedules examined were for 1997, because that was a year in which the Texas Legislature met (there is no legislative session in even years) and thus gave Mr. Bush the chance to be more involved in policy, and he had not yet begun traveling widely in pursuit of the presidency. These days, Mr. Bush is rarely in the governor's office. The schedules do not, of course, tell the full story. Long chunks of time were left blank, and just because nothing was scheduled does not mean that Mr. Bush was playing solitaire on his computer (although he sometimes did). Aides say that during periods when his schedule was blank, Mr. Bush made phone calls, read and answered correspondence, talked to staff members, met visitors and dropped in on legislators. These visits with legislators -- which Mr. Bush made much more frequently than past governors had -- have generated enormous good will for him and helped increase his effectiveness in getting legislation passed. It was George W. Bush, then the Republican candidate for governor, and he was making a secret visit to a legendary Democratic kingmaker, Bob Bullock. They had never met, and even their aides did not know of that first meeting. It would have been natural for them to sit down together after the election, but it was extraordinary for Mr. Bush to reach out in this way in the middle of a campaign that many thought he would lose. Yet Mr. Bullock, a craggy, explosive man, a Rodin statue come to life, invited Mr. Bush into the kitchen and sat down at the table. Jan Bullock, Mr. Bullock's widow (he died last year), recalled that Mr. Bush first walked to the counter and, without invitation, poured himself a mug of coffee. Then he sat down at the small table and made a plea for a truce instead of a political war. That meeting, recounted by Mr. Bush's aides as well as by Mrs. Bullock, helped lay the groundwork for one of Mr. Bush's proudest achievements as governor -- the spirit of bipartisan cooperation that hugely multiplied his effectiveness. Many politicians and consultants say that so far, at least, Mr. Bush has not left any fundamentally new imprint or legacy in Texas, but that he did succeed in uniting Republicans and Democrats behind an agenda that took Texas several steps toward bolstering schools and creating a more pro-business environment. One of Mr. Bush's campaign themes has been his boast, which many Texas Democrats say is justified, that as governor he worked particularly closely with Democrats. Thus a central question about Mr. Bush is simply how transferable his style would be to Washington. As a result, the two parties were divided by rivalry and distrust in Texas, but not by their positions on the issues, as is true in most of the nation. Mrs. Bullock, for example, says there were no ideological differences between her husband and Mr. Bush. Yet while there are doubts about whether Mr. Bush could achieve a similarly harmonious relationship in Washington, this bipartisanship remains a real and unexpected achievement in Texas. No one would have anticipated his partnership with Mr. Bullock, and the two men's cooperation became a reason Mr. Bush could get things done and a source of his tremendous popularity. His critics accuse him of being a terrible governor on the issues -- keeping poor children off the health insurance rolls, backing polluters as they destroy the air and water, doing little to improve the quasi-third world conditions in the communities known as ''colonias'' close to the Mexican border. But few critics try to argue that Mr. Bush has been ineffective or unpopular. Professor Buchanan said Mr. Bush would be remembered as an incrementalist who had achieved modest progress on his own limited agenda -- more progress than his Democratic predecessor, Ann Richards -- but that he would leave a much smaller imprint on Texas than such predecessors as John B. Connally, who helped build the state's university system, or Mark White, who worked with Ross Perot to begin an overhaul of the state's education system. Back when Mr. Bush began his campaign for governor, just about everybody thought he was crazy. Ms. Richards was a national figure and media star with high popularity ratings. Even Mr. Bush's own mother, Barbara, urged him not to run against her. Yet Mr. Bush was determined, and he ran a shrewd race while keeping his hot temper in check. Ms. Richards tried to aggravate Mr. Bush into self-destruction by needling him and belittling him as a dull-witted daddy's boy who had never accomplished anything on his own. If Mr. Bush had detonated in front of a television camera, such an explosion would have been particularly costly because it might have been seen as confirmation of what many Texans suspected: that he was running against Ms. Richards partly for personal reasons, to seek revenge. Ms. Richards had made a famous speech to the Democratic National Convention in 1988, ridiculing Mr. Bush's father as ''born with a silver foot in his mouth.'' Yet Mr. Bush, whose temperament in the past had resembled a string of firecrackers popping, simply grinned amicably when Ms. Richards goaded him over the course of the campaign as a ''shrub'' and a ''jerk.'' His cousin Elsie Walker said she watched Mr. Bush and Ms. Richards debate on television, periodically cowering behind a bathroom door as she waited for Mr. Bush to blow up. But he had matured, and he came across as the cooler candidate. One of Mr. Bush's insights was that while Texans liked Ms. Richards, they did not much agree with her and regarded her as too liberal. And so he ran an exceptionally focused, tight campaign that hammered home his themes day after day: better schools, a tougher juvenile justice system, tighter restrictions on welfare and new limits on tort lawsuits. Mr. Bush's greatest asset in life, with the possible exception of his name and connections, has been a winning personality, and he used it to great effect in the campaign. On the opening day of dove season, Sept. 1, Mr. Bush went out -- with 30-odd reporters in tow -- to shoot a dove. A bird flew up, he blasted away with his shotgun, he held up the bird proudly for the news photographers. Then the reporters pointed out that he had shot not a dove, but a protected songbird known as the killdeer. Mr. Bush promptly confessed, paid a $130 fine and began a news conference that afternoon by saying: ''Thank goodness it wasn't deer season. I might have shot a cow.'' The humor and discipline of the campaign worked: Mr. Bush defeated Ms. Richards with a healthy 54 percent of the vote. During the campaign, Mr. Bush had told a reporter of his belief that the path to heaven comes from acceptance of Jesus as one's personal savior. Mr. Bush later recalled: ''It was, of course, picked up and politicized -- you know, 'Bush to Jews: Go to Hell.' It was very ugly. It hurt my feelings.'' ''It hurt me,'' Mr. Bush recalled saying. ''It hurt to think that you think I've condemned you to hell, because I would never do that. That's not my role in life.'' Mr. Bush later explained that the Rev. Billy Graham had helped him reach this position. As he recalled in a 1998 interview, the issue arose when he was visiting his parents in the White House and the discussion turned to religion: he argued that only Christians had a place in heaven, while his mother disagreed. ''I said, 'Mom, look, all I can tell you is what the New Testament says,' '' Mr. Bush recounted. ''And she said, 'Well, surely God will accept others.' And I said, 'Mom, here's what the New Testament says.' And she said, 'O.K.,' and she picks up the phone and calls Billy Graham. She says to the White House operator, 'Get me Billy Graham.' ''I said, 'Mother, what are you doing?' '' Mr. Bush said. ''Seriously. And about two minutes later, the phone rings, and it's Billy Graham, and Mother and I are on the phone with Billy. And Mother explains the circumstances, and Billy says: 'From a personal perspective, I agree with what George is saying; the New Testament has been my guide. But I want to caution you both. Don't play God. Who are you two to be God?' '' The issue reflects Mr. Bush's penchant for holding to views whose implications some might find offensive, while doing all he can to avoid giving any offense. The logical conclusion of Mr. Bush's theology may be that non-Christians cannot enter heaven, but he consciously steps aside before reaching that conclusion and insists that it is not his role to be gatekeeper. A similar pattern arises on gay issues. While campaigning in 1994, Mr. Bush opposed an effort to repeal an anti-sodomy law making homosexual acts a crime in Texas. The effort to repeal the bill failed very narrowly, and it remains on the books, apparently with Mr. Bush's support. Yet Mr. Bush has avoided trumpeting his views about homosexuality. Glen Maxey, a gay Democrat in the Texas House of Representatives, recalled an occasion when Governor Bush was visiting the House floor to support a bill that would have banned adoption by gay couples. ''We had a short talk on the House floor,'' Mr. Maxey said. ''He said, 'Glen, I value you as a friend, and what I say about gay people doesn't apply to you personally.' And I said: 'Governor, when you say you're against gay adoption, you're talking about me. And I take that very personally.' '' ''George Bush was totally comfortable with me,'' Mr. Maxey added. ''But it's all those other gay people out there. I think that mentality runs through him, whether it's race or sexual orientation. Up front, he's a great guy. But when you move to policy things, it's a great danger.'' ''It's Bush, and he's very friendly,'' recalled Mr. Naishtat, a liberal who is the chairman of the House committee that was then considering welfare legislation. Some Capitol police officers were nearby, and Mr. Naishtat jokingly called out to them for help, but they did not interfere. So the governor walked Mr. Naishtat down the steps, keeping him bent over and in the headlock. This aggressive bonhomie is very much Mr. Bush's style, and it has been very effective in Texas. Mr. Naishtat, for example, admits that it was ''seductive'' to be mugged by the governor, although he quickly adds that this aggressive approach did not work: he did not allow the welfare bills out of committee. Still, what is striking in talking to Texas politicians, even Democrats, is how much they like Mr. Bush. He invites them to the governor's mansion, he drops by their offices, he praises them in the press, he puts them in friendly headlocks. Mr. Sadler worked very closely with Mr. Bush on changes in the education system, and when the new school law was signed in June 1995, Mr. Bush scheduled the ceremony in Mr. Sadler's hometown, Henderson, and then praised him for his work. It would be difficult to imagine such an event at the federal level, with a president traveling to the hometown of the other party's congressman to thank him for his work on a bill. One result of this gesture is that Mr. Sadler describes himself as a friend of Mr. Bush and is not taking sides in the presidential race. That is remarkably common: many Texas Democrats are steering clear of Vice President Al Gore and remaining on the sidelines. Yet the Texas Democrats are sometimes also a bit irritated that all the credit for bipartisanship goes to Mr. Bush. They emphasize that Mr. Bush's success was in large part a consequence of his extraordinary partnership with Mr. Bullock, who was the lieutenant governor and arguably held more power under the Texas system than Mr. Bush. The two men developed almost a father-son relationship, with Mr. Bullock doing much of Mr. Bush's heavy legislative lifting. And while it was Mr. Bush who reached out, Mr. Bullock responded with equal enthusiasm. Likewise, Democrats say Mr. Bush's agenda was partly drawn from measures that were already bubbling up in the Legislature, which would have been passed even under a different governor. ''Was he significant?'' Mr. Sadler said, referring to Mr. Bush's role on the education bill. ''Absolutely. But were the ideas his? No, that's not the way it happened. There were a whole bunch of people, Democrats and Republicans alike, working to get it done, and he was a part of that team. He was no more significant than any member of my committee or of the Senate committee.'' A Texas governor's main powers lie in making appointments and using the bully pulpit. On both counts, Mr. Bush gets high marks from many Democrats as well as Republicans. State records show that Mr. Bush has appointed many fewer members of minority groups than Ms. Richards -- 80 percent of his appointees have been white, compared with 66 percent of Ms. Richards's and 55 percent of the Texas population as a whole. In addition, 63 percent of Mr. Bush's appointees have been men. While Mr. Bush's appointments have been less diverse over all, his choices have mostly been well-respected moderates rather than hard-line ideologues (although a couple of appointees have aroused criticism because of their remarks about blacks and Hispanics). And Mr. Bush's judicial appointees say they were never asked about their positions on issues like abortion. In contrast to this traditionally political approach, Mr. Bush appointed an old friend from the business world, Clay Johnson, to head the appointment process. Many of his appointees are financial contributors or cronies, but many others are simply experts in their field who are not politically active, or even Democrats. Mr. Bush's one effort to leave a major legacy in Texas showed just the kind of vision that critics often said his father lacked in the White House. It was a far-reaching tax proposal that would have addressed weaknesses in public finance in Texas by reducing property taxes, raising the sales tax and levying a new tax on partnerships of professionals like doctors, lawyers and accountants. It was a bold move that reflected a measure of political courage: Mr. Bush, not surprisingly, was promptly denounced for trying to raise new taxes. The proposal failed ignominiously, for while there was widespread agreement that Texas' emphasis on property taxes was outdated, reflecting an era when most wealth came from the land, Mr. Bush could not build a consensus on how to replace the lost revenue. Mr. Bush never mentions the proposal these days, perhaps because it failed, or perhaps because it could remind voters that he had once favored raising the sales tax. He said afterward that the failure demonstrated how hard it was to achieve dramatic change without a crisis to force it. An old friend and high school roommate, John Kidde, recalled visiting Mr. Bush for a 50th-birthday celebration in July 1996. Governor Bush's Journey This is the 16th article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future installments will look at Al Gore and religion and George W. Bush's decision to seek the presidency.
 ''Guess what?'' said George W. Bush, whose home state is already the champion of the Western world when it comes to executions. ''The three men who murdered James Byrd, guess what's going to happen to them? They're going to be put to death.'' There was a disturbing, upbeat quality to the governor's tone as he said this during last week's debate with Vice President Al Gore. His face brightened in a way that was unsettling to much of the nation. He was  so obviously and inappropriately pleased. If he honestly believes that, he's deluded. If he and Governor Bush are at all interested in the truth, they could start by reading the Texas Defender Service study, which is titled, ''A State of Denial: Texas Justice and the Death Penalty.''
 But if Vice President Al Gore is elected president and Mr. Lieberman vice president, he will resign from the Senate, and Gov. John G. Rowland, a Republican, will doubtless appoint a Republican to hold the Connecticut Senate seat until the 2002 election. And if Mr. Lieberman does not become vice president and remains in the Senate, then there will be a Republican vice president, Dick Cheney, to cast the tie-breaking vote if the Senate is evenly divided.
 What troubles The Times about Al Gore's tough-minded Weltanschauung is just what draws me to the Democrat; with perverse consistency, what appeals to The Times about George Bush's reluctance to intervene worries me about the Republican. What troubles The Times about Al Gore's tough-minded Weltanschauung is just what draws me to the Democrat; with perverse consistency, what appeals to The Times about George Bush's reluctance to intervene worries me about the Republican. Take the Balkans. (As Henny Youngman would have added, ''Please!'') Gore, frowned The Times yesterday, ''argued for a more muscular projection of American influence, including military intervention, in overseas trouble spots. He described himself as a 'hard-liner' in favor of action during debates over the Balkans. . . .'' ''Mr. Gore, in trying to draw distinctions between himself and the less-experienced governor,'' continued my distressed confreres about the second debate, ''outlined a more aggressive response to America's role as the sole superpower.'' Though crediting him for being on the right track for trying to deal with genocidal conflict, The Times complained that ''he offered no assurances on what limits he might place on such involvements. Defining such limits is the essence of presidential leadership.'' That's what I like most about Gore: he confidently asserts his assumption of superpower responsibility. He offers no self-defeating promises about exit strategies and makes no apologies for taking action to save lives, protect human values and turn back totalitarians. Marshaling public support for needed sacrifice is, in my book, the job of a leader. And what of George W., whose tax plan, decentralization approach and retirement reforms I embrace? ''As a page that has generally been reluctant to endorse military intervention,'' says the editorial of the newspaper I revere (especially for inventing the Op-Ed page), ''we like Mr. Bush's cautious attitude.'' It likes his position that ''any foreign involvement must be based on a strict definition of vital national interest.'' Those qualifiers -- ''strict'' and ''vital'' -- strike me as words used often to excuse or justify inaction. Bush's most impressive moment in the campaign came when he parted company from impatient Republicans in Congress who, using such severe-sounding weasel words, wanted to exit-strategize our troops out of the Balkans before our intervention helped the Serbian people free themselves. It's undeniable, though, that Bush --  whose foreign experience is second-hand -- is using the language of caution. This is designed to persuade voters that his inexperience would not lead him to reckless action. Bush's rhetoric of restraint is supposed to insulate him from the charges of ''that damned cowboy,'' leveled first by Mark Hanna against Teddy Roosevelt and by others at Ronald Reagan. On this, I'm rooting for Bush to be more like Gore -- unless, of course, Gore tries to be more like Bush.
 Gov. George W. Bush plans to send the nation's 28 Republican governors on a three-day campaign swing to hotly contested states. He will also deploy a team of women -- political wives and advisers -- and Senator John McCain of Arizona to woo swing voters. Three Texas state legislators, all Democrats, said Mr. Bush had exaggerated state spending on health care for uninsured people in Texas, taking credit for large amounts of charity care provided by private doctors and hospitals. The Bush campaign rejected the criticism. A review of Mr. Bush's daily schedules, correspondence and other documents underscores that as governor he has devoted himself remarkably little to policy details and instead spent most of his time wooing legislators, the public and the news media. Yet this may have made him more effective as governor, not less.
 Both presidential candidates also agree that Medicare needs an overhaul and appear headed toward roughly similar solutions, except for prescription drugs. However, Mr. Gore's proposals are more generous, and more costly, than Mr. Bush's. Mr. Bush proposes adding a drug benefit to Medicare, with large subsidies for low-income families and about a 25 percent subsidy for everyone else. He also proposes to cap each enrollee's annual out-of-pocket costs for all Medicare services, including drugs, at $6,000. He has embraced the broad outlines of the commission's original proposal and his advisers say privately that the Breaux-Frist-Clinton revision is consistent with his principles. Mr. Gore also proposes a drug benefit with large subsidies for low-income families and about a 50 percent subsidy for everyone else. He would limit out-of-pocket drug costs to $4,000 a year, but he has not proposed a cap on non-drug spending. He embraces Mr. Clinton's proposal for overall reform. The chief area of disagreement -- and it is a major one -- is the mechanism for delivering drug coverage. Mr. Gore proposes that every enrollee be offered an identical drug benefit. Coverage would be administered by a single private benefits manager in each region. Republicans reject this idea because, they say, it turns health coverage over to a government-created monopoly. Mr. Bush would first establish an interim plan in which drug coverage would be left to the states for four years, with Washington contributing subsidies to encourage state action. After that, Medicare would involve the private sector in providing drug coverage. Mr. Bush would not create a uniform benefit, nor specify what premiums, co-payments or deductibles the elderly would pay. Every health plan serving Medicare would simply be required to offer drug coverage costing about $800 an enrollee. He would rely on competition to make sure the elderly were offered affordable options. But the Bush subsidies look small, raising fears that many enrollees would find no affordable coverage. Mr. Gore's plan is preferable because benefits would not rely on uncertain action by the states or the private sector. But his approach could be modified to attract Republican support after the election. It could retain a uniform benefit but have the government hire several private managers in each region to administer the benefit and compete for customers. That would replace monopoly with competition as Republicans seek.
 Only an hour or so after Gov. George W. Bush's well-reviewed performance in Wednesday night's presidential debate, one of his top aides called to tell him that he ''just became the president of the United States.'' Only an hour or so after Gov. George W. Bush's well-reviewed performance in Wednesday night's presidential debate, one of his top aides called to tell him that he ''just became the president of the United States.'' Small wonder that by late Friday afternoon, as Mr. Bush's week on the campaign trail ended, he jittered across the tarmac in Pontiac, Mich., like a human pinball machine, juiced by electricity, lit from within, beaming and bopping. With little more than three weeks until Election Day, Mr. Bush and his aides are exuding a mood as helium-buoyant as at any other point in the 16 months of his campaign. And there is some wisdom and potential benefit in that: many political scientists say that late-deciding voters often break in favor of the candidate who is perceived to be on the surest path to victory. But there is danger, too, in all of the Austin ebullience, because the Bush campaign has fallen prey to overconfidence in the past. In the days immediately before the Republican primary in New Hampshire, Mr. Bush went sledding, bowling and snowmobile riding, obviously unprepared for the landslide victory Senator John McCain of Arizona ended up posting. Just weeks later, the Bush campaign was surprised again when Mr. McCain beat the Texas governor in the Michigan primary. One senior Republican official who advises the Bush campaign said he did not believe that Mr. Bush and his aides, for all their brio, were letting themselves be lulled into a false sense of security this time around. Indeed, the Bush campaign is in some ways beginning to pull out all the stops. This week, it is sending Mr. Bush's mother, Barbara Bush, out to campaign in the crucial swing states of Michigan and Pennsylvania, and next week, it is putting 28 fellow Republican governors in four airplanes to spend several days crisscrossing the country for Mr. Bush. But the adviser acknowledged that Mr. Bush has a tendency toward excessive optimism, citing as an example his selection in July of Dick Cheney, the former defense secretary and a longtime Bush family friend, as a running mate. Many Republican officials still see that choice as an indication that Mr. Bush felt so serene atop the polls that he put emotional preference before political strategy. Mr. Cheney, after all, is from Wyoming, a solidly Republican state with only three electoral votes, and his conservative voting record in Congress would seem to have little appeal to moderate swing voters. But several political analysts said that what Mr. Bush and his campaign may be doing now, with their constant trumpeting of recent polls that show Mr. Bush edging ahead of Mr. Gore, is trying to weave an aura of imminent triumph. It could make a difference. Mr. Lewis-Beck said he thought  Mr. Gore would prevail, based on a predictive formula that weighs factors like the health of the economy and the approval ratings for the incumbent administration. Still, Mr. Bush and his allies might be accused of pushing it a bit far. On Saturday, the Bush campaign produced a news release with the headline that Mr. Bush was ''leading Al Gore among the next generation of women voters,'' and Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, drew reporters' attention to this development in a conference call today. Chris Lehane, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said the Bush campaign was ''gloating,'' while Mr. Gore and his aides have ''always had a gloat-free zone.'' But even as Mr. Bush's supporters flash broad smiles, their language suggests an awareness that the Republican presidential nominee still has to work to convince hesitant, ambivalent voters that he is adequately prepared to run the affairs of the country. The word Mr. Ridge used on Thursday afternoon to sum up Mr. Bush's debate performance was ''presidential,'' and he made a point of saying it twice. Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, insisted on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' this morning that Mr. Bush was ''ready'' for the presidency, which happened to be the same locution Gov. John Engler of Michigan repeated several times at a Bush rally on Thursday night. That same evening, aboard his campaign plane, Mr. Bush had an exchange with the press corps that revealed a keen awareness of the disparaging questions about the depth of his knowledge and a keen interest in putting that chatter to rest. A reporter jokingly asked Mr. Bush if she could leave the plane through the less crowded front door, which Mr. Bush uses, instead of the back door, noting that the rear exit was ''separate'' but not ''equal.'' ''Plessy v. Ferguson!'' Mr. Bush exclaimed, showing off his familiarity with the 1896 Supreme Court decision that instituted a separate-but-equal doctrine to permit racial segregation in public facilities. His grin was gargantuan.
 ''It was real exciting for the first 18 hours, and then it got a little scary,'' said Randy Ellis, who, with the best of intentions, sent a note and an accompanying newspaper clipping about school overcrowding to Vice President Al Gore. The clipping's photograph showed Kailey Ellis, Mr. Ellis's 15-year-old daughter, standing in a crowded classroom at Sarasota High School. ''It was real exciting for the first 18 hours, and then it got a little scary,'' said Randy Ellis, who, with the best of intentions, sent a note and an accompanying newspaper clipping about school overcrowding to Vice President Al Gore. The clipping's photograph showed Kailey Ellis, Mr. Ellis's 15-year-old daughter, standing in a crowded classroom at Sarasota High School. First, his note became a tidbit by Mr. Gore in a televised debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on Oct. 3. Kailey thought it was cool that it made national television, and Mr. Ellis was proud he had called the problem -- part of a larger national issue -- to the vice president's attention. But then Republicans used a misstatement in Mr. Gore's comment -- the vice president said Kailey ''has to stand'' when she had stood for only one day on the ninth day of classes -- to question the vice president's credibility. Fueled by indignant reaction from the school's principal, Dan Kennedy, and other school officials who resented having their highly rated high school used on national television to make a point about education problems, Bush campaign workers said Mr. Gore's statement showed that he would embellish a truth for political gain. It makes Mr. Ellis, who happens to be a Republican himself, shake his head. ''It was nonpolitical,'' said Mr. Ellis, a general manager at a Sarasota restaurant, of his decision to send the note to Mr. Gore while he was helping prepare lunch for the vice president during a campaign stop before the debate. ''I had an opportunity to get a message to Washington,'' Mr. Ellis said. If he had been catering Mr. Bush's lunch instead, he would have done the same, Mr. Ellis said. But when Mr. Gore, in the Oct. 3 debate, referred to Mr. Ellis's note as a sign of a need for increased spending in education, he said of Kailey's classroom, ''They can't squeeze another desk in for her, so she has to stand.'' ''It was verb tense,'' Mr. Ellis said of Mr. Gore's mistake. '' 'She has to stand,' Gore said, instead of saying she had to stand. We've been asked if Gore stretched the truth. In my view, he used it to drive home a point, and it was a good point. ''The funny thing is, it looks like I'm defending Al Gore, and I'm a Republican. My name was mud around Sarasota.'' The national media, pundits and talk show hosts, Mr. Ellis said, seized on comments by Mr. Kennedy, whom he said he respects, and other school officials, who said Mr. Gore exaggerated the overcrowding problem. His comments rebutting Mr. Gore's claim included a column in The Wall Street Journal that bore the headline: ''Note to Gore: Sarasota High Is Not a Sob Story.'' It delighted Republicans here and around the nation. But Mr. Kennedy said politics had nothing to do with his response to Mr. Gore's comments. The schools superintendent, Ms. Hamilton, also said politics played no role in her decision to strongly rebut the image of the school Mr. Gore put forth. Everyone, Mr. Ellis said, seemed to miss the point. It was not that Mr. Gore made what he called a small mistake in recounting the problem, but that the problem exists.
 In the swirl of commuters coming and going outside Grand Central Terminal, I found myself next to a young couple holding hands. Maybe newlyweds, I thought, based on the wee bit of air space between their bodies as they walked toward Park Avenue. At the corner of 41st Street, they stopped, apparently to head in separate directions. He gave her a peck on the mouth and started to head east. She ran toward him and grabbed his hand before he got away, and I heard her say, rather imploringly, ''Aren't you going to give me a Gore?'' In the swirl of commuters coming and going outside Grand Central Terminal, I found myself next to a young couple holding hands. Maybe newlyweds, I thought, based on the wee bit of air space between their bodies as they walked toward Park Avenue. At the corner of 41st Street, they stopped, apparently to head in separate directions. He gave her a peck on the mouth and started to head east. She ran toward him and grabbed his hand before he got away, and I heard her say, rather imploringly, ''Aren't you going to give me a Gore?''
 Beginning the final phase of the presidential campaign, Gov. George W. Bush plans to send the nation's Republican governors in a three-day fly-around to battleground states as well as deploy a phalanx of women and his onetime bitter primary rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona, to woo swing voters. The Bush campaign said 28 of Mr. Bush's fellow Republican governors, including his brother Jeb, of Florida, plan to converge on Austin on Sunday for a rally. Beginning the final phase of the presidential campaign, Gov. George W. Bush plans to send the nation's Republican governors in a three-day fly-around to battleground states as well as deploy a phalanx of women and his onetime bitter primary rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona, to woo swing voters. The Bush campaign said 28 of Mr. Bush's fellow Republican governors, including his brother Jeb, of Florida, plan to converge on Austin on Sunday for a rally. They then plan to split onto seven planes and crisscross the country for Mr. Bush, making 45 stops in 24 states. Altogether the states represent 316 electoral votes, and 22 of the states voted for President Clinton in 1996. The effort, in many ways, brings the Bush campaign back to its origins. The initial groundswell for Mr. Bush's candidacy began with the recognition inside the Republican Party that its governors were winning elections even as the Congressional branch of the party was falling into disfavor and losing seats. And from the moment Mr. Bush won re-election in 1998, he drew on his fellow governors as a mainstay of his candidacy and as his base of support in the Republican primaries. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the governors would lend emphasis to Mr. Bush's campaign theme that he is not a creature of the nation's gridlocked capital. ''It's a strong reminder that Governor Bush is cut from a different cloth from most of the Washington politicians,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''He's an outsider to Washington and comes from the more reformist, bipartisan wing of our party.'' Mr. Bush's aides said the governors would showcase their ideas and records in education and tax-cutting. The one Republican governor who will not be participating is Cecil H. Underwood of West Virginia, who is in a tough re-election fight. Mr. Fleischer said the effort would cost the Bush campaign about $500,000. Vice President Al Gore also is stepping up his use of campaign surrogates. Tipper Gore and Hadassah Lieberman are campaigning for their husbands. And this weekend, the former federal housing secretary Henry G. Cisneros, who was once the mayor of San Antonio, began an effort for the Gore campaign to lead surrogate campaigners in criticizing Mr. Bush's record in Texas. The Gore campaign is trying to use Mr. Bush's record in Texas to underscore its argument that Mr. Bush puts the interests of the wealthy and corporate interests before those of average Americans. Mr. Gore has been citing in particular statistics that show Texas last among the 50 states in families with health insurance coverage. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, used the announcement of the governors' tour to keep up the same theme and charge that Texas has not been aggressive in signing up children for a federal health insurance program. ''Maybe they can do a better job than he did of explaining his failed leadership in Texas,'' Mr. Hattaway said. ''Many Republican governors have managed to expand children's health care,'' he said, arguing that Mr. Bush had not followed their lead. Even before the governors begin their campaign swing, Mr. Bush will send a team of women to the hotly contested states of Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania. The group includes Bush's wife, Laura; Lynne Cheney, the wife of his vice-presidential running mate Dick Cheney; and Barbara Bush, the former first lady. Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, and Cindy McCain, the wife of Mr. McCain, will also join the effort. Mr. Gore is leading among women, but Mr. Bush has been making inroads. Mindy Tucker, an aide to Mr. Bush, said the women would talk about issues important to women such as education, health care, safety and violence. Mr. Bush himself is beginning his campaign week in President Clinton's home state, Arkansas. Later in the week, he will be joined by Mr. McCain in New Hampshire. Mr. McCain's substantial victory over Mr. Bush in New Hampshire, the nation's first primary state, forced the Texan into a bitter primary race.
 But something new has been added to the usual seasonal mix: Appleton, a pleasant city of 85,000 at the northern end of Lake Winnebago, finds itself squarely in the cross-hairs of the 2000 presidential campaign. This is the swing region in one of the handful of swing states in the neck-and-neck battle between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. But something new has been added to the usual seasonal mix: Appleton, a pleasant city of 85,000 at the northern end of Lake Winnebago, finds itself squarely in the cross-hairs of the 2000 presidential campaign. This is the swing region in one of the handful of swing states in the neck-and-neck battle between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. The region in eastern Wisconsin is rich in undecided voters. The candidates know it. They apparently think that women hold the key to the valley vote and that women care most about education. Mr. Bush came to Appleton on Oct. 5 for an event at McKinley Elementary, a public school with a charter school on the second floor; he favors charter schools, which are independently run institutions paid for with public funds. Tipper Gore, the vice president's wife, is due here on Monday for a visit to an all-public school. And when the candidates and their surrogates are off campaigning somewhere else, there are endless commercials on Green Bay television stations to ensure that Appleton does not forget the campaign and its role. Mr. Gore alone ran 2,322 spots in this region between June 1 and September 30, and one of Mr. Bush's education commercials appears several dozen times every week. Numb they may be, but they, like other people in Wisconsin, are expected to vote heavily next month.  New registrations are up, and crowds -- like the throng of 6,000 to 8,000 that turned out for Mr. Gore in Milwaukee on Thursday -- are full of enthusiasm. The state still seems there for the taking. Jeff Mayers, a veteran political reporter in Madison, Wisconsin's capital, said the last month had ''seen a lot of action but not much change.'' The most recent statewide public poll, showing Mr. Gore up by five percentage points, was completed for The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel on Sept. 20 -- more than three weeks ago, and well before the two presidential debates and the recent intensification of violence in the Middle East. ''We haven't gone up, they haven't gone up, we haven't gone down, they haven't gone down,'' said Teresa Vilmain, Mr. Gore's manager in the state. ''It's a struggle to the death here.'' Republican strategists say they sense movement in their direction, and private polls taken by Democrats here before Wednesday night's debate showed Mr. Bush taking the lead in the Fox River Valley and cutting into Mr. Gore's lead in Milwaukee. Two additional factors cheer the Republicans: they have more money for the stretch drive, and Mr. Bush seems to many in Wisconsin to have bested Mr. Gore in the second debate. Ms. Squires offered to bet that Mr. Bush would carry this area. Why was she so sure? ''George Bush is the kind of guy you want to sit down and have a few beers with, and talk for an hour or so,'' she said. ''Gore isn't, not even the new, remodeled Gore. He's too much of an egghead for these people up here.'' Mr. Green argued that Mr. Bush, a governor preaching compassionate conservatism, would benefit from Mr. Thompson's innovative style of politics, which voters have grown accustomed to in electing him to four four-year terms. It is not that Mr. Thompson can deliver the state, Mr. Green said, but that he has made it receptive to Mr. Bush's ideas. The valley has prospered during the Clinton-Gore years, others note, and there seems to be no particular reason for people here to want to change administrations. Taken together, the three area counties -- Brown (Green Bay), Outagamie (Appleton) and Winnebago (Oshkosh, Neenah and Menasha) -- voted for Mr. Bush's father in 1988, but supported Bill Clinton in 1992 and 1996. In fact, a woman asked Mr. Bush at McKinley school why an undecided voter should opt to switch parties in the White House, given current prosperity. Ken Harwood, the mayor of Neenah, listened to Mr. Bush struggling and said: ''He has to be prepared to answer that question over and over again. He needs to say, I understand business and industry, and I can create a balance that will sustain this economy.'' Mr. Gore never forgets to talk up the administration's economic achievements. But in his speech to the labor-dominated crowd in Milwaukee on Thursday, he pledged to create ''a better, fairer, stronger economy'' if elected. So far, however, no issue has taken a dominant role, and a number of imponderables remain. One of the most important is Ralph Nader, the nominee of the Green Party, whose Wisconsin headquarters are prominently located on State Street, the funky pedestrian mall in Madison that links the State Capitol and the University of Wisconsin. Most politicians here thought that Mr. Nader would begin to lose strength as the campaign progressed, but he has held steady at 4 percent to 5 percent, which could cost Mr. Gore the state if it holds up at the polls. And what of the situation in the Middle East? Will it help Mr. Gore, who has more experience in international affairs, or Mr. Bush, whose party is trusted by more people, generally speaking, on foreign policy issues? Few here will risk a guess, and the candidates are taking nothing for granted. Mr. Bush will return to the state next week, on the day after the final debate, probably to visit La Crosse, on the Mississippi River, and Eau Claire in western Wisconsin. Mr. Gore is expected again, too, well before the end of the campaign. It's quite a lot of fuss over 11 electoral votes.
 The issue of capital punishment has been a recurrent theme during the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Under Mr. Bush, the state leads the nation in executions, and the governor has repeatedly defended the state's system as fair and unbiased. This afternoon, protesters held a rally outside the governor's mansion in Austin to call for a moratorium on executions in Texas. Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, said a copy of the study had not yet been made available to the governor's office. ''Governor Bush respects the opinion of those who oppose the death penalty, including this group,'' she said. ''In Texas, there are many checks and balances, including at least nine thorough reviews of each death penalty case by the courts.'' Both men were sentenced to death. Mr. Williams was executed in January 1995, shortly after Mr. Bush took office. Mr. Nichols remains on death row.
 It turns out that Vice President Al Gore's statements in the first debate in Boston a couple of weeks ago read at a level roughly appropriate to an eighth-grader. Gov. George W. Bush spoke at a level almost a grade below. Each candidate's speech fell half a grade level in the second debate last week.
 You note in ''Real Differences in the Debate'' (editorial, Oct. 13) that George W. Bush ''even said that he cared about global warming.'' Unfortunately, Mr. Bush's eagerness to doubt a connection between pollution and climate change indicates that he does not intend to do anything to prevent it. You note in ''Real Differences in the Debate'' (editorial, Oct. 13) that George W. Bush ''even said that he cared about global warming.'' Unfortunately, Mr. Bush's eagerness to doubt a connection between pollution and climate change indicates that he does not intend to do anything to prevent it.
