 Fox plans to capitalize on the allure of the Subway Series by looking back on its history with taped segments in the pregame show and during the games. Ed Goren, the president of Fox Sports, said the number of such nostalgic insertions would depend upon how quickly the Series established itself. ''We'll let the Series evolve,'' he said.
 Oct 19 headline about television ratings for three debates between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore misstated viewership for Oct 17 debate; it drew more viewers than Oct 11 debate, but not more than one on Oct 13 A headline yesterday about television ratings for the three debates between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore misstated viewership for the last one, on Tuesday. It drew more viewers than the Oct. 11 debate, but not more than the one on Oct. 3. A headline yesterday about television ratings for the three debates between Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore misstated viewership for the last one, on Tuesday. It drew more viewers than the Oct. 11 debate, but not more than the one on Oct. 3.
 Katherine Profeta letter asks why she should vote for George W Bush for president if he has so little faith in that branch of government; suggests he remain in local government if he likes it so much In Tuesday's debate, George W. Bush referred to his fundamental mistrust of the federal government (transcript, Oct. 18). I ask: Why should I vote for a man to lead a branch of government in which he has so little faith? If he prefers local government, let him govern locally. In Tuesday's debate, George W. Bush referred to his fundamental mistrust of the federal government (transcript, Oct. 18). I ask: Why should I vote for a man to lead a branch of government in which he has so little faith? If he prefers local government, let him govern locally.
 Gov George W Bush, campaigning in Michigan, strikes back at Democrats' new commercials attacking his Social Security plan; contends that Vice Pres Al Gore is pitting 'grandparents against grandchildren' for political gain; photo (M) With the Democrats running new commercials attacking his Social Security plan, Gov. George W. Bush struck back hard yesterday, contending that Vice President Al Gore was pitting ''grandparents against grandchildren'' for political gain. Campaigning at a tool factory outside Detroit, Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore ''leads the party of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, but the only thing he has to offer is fear itself.'' In a speech laced with some of his strongest broadsides in the campaign so far, he went on to accuse the vice president of being irresponsible and not facing up to the fiscal problems that Social Security will encounter in coming years. With the Democrats running new commercials attacking his Social Security plan, Gov. George W. Bush struck back hard yesterday, contending that Vice President Al Gore was pitting ''grandparents against grandchildren'' for political gain. Campaigning at a tool factory outside Detroit, Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore ''leads the party of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, but the only thing he has to offer is fear itself.'' In a speech laced with some of his strongest broadsides in the campaign so far, he went on to accuse the vice president of being irresponsible and not facing up to the fiscal problems that Social Security will encounter in coming years. ''A true leader does not try to pit grandparents against grandchildren,'' Mr. Bush told the cheering crowd in Macomb County, the home of the so-called Reagan Democrat. ''A true leader will fix this problem so that both the 'Greatest Generation' and the rising generation can depend on the promise of Social Security.'' Mr. Bush wrapped the mantle of Roosevelt around his own plan to divert some of the Social Security payroll tax to private investment accounts for younger workers. He called his proposal a ''New Deal for a new generation.'' The speech amounted to one of Mr. Bush's most sustained defenses of his Social Security plan since he unveiled it last May. He also spoke more broadly of the high-technology, investor-driven ''new economy,'' portraying himself as an advocate of an entrepreneurial future and Mr. Gore as a relic the ''planners and bureaucrats'' of the past. The Republican presidential nominee gave a spirited defense of Texas as a mecca of the high-technology industry, painting a picture of his state at odds with Mr. Gore's portrayals of it as a smog-ridden place where children lack health insurance coverage. ''We are attracting young, ambitious workers from all across America,'' Mr. Bush said. But at the heart of Mr. Bush's  address was his proposal for Social Security. On Wednesday the Democrats, moving fast to take advantage of one of the exchanges in the third and last presidential debate, began broadcasting a commercial about Social Security. Asking ''which promise is he going to break?'' the advertisement echoes the language Mr. Gore used when he raised Social Security in the last moments of the debate. ''He has promised a trillion dollars out of the Social Security trust fund for young working adults to invest and save on their own,'' Mr. Gore said in the debate, referring to Mr. Bush. ''But he's promised seniors that their Social Security benefits will not be cut, and he's promised the same trillion dollars to them. So this is the Show Me State, reminds me of the line from the movie, 'Show me the money.' Which one of those promises will you keep and which will you break, governor?'' The Democratic criticisms were based on the fact that Mr. Bush has put out the framework of a Social Security plan but not details, saying he wants flexibility to negotiate with Congress. Analysts say that the transition from the current system to the kind proposed by Mr. Bush will require some hard choices. Under the Social Security system the payroll taxes of current workers are now used to pay current retirees. So if part of those taxes are shifted into private accounts, a way has to be found to keep paying current retirees. Mr. Bush did not provide more details yesterday, but instead ridiculed Mr. Gore's math, saying, ''My opponent, a man prone to exaggeration at times, seems to be deliberately missing a trillion dollars. Maybe if you've been in Washington too long you lose your ability to count real money.'' To give his advocacy of private accounts the sheen of bipartisanship, Mr. Bush invoked two Democratic senators who favor such an approach -- Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska. Both men are leaving Congress at the end of this session. ''With this Social Security reform, over time the working class will join the investor class,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Millions of Americans -- of every race and age and background -- will have not only wages, but accumulated wealth.'' Mr. Bush found other ways to go after Mr. Gore, winning the applause of his audience. He noted that a Texan, Jack S. Kilby, had just won the Nobel Prize for inventing the integrated circuit in the 1950's. ''It was an amazing achievement, unrivaled in the annals of technology -- until 1986 when one senator from Tennessee, alone in his office, invented the Internet,'' Mr. Bush said, mocking Mr. Gore's statement in 1999 that he had been instrumental in the creation of the Internet. ''Yesterday, the Democratic Party released its latest attack ad prepared by the Gore media team and designed to scare seniors. The chairman said that I had grabbed the third rail of American politics, and ''he just didn't realize that we hadn't switched on the electricity yet and that's what we're going to do with this television ad as well.'' It is irresponsible for the chairman of the Democratic Party and for Vice President Gore to stoke the fears of seniors while ignoring the hopes of  younger workers. A true leader does not try to pit grandparents against grandchildren; a true leader will fix this problem so that both the Greatest Generation and the Rising Generation can depend on the promise of Social Security.
 Annual Alfred E Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner is held at Waldorf-Astoria; political luminaries attending include Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, presidential contenders, and Hillary Rodham Clinton and Repr Rick Lazio, who are seeking US Senate seat; photos (L) The campaign for president made a rare stop in New York last night, as Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore gave dueling pointed speeches before a white-tie audience that included two people who had, until yesterday, kept a distance from those two presidential candidates: Hillary Rodham Clinton and Rick A. Lazio. The campaign for president made a rare stop in New York last night, as Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore gave dueling pointed speeches before a white-tie audience that included two people who had, until yesterday, kept a distance from those two presidential candidates: Hillary Rodham Clinton and Rick A. Lazio. For Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, it was a rare opportunity, aside from their three debates, to speak from the same stage, albeit under the historical guidelines of these dinners: Speeches should be funny, and not stumpy. But they are allowed to have a political point, and both candidates seemed to approach the evening as another night of competition in their contest. Mr. Gore offered a few self-deprecating jokes about some things that have caused problems for his candidacy this year. ''This dinner represents a hallowed and important tradition, which I actually did invent,'' he said to shouts of laughter from a crowd that included virtually every major elected official in New York. And he also offered a few remarks with a sharp political edge, directed at his opponent, who also sat on the stage. ''Al Smith ran on an agenda that was revolutionary for his time,'' Mr. Gore said, referring to the presidential candidate for whom the dinner is named. ''A 45-cent minimum wage. Limiting the work week to six days. Building a bridge to the 1930's. And I must say it's quite a tribute to Governor Smith that Governor Bush has adopted the same agenda.'' Mr. Bush responded with the same mix of jokes and barbs. ''This is an impressive crowd,'' he said. ''The haves and the have-mores. Some people call you the elite. I call you my base.'' But he ended his speech with a long and serious tribute to the late Cardinal John J. O'Connor who, Mr. Bush told the hushed crowd, ''defied all the labels and showed us that sometimes truth is larger than the left and the right.'' And Mr. Bush, who opposes abortion in most cases, made particular mention of Cardinal O'Connor's advocacy of the ''rights of the unborn,'' drawing heavy applause from many of the people in the room. Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Gore did not applaud. For Mrs. Clinton, the presence of Mr. Gore in New York was an opportunity, and she leapt at the chance to campaign, for the first time since last March, with a politician who polls show is significantly more popular among New Yorkers than she is. With much fanfare, she appeared with Mr. Gore and his running mate, Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut senator, at a labor rally earlier yesterday in Midtown, and thrust herself between them on the stage as she sought to cast the contest in sharply partisan terms. ''I am proud to be on that team because it is the Gore-Lieberman-Clinton team that will keep the prosperity and the progress going in America,'' Mrs. Clinton declared to shouts and cheers. ''We have to get out and make sure our team wins.'' Mr. Gore then picked up the line, noting that there is no ''Gore-Lieberman-Lazio team,'' as he moved to blunt Mr. Lazio's effort in recent days to enlist Democratic Gore supporters to his campaign. ''I want to say it plainly and clearly there is only one candidate for the United States Senate who is part of the Gore-Lieberman team, and that is Hillary Clinton,'' Mr. Gore said. By contrast, Mr. Lazio and Mr. Bush barely crossed paths today. They held no joint events. When Mr. Lazio appeared at a news conference with Henry A. Kissinger, the former secretary of state, a Democratic Party activist showed up with a life-size cutout of Mr. Bush in an attempt to create the photo opportunity that Mr. Lazio seemed intent on avoiding. And at the dinner last night, an event where seating charts are perhaps overly scrutinized for political significance, Mr. Lazio sat on the opposite side of the stage from Mr. Bush; even Mrs. Clinton sat closer to the Republican candidate for president than Mr. Lazio did. In contrast to Mrs. Clinton, who eagerly greeted Mr. Gore, Mr. Lazio did not appear to go to any special effort to be photographed greeting Mr. Bush. Mr. Lazio and Mr. Bush have not appeared together in New York since July 16. The Republican candidate for Senate has, in his campaign, gone to great lengths to distance himself from Mr. Bush, who Mr. Lazio's aides view as a drag on his own candidacy in New York. Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Gore last campaigned together on March 20, in Albany, though they have appeared together at other political events, most recently a fund-raiser at Radio City Music Hall last month. Part of that is because there has been no real reason for Mr. Gore to come to New York, given his large lead in polls in the state. There is also inevitable tension between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Gore as they have each sought, in their own way, to carve a political identity separate from President Clinton. ''I think he is doing exactly what he needs to do,'' Mrs. Clinton said when asked about Mr. Gore's sparse schedule in New York. ''He has to concentrate his time and energy on the battleground states.'' These dinners have more than once provided a forum for presidential sparring, though the last time both presidential candidates attended one of these dinners was in 1988, when Mr. Bush's father, then vice president, and Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic candidate for president, shared a stage with Cardinal O'Connor. Although New York is not in play, it was hard to tell by the effort that both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush brought to their two speeches, a combination of jokes, skilled shots at their opponents, and even efforts to display their knowledge of New York politics. ''By the way: was it my imagination, or did Mayor Giuliani nod when I said, your excellency?'' Mr. Gore said, referring to his own salutation a moment earlier to the archbishop. Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani dropped his head and smiled. At another point, referring to his own debate performance, Mr. Gore said: ''Please accept my apologies for interrupting your meal. Since this is a special occasion, I wanted to mark it by getting all my interruptions out of the way before Governor Bush speaks.'' Mr. Bush did not appear that amused at many of Mr. Gore's jokes and, if the reaction of the audience was any guide, the Texas governor probably came across better at the dinner last night. He did, after poking fun at Mr. Gore for exaggeration and other political foibles, offer him the kind of compliments that politicians rarely give one another in public. ''Let me tell you a few things that I've learned about my opponent in this campaign,'' Mr. Bush said. "He's a man who clearly loves and respect his wife and family. Like me, he married up. I also learned that he is a person of energy, skill and determination. This year, Mr. Vice President, I can't wish you success, but I do wish you well.'' Even Mr. Gore had to join the applause.
 Voters generally judge this year's candidates favorably -- in fact, they give the field a better rating than they did in 1992 and 1996. But there is not a lot of strong feeling one way or the other about Al Gore versus George W. Bush. Neither man has been more able than the other to make a compelling case for his candidacy. Add to this the fact that the central question of most elections is not being raised. Voters are not being offered a referendum on the administration in power; that question is being sidestepped by both camps. President Clinton's name was hardly mentioned in the third presidential debate. The swing groups are likely to have a variety of reasons for coming to their final decisions. Some strongly favor Mr. Gore on health care and other high-anxiety issues, but have trouble with his personality. Others think Mr. Bush might provide a refreshing change in tone in Washington, but worry about his qualifications and some of his positions on issues.
 Gov. George W. Bush struck back hard at Democratic commercials attacking his Social Security plan, accusing Vice President Al Gore of being irresponsible and divisive on the sensitive subject. In one of his harshest broadsides so far, Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore was pitting ''grandparents against grandchildren'' for political gain instead of fixing the federal retirement system for the ''rising generation.'' Gov. George W. Bush struck back hard at Democratic commercials attacking his Social Security plan, accusing Vice President Al Gore of being irresponsible and divisive on the sensitive subject. In one of his harshest broadsides so far, Mr. Bush said Mr. Gore was pitting ''grandparents against grandchildren'' for political gain instead of fixing the federal retirement system for the ''rising generation.'' Mr. Gore continued to press the attack, charging that Gov. Bush's tax cut proposal would drain Social Security, raise interest rates and undermine economic growth by giving ''too much to too few at the expense of too many.'' ''The economic policies my opponent has put forward in this election are not just unfair,'' Mr. Gore said. ''They're unsound, and they would hurt our economy.''
 Pres Clinton and Jordan's King Abdullah plan to sign wide-ranging free trade agreement next week; under pact, each side would eliminate all tariffs and barriers to trade, which would make Jordan only nation to make such deal with US besides Canada, Mexico and Israel; agreement is seen as source of economic growth for Jordan, and way of making it even stronger partner for US in Middle East; Clinton administration is also hailing it as new model for trade, one with potential to attract union support because it mandates compliance with international labor and environmental norms; agreement is also expected to resonate on campaign trail as Vice Pres Al Gore seeks to solidify his support from organized labor (M) The United States plans to sign a wide-ranging free trade agreement with Jordan next week, bolstering a partner in the troubled Middle East peace effort while helping Vice President Al Gore show that he could reinvent the way trade deals are done. The United States plans to sign a wide-ranging free trade agreement with Jordan next week, bolstering a partner in the troubled Middle East peace effort while helping Vice President Al Gore show that he could reinvent the way trade deals are done. Vice President Gore and George W. Bush, the Texas governor, have sparred over how to conduct trade talks. Mr. Gore, seeking to solidify support from labor unions, has repeatedly promised that he will not negotiate any new trade agreements unless they include language preventing labor or environmental abuses. As he campaigns for the White House, Mr. Gore is expected to cite the Jordan agreement as the kind of trade accord he supports. Mr. Bush has said that the push to harmonize labor and environmental rules is fundamentally protectionist, geared to thwart trade rather than enhance it.
 In an unusual feat of bipartisanship, the project made allies of Vice President Al Gore; his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas; Mr. Bush's younger brother Jeb, the Republican governor of Florida, and farmers and environmental advocates. Florida has the fourth-largest number of electoral votes in the presidential election, and Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are in a furious battle to sway voters there.
 His race comes in a presidential election year, and Vice President Al Gore is expected to carry New Jersey easily, which can only help his fellow Democrat, Mr. Corzine. In addition, the out-of-state contributions that Mr. Franks might have received are being sent to Representative Rick A. Lazio, a Republican in neighboring New York who is fighting Hillary Rodham Clinton, the favored motivational tool for Republican fund-raisers everywhere.
 Strong work relationship of Pres Bill Clinton and Vice Pres Al Gore is now all but non-existent, first irreparably weakened by Monica Lewinsky affair and then by Gore's efforts to assert himself as 'his own man' in presidential campaign; since last appearing together on Aug 15, Gore has spoken with the president only a few times; Clinton is said to be both hurt by personal rebuff and bewildered as to why his political heir will not come to him for the advice he is itching to give, advice the president feels the candidate needs; history of relationship detailed; photos (L) After eight years together, here is the state of the relationship between President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore: Mr. Gore won't pick up the phone. He doesn't call, and Mr. Clinton doesn't know why. After eight years together, here is the state of the relationship between President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore: Mr. Gore won't pick up the phone. He doesn't call, and Mr. Clinton doesn't know why. After Mr. Gore's second debate with Gov. George W. Bush, the president was irate. He told one friend that the vice president was getting bad advice from consultants, especially Carter Eskew and Robert Shrum, who seemed to Mr. Clinton to have coached all the fight out of him. But when the friend said, ''Why don't you just call him?'' the president said he didn't feel he should meddle. Former Clinton aides have said that one big reason Mr. Clinton chose Mr. Gore as his running mate was that he had a lot in common with his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. Paul Begala, a former aide, recalled that Mr. Clinton said when he picked Mr. Gore, '' 'He reminds me of Hillary in that when he gets hold of something he never lets loose.' He saw a constancy that he's been accused of lacking.'' But now, Mr. Clinton is left to wonder why Mr. Gore can't be more like his wife, who appeared with the vice president at a campaign event in New York yesterday. As a candidate, she does listen to his advice -- and not coincidentally, in the view of several Clinton aides, seems to be doing better in her race than the vice president is in his. It took last week's outbreak of violence in the Middle East to bring Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton together. The vice president left the campaign trail to attend White House briefings on the crisis. It was the first time Mr. Gore had set foot in the White House since a state dinner on May 22, and he seems to be going out of his way to avoid appearing with the president. His office was even reluctant to release a photo taken last week of the two of them together -- and initially instructed the White House not to put it out, either. One Democratic fund-raiser who knows both men said, ''It's worse than you think, worse than it was last year.'' Even then, things weren't so hot. On the day Mr. Gore formally declared his candidacy in June 1999, ABC News broadcast an interview with the vice president in which Mr. Gore repeatedly distanced himself from the president, voicing disappointment over Mr. Clinton's behavior with Monica S. Lewinsky, the  White House intern with whom he had an affair. Mr. Clinton feels frustrated, eager to help but unwilling to insert himself where he's not wanted, say the friends who have discussed this with him. It's beyond him why Mr. Gore can't manage to relate to an audience in the way that comes so effortlessly to him. And he's convinced that Mr. Gore moved too slowly to capitalize on his successful convention performance -- in the president's view, running away from him when he ought to be running on their record. Yesterday, at a meeting of the House Democratic caucus, Mr. Clinton responded to Mr. Bush's remarks in the last debate point for point and seemed to wish he had been there to make the arguments himself. ''I almost gagged when I heard that answer on the patients' bill of rights in Texas,'' Mr. Clinton said at one point -- Mr. Bush's answer, of course. Yet there is no plan for Mr. Clinton to campaign with Mr. Gore, although he will be stumping for him and other Democrats, said Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane. ''This is something Gore is going to do on his own,'' Mr. Lehane said. And that is what has Mr. Clinton worried. He is concerned that a loss would reflect poorly on him, and aware, too, that he is responsible for some of Mr. Gore's problems. Yet the president also believes that he has left Mr. Gore a rich legacy, in both policy and political terms, and that Mr. Gore seems to be squandering it. Gore aides, however, see the distance as a must. ''He said at the convention, 'I am my own man, vote for me.' That's real,'' said Mark Fabiani, the deputy campaign manager. ''It's not some kind of facade where behind it he's seeking Clinton's counsel every day.'' The president does speak regularly with Mr. Gore's staff, as does the White House chief of staff, John Podesta, and his deputy Steve Ricchetti. Through them, the president stays well briefed on campaign developments. And sometimes, he cannot resist offering a suggestion. Mr. Clinton called Mr. Eskew, Mr. Gore's top strategist, a couple of weeks ago to tell him he ought to make the vice president watch a skit about the first debate on NBC's ''Saturday Night Live,'' in which Mr. Gore was depicted as overbearing and orange. ''He called me and said, 'You've got to show it to him,' '' Mr. Eskew said. When they did, though, Mr. Gore, who does some pretty scathing imitations himself, turned into a critic, too. Sizing up Darrell Hammond, the actor who played him in the skit, Mr. Eskew said, ''he said, 'He's got me in some ways, but I could help him in some places.' '' A couple of times a week, the president speaks with William M. Daley, the Gore campaign chairman who was Mr. Clinton's former commerce secretary. Mr. Daley said that Mr. Clinton's questions about campaign strategy usually concerned ''big picture'' matters like television ads. Several of Mr. Gore's friends, however, not only acknowledged the chill but said the vice president's relationship with Mr. Clinton never fully recovered from the scandal, because he felt betrayed by the lies, compromised by the recklessness and upset by the behavior, particularly as the father of young women near Ms. Lewinsky's age. Mr. Gore is introverted by nature, highly rational in his decision-making, someone who spends virtually all his free time with his family. He is a man who has been heavily influenced by the women in his life -- his mother, his wife, his daughters -- but also by a rich, difficult and defining relationship with his father, the senator. What bonding there was between him and Mr. Clinton -- an extroverted, instinctive, guy's guy who never knew his own father -- almost certainly centered on public policy. Mr. Gore definitely does not share the president's passion for politics. And -- this is not unimportant -- he does not even play golf. ''I don't think this was a real friendship; these are two very different character types,'' said Mr. Gore's close friend Martin Peretz, one of his Harvard mentors, who now owns The New Republic. Among the slights perceived by the president is that not only are few Clintonites on the Gore campaign, but that the team is chock-a-block with people who have gone out of their way to criticize Mr. Clinton, starting with Joe Lieberman, Mr. Gore's running mate. Some of Mr. Gore's closest friends speak of the president with extravagant, open disdain, especially Mr. Peretz, who is already on record as having referred to Mr. Clinton as ''loathesome.'' Mr. Peretz said about Mr. Gore that ''Even though he had a hard relationship with his father, he also had unconditional love, while Clinton didn't have this with his father,'' who died before he was born. ''My guess is Clinton resents Al, and that's why I think he's stuck it to him on occasion.'' One such occasion came in July, when The New York Times reported that the president had been telling friends he thought either Senator Bob Graham or Senator George J. Mitchell, both of whom he had considered in 1992, would be fine choices as Mr. Gore's running mate. Some Clinton aides suggest that the relevant resentment cuts the other way, that it is Mr. Gore who envies Mr. Clinton's political skills and is too proud to admit he needs help from the acknowledged master. Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton have each made public comments that showed some ambivalence about the other. Mr. Clinton once told The Times that Mr. Gore's campaign had gotten off to a sluggish start and that he had been advising him to loosen up. Even Mr. Gore's mother, Pauline, once made condescending remarks about Mr. Clinton to a reporter for The New Yorker. Though she herself was born poor in rural Tennessee and struggled to put herself through school, she seemed to sneer at the president's humble upbringing: ''Bill came up in a very provincial atmosphere. And even though he went to Yale, and he went to Oxford, you don't undo or move out of that provincial atmosphere that has influenced you in your early life.'' Tipper Gore and Hillary Clinton were never particularly close, but after ''Tipper's people put out that she and the girls were appalled'' by the Lewinsky matter, Mrs. Clinton never forgot it, a friend of the first lady said. The Gore and Clinton children had never been any more than polite, either, several family friends said. Though Sarah Gore and Chelsea Clinton are the same age -- college seniors now -- they never made much of a connection. Even Mrs. Gore's normally tight-lipped spokeswoman, Camille Johnston, spoke disparagingly of Mrs. Clinton in a recent interview, comparing the two women while making a point about how little Mrs. Gore cares about her public image. ''With Mrs. Clinton, there was always such a concerted effort with image,'' Ms. Johnston said. ''She went from housewife to cookie lady to whatever. Mrs. Gore hasn't done that, so it's easier. She hasn't had to turn into somebody else.'' And the Gores' oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, answered frankly when asked if the first lady and her mother are friends: ''They've definitely had a personal relationship,'' she said, using the past tense. ''Obviously, the last eight years seems like a lifetime. But they call each other on important occasions.'' A lifetime ago, as Ms. Schiff says, way back in 1992, Governor Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore didn't know one another terribly well. Though they came from the same part of the country, the two men had only met once, at Little Rock's Excelsior Hotel in 1987, when Mr. Gore was running for president and went to Mr. Clinton to ask for his endorsement. Their identical aspirations made them natural competitors -- and Mr. Gore seemed to have jumped ahead -- said Mr. Gore's cousin, Ark Monroe, who escorted him to the meeting. But Mr. Gore told the governor that they should consider one another natural allies, two southern moderates who could help hold their party together. If he was elected, Mr. Gore said, it wouldn't hurt Mr. Clinton's chances but would bolster them. He'd be paving the way, see? The meeting went fine, said Mr. Monroe, a longtime friend of Mr. Clinton. ''I always kind of thought they'd be rivals, but they seemed to get along.'' Mr. Gore did not get the endorsement, though. And the next time the two met, it was Mr. Clinton who was paving the way. Mr. Gore had just written his environmental book, ''Earth in the Balance,'' which had greatly impressed the governor. On the June night in 1992 that Mr. Clinton interviewed Senator Gore about joining him on the Democratic ticket, they talked for three hours and got pretty wonky, according to a former Gore aide. Before long, they were comparing favorite economists, and were soon telling friends that this partnership was not only going to work, but was going to be great. ''They saw the campaign and the issues the same way; they have scarcely any differences on policy, and that's of enormous importance to the two of them,'' said Reed Hundt, who attended St. Albans with Mr. Gore and Yale Law School with Mr. Clinton, who later named him chairman of the Federal Communications Commission at Mr. Gore's urging. ''Clinton was digging it, and there was no jealousy and no backbiting. But there were people sticking the knife in Gore -- the Gephardt crowd and the Hillary crowd.'' George Stephanopoulos, a close Clinton aide, was a leading skeptic, since he had worked for both Richard Gephardt and Michael Dukakis, neither of whom had appreciated the rough treatment they got from Mr. Gore during the 1988 primary campaign. But, former White House aides recall, it was Mrs. Clinton who drove the first wedge between the two. Even before the election, her loyalists began jockeying to protect her position as first adviser -- and even tried to kick Mr. Gore off the bus, though he refused to budge. Susan Thomases, a longtime friend of Mrs. Clinton, who had words with Mr. Gore not long after he was named to the ticket, denied there was ever any rivalry. ''No one tried to kick him off'' the bus, she said. ''He was just initially reticent about it, that being his personality, and then he stayed on and on and on. I don't know why so much was made of that.'' But someone who has known both the Clintons well since the 1970's and has worked with Mr. Gore -- and has been disillusioned by all three of them -- said that Mrs. Clinton had worked hard to curb Mr. Gore's power from the start. ''Early on, Gore thought he would have much more influence,'' this person said. ''But she put a stop to that.'' These efforts only intensified after Mr. Gore's October debate with Dan Quayle; Mrs. Clinton, among others, thought he seemed a little slow to defend her husband on the character issue. Despite the conflicts, Mr. Gore at least arguably still had more responsibility than any previous vice president. And not without some reason. In a recent interview, Mr. Gore said he agreed to join the ticket in part because he felt he could make not just a difference but perhaps the difference in the race. Pollsters did find that Mr. Gore's presence on the ticket made people feel better about voting for Mr. Clinton. His conservative persona and placid, no-surprises-here personal life seemed to offset concerns about Mr. Clinton's character, and his experience, particularly on foreign policy, eased worries that Governor Clinton was a little weak in this area. Stan Greenberg, then Mr. Clinton's and now Mr. Gore's pollster, recommended constant references to the Clinton-Gore ticket and commercials that showed both men. After they won in November, but before the inaugural, representatives for the two worked out an extraordinary agreement, a prenuptial agreement of sorts. The deal hammered out by Roy Neel, who negotiated on Mr. Gore's behalf, and Thomas F. McLarty III, who stood in for Mr. Clinton, codified their partnership, and spelled out a degree of shared responsibility that was such a departure from the norm that it essentially amounted to a reinvention of the vice presidency. The president agreed to hand over real power -- enormous policy and personnel responsibilities -- as well as to include Mr. Gore and his staff in all important meetings. Mr. Clinton also promised to lunch with him privately, every week, no matter what. Once they took office, technology and the environment became part of Mr. Gore's portfolio, along with the ''re-inventing government'' streamlining project and a heavy foreign policy role. And Mr. Gore was able to position loyalists throughout the executive branch. Yet the turf battles between Mr. Gore and Mrs. Clinton intensified in the West Wing, where their surrogates fought over everything from media attention to office space. A former administration official said that the only time he saw Mr. Gore lose out on a policy issue was in 1993, when he opposed health care reform and obliquely took on Mrs. Clinton. ''The president was moving ahead but a lot of us thought there hadn't been proper economic or political vetting,'' the official said, and Mr. Gore urged him to go to the president and make their case. ''It was the only time he felt he couldn't go himself,'' said the former official, who is no longer in contact with either man, ''and that's because it involved her.'' At that point, the Clintons brought back Dick Morris, a former adviser, to help reposition the White House, move it back to the political center. Mr. Gore, who allied himself with Mr. Morris, wound up playing a major role in their rehabilitation efforts. Mr. Clinton relied heavily on him, especially at this time, presidential aides said. Mr. Gore stiffened Mr. Clinton's resolve against Republican efforts to dismantle environmental regulations, zealously raised campaign funds, as the world now knows, and even made it his business to make sure the cabinet secretaries stayed on message. ''He was relentless,'' said the former consultant, who has no ties to or affinity for Mr. Gore. In 1996, the vice president's support of the welfare-reform bill was considered decisive. ''Gore was clearly telling the president to sign the Republican bill, even though it was punitive,'' said Mr. Reich, who strongly opposed the bill. ''There were very, very few voices inside the administration telling Clinton to sign the bill, and Gore was the adviser in chief, the most important voice in favor of signing.'' One key to their relationship was that Mr. Gore was not afraid to disagree with the president. He was also often the only person in the room who could cajole Mr. Clinton out of a mood, White House aides said. In mock news conferences where staff members threw out questions to prepare him for the real thing, Mr. Clinton would sometimes get agitated by a hardball question. He'd vent for a few minutes, then Mr. Gore, on cue, would say something like, ''That's right, Mr. President, answer it just like that. That would be perfect'' -- and they'd laugh and the storm clouds would pass. These lunches were definitely not social occasions. ''Clinton would just go in and sit down and Gore would come with a foot-and-a-half stack of books,'' said this official. Mr. Gore has said the lunches almost always touched on environmental policy. Several former Clinton aides with no ties to Mr. Gore said that his influence on the president has often been understated. He brought Mr. Clinton around on the importance of environmental issues, they said. During the budget negotiations with Republicans that led to the government shutdown., he successfully argued that the environment should be one of the areas on which the administration would not compromise. When the scandal hit, one friend of the vice president said, Mr. Gore at first believed the president, and even defended him to Tipper and his daughters, who did not. When the truth became known, Mr. Gore felt betrayed; the president had lied to his face in the Cabinet meeting in January 1998 when the the president said there was nothing to the story. But then, a Clinton friend said that the president also felt betrayed by Mr. Gore -- abandoned when he needed him most. Publicly, of course, Mr. Gore stood outside the White House after Mr. Clinton was impeached and said his boss would be remembered as one of the nation's greatest presidents. Standing right behind the vice president as he spoke, Hillary Clinton nodded her head vigorously at every word Mr. Gore said. The vice president was inclined to stick by Mr. Clinton not only because of his role, friends said, but because he, like the first lady, felt that Mr. Clinton had in part suffered at the hands of Republican bloodhounds -- some of the same people, in fact, who had worked so hard to defeat his father, Senator Albert Gore, in a legendarily dirty race in 1970. But privately, said a friend of Tipper Gore, the vice president was sickened. ''He has daughters,'' this friend said. ''That was a moment Gore lost a great deal of respect for him.'' Until last year, that is, when both Mr. Gore and Mrs. Clinton began revving up their respective campaigns, and their history began to repeat itself. But it was a relief in some ways, too, this same official said. Finally, there could be physical as well as emotional separation from the president: ''Gore had the cover to go out on the campaign.'' Al Gore's Journey This is the 17th article of a series about the lives of the presidential candidates. Future installments will look at Al Gore and religion and George W. Bush's decision to seek the presidency.
 Provisions of an appropriations bill expected to be approved in the next few days would make filtering software a condition for grants under the E-rate program, which subsidizes Internet connections for schools and libraries. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, in their debate this week, also spoke approvingly of such filters. Provisions of an appropriations bill expected to be approved in the next few days would make filtering software a condition for grants under the E-rate program, which subsidizes Internet connections for schools and libraries. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, in their debate this week, also spoke approvingly of such filters.
 Fortified by new radio and television commercials that trumpet his ''America first'' themes, he is concentrating on states where he sees weakness or at least vulnerability in the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Among them are New York and California, and also Minnesota, where Mr. Buchanan spoke to an audience of several hundred today at the University of Minnesota Law School. It is in states that Mr. Bush is not likely to win, Mr. Buchanan said, that he has a better chance to convince voters sympathetic to his views that their support would not be wasted on a third-party candidate. ''George Bush has written off New York State,'' Mr. Buchanan said. ''So a vote for Bush there is a wasted vote. But a vote for Pat Buchanan can help accomplish something:  fighting for a third party, building a new party that doesn't poach or thieve but offers the American people something new.'' His concern, of course, which he readily acknowledged, is that for now the country appears unready to embrace a third party, either his on the right or Ralph Nader's Green Party on the left. Mr. Nader has polled somewhat better than Mr. Buchanan in most national surveys, reaching as high as 4 percent in some, causing more concern for Vice President Al Gore than Mr. Buchanan has caused for Mr. Bush. For all his triumphs in the Reform Party, one failure still rankles: the inability to convince the Commission on Presidential Debates that he and Mr. Nader deserved a place on the stage with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore these last two weeks. Had he managed to prevail, Mr. Buchanan said, polls would have shown him ''in the teens right now, the upper teens.''
 Mr. Freeman says President Clinton ''cannot restart the peace process, and his successor, whoever he is, will have to rebuild trust with both sides.'' Yet if George W. Bush and Al Gore jointly requested Mr. Clinton to continue as mediator in the next administration, regardless of who is elected, the prospects for the negotiations would be greatly increased.
 ''We are staying above the fray,'' he said. ''You've got the governor, you've got the state comptroller and the next thing you know you'll have George Bush and Al Gore weighing in.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore, campaigning in New York, makes blistering attack on Gov George W Bush's economic policies; says Bush's tax proposals would give 'too much to too few at the expense of too many;' photo (M) Vice President Al Gore said yesterday that Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut proposal would drain Social Security, jack up interest rates and undermine economic growth by giving ''too much to too few at the expense of too many.'' On a whirlwind day in New York, where the vice president courted national television personalities, campaigned with Hillary Rodham Clinton and appeared on a dinner dais with Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore delivered a blistering condemnation of Mr. Bush's economic proposals. Vice President Al Gore said yesterday that Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut proposal would drain Social Security, jack up interest rates and undermine economic growth by giving ''too much to too few at the expense of too many.'' On a whirlwind day in New York, where the vice president courted national television personalities, campaigned with Hillary Rodham Clinton and appeared on a dinner dais with Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore delivered a blistering condemnation of Mr. Bush's economic proposals. ''The economic policies my opponent has put forward in this election are not just unfair, they're unsound, and they would hurt our economy,'' Mr. Gore declared at a noon speech in the soaring rotunda of Columbia University's Low Library. ''Governor Bush's plan gambles with our prosperity by bringing back deficits, draining Social Security, delaying debt reduction and fueling higher interest rates,'' he said, adding that the governor's tax cut proposal would ''lavish more on those who need it least.'' In his speeches to date, Mr. Gore has generally portrayed himself as the more responsible steward of the nation's economy, and he did so again yesterday. But in increasing signs that the economy will be the central issue in the election, both candidates have been escalating their predictions of how the other would ruin the prosperity, and Mr. Gore took his oratory to new heights. ''My opponent's plan really does pose a threat,'' the vice president said. ''These are not personal differences. I'm not questioning Governor Bush's heart, I'm questioning his priorities.'' Flying into New York late Wednesday night, reporters asked Mr. Gore if he was rooting for the Yankees or the Mets. But all was cheerful on the television sets. Ms. O'Donnell, an unabashed Gore promoter, captured the tone by announcing, ''This is going to be a very pro-Gore day.'' Early this evening, Mr. Gore attended a raucous rally with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, his running mate, and Mrs. Clinton, the Democratic candidate for the Senate in New York. Thousands of people jammed a midtown hotel for the rally, sponsored by the Service Employees International Union. Mrs. Clinton appealed to the crowd to get out the vote for the ''Gore/Lieberman/Clinton ticket.'' At Columbia, Mr. Gore was introduced by Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary. Mr. Rubin told the audience of a few hundred people that Mr. Gore was ''at the center'' of the difficult economic choices made by the Clinton administration. He said Mr. Bush's proposals would take the nation on the ''wrong path.'' In his speech, Mr. Gore pledged to ''underspend'' the surplus, balance the budget and eliminate the national debt. He also insisted that he would not, as Mr. Bush has charged, expand the size of government. ''You'd better believe that the era of big government is over,'' he said. He pledged that in a Gore administration, he would take government spending to ''the smallest share of national income in 50 years.'' On ABC's ''Live With Regis,'' Mr. Gore demonstrated how as a teenager he hypnotized chickens, using Mr. Philbin as the stooge. The vice president, standing behind Mr. Philbin, circled his finger around the talk-show host's head, declared him under and intoned this message: ''Regis, between now and Nov. 7, you will say good things about the Gore/ Lieberman ticket.'' Ms. O'Donnell asked about Mr. Clinton, giving Mr. Gore a chance to debunk any negative association with Mr. Clinton's sex scandal that might linger among her primarily female audience. ''I hope it hasn't, because I am who I am,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I condemned his personal mistake. I do so again. He's my friend. We've worked together, we've been able to do some good things for the American people. I'm not trying to make this race about the past. It really is about the future.'' Mr. Bush is also to appear in the skit as himself. The script has Mr. Bush saying that he is offended by some of the material on the show, and Mr. Gore then says: ''I was one the very first to be offended by material on 'Saturday Night Live' and I'm glad to see the governor has joined with me in condemning it.'' ''Governor Bush has very different priorities. Instead of underspending the surplus, he overspends it. He starts with a $1.6 trillion tax cut that gives too much to too few at the expense of too many. Then he adds about a half a trillion dollars in new spending. Then he privatizes Social Security, which would cost another trillion dollars. The choice couldn't be clearer. Under my plan, zero deficits and a zero national debt within 12 years. Or a Bush plan that would leave us with a $1.1 trillion deficit in our non-Social Security accounts over the next 10 years, would raise interest rates and could undermine economic growth. . . . Sound fiscal policy sends a signal of reassurance to our markets, and my budget surplus reserve fund is a hedge against the possibility that even today's best projections of economic growth might turn out to be overly optimistic. . . . Let's cut to the heart of the matter. Both sides in this election have proposed targeted tax cuts. The difference is, my plan targets the middle class; the Bush plan targets the wealthy. In fact, the other night in our debate, Governor Bush was asked directly by the moderator whether what I was saying about his plan was correct and whether his plan 'benefits the top 1 percent of wealthiest Americans.' His answer? 'Of course it does.' . . . And just yesterday, we learned that there's some confusion in the Bush campaign about how soon Social Security will be in deficit under their plan. . . . In this week's debate, I asked the governor to address this confusion. But when he tried to explain his proposal, his own chief economist said, 'I don't know why he said what he said.' . . .
 Gov George W Bush appears on Late Show with David Letterman, and amid the expected humor is unexpectedly sharply questioned by Letterman on several issues; photo (M) It started like a normal night on the ''Late Show with David Letterman.'' Expecting Gov. George W. Bush as his guest, Mr. Letterman quizzed an audience member about Texas. He showed footage of the governor emerging from a black car. He brought up Mr. Bush's open-mike faux pas about a reporter. But quickly after that Mr. Letterman had a surprise for anyone who was expecting a normal night of comedy -- and from the look of it, Mr. Bush was also surprised. The host sharply questioned the Republican presidential candidate on the death penalty, violence in the Mideast and pollution in Texas. And he hardly seemed to be joking, even though he punctured his questions with his trademark laugh. It started like a normal night on the ''Late Show with David Letterman.'' Expecting Gov. George W. Bush as his guest, Mr. Letterman quizzed an audience member about Texas. He showed footage of the governor emerging from a black car. He brought up Mr. Bush's open-mike faux pas about a reporter. But quickly after that Mr. Letterman had a surprise for anyone who was expecting a normal night of comedy -- and from the look of it, Mr. Bush was also surprised. The host sharply questioned the Republican presidential candidate on the death penalty, violence in the Mideast and pollution in Texas. And he hardly seemed to be joking, even though he punctured his questions with his trademark laugh. Mr. Bush did get in some good lines. Asked whether he thought he had done well in the debate, he said, ''Well, a lot of folks don't think I can string a sentence together so when I was able to do so, the expectations were so low that all I had to do was say, 'Hi, I'm George W. Bush.'' But soon Mr. Letterman was bearing in on the death penalty, saying, ''We make a lot of jokes about you electrocuting people in Texas,'' and asking whether there was some circumstance that would change Mr. Bush's position on capital punishment. ''Well, obviously if the system were unfair, I'd think about it'' Mr. Bush said. ''You know it's a serious business. I hope that you're not laughing at the expense of victims or other people who are put to death of course.'' Mr. Bush said he might change his mind if he did not think that executions saved lives. Soon the two were debating Mr. Bush's plan for oil drilling in a preserve in Alaska and smog in Texas. Mr. Bush said, ''It's getting better,'' and noted, ''We have a lot of cars.'' At least Mr. Bush got to present a top 10 list of changes he would make in the White House, including giving the Oval Office ''one heck of a scrubbing.'' A taping of a ''Saturday Night Live'' to be shown the weekend before Election Day went more as planned. But there had to be several retakes because Mr. Bush, usually a chronic word mangler, could not produce the effect on command. Told to mispronounce the word ''ambivalent'' for comic effect, he kept pronouncing it correctly.
 Comment on baseball fans who frequent Ridgewood Diner in Queens, diner that sits on border of Ridgewood, which straddles Queens and Brooklyn, and Bushwick, in Brooklyn; they are two ethnically different neighborhoods, and the two neighborhoods form as good a laboratory as any in which to observe World Series games as they brush up against regular New Yorkers and their regular lives; photo; map (L) The Ridgewood Diner, a dumpy little joint beneath the shadow of the elevated M train, is just one place among many inflamed with baseball fever. It sits on the border of Ridgewood, which straddles Queens and Brooklyn, and Bushwick, in Brooklyn. They are two ethnically different neighborhoods hanging beside each other in the middle of the city like a bedsheet draped across the clothesline of Myrtle Avenue. The regular folks of Bushwick and Ridgewood are clearly caught up in the Subway Series games. At the 83rd Precinct, the scratchboard in the conference room is covered with trash-talking taunts that hack at both teams. At St. Barbara's Church, parishioners bicker over the Mets and the Yankees even during Mass. Like many places in New York, Ridgewood and Bushwick have long been landing points for the city's immigrants. For some of them, baseball has made that landing easier to bear.
 What of Dick Cheney, Al Gore and George W. Bush? Mr. Cheney tells it straight: he's a longtime Yankee fan. But Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are taking a slide on this one. Mr. Gore told The Associated Press yesterday: ''I love New York City. I'm dodging that question.'' And Mr. Bush said, ''I'm for the New York team.'' POLITICAL FUEL  Dick Cheney has said from the start that the Clinton administration's decision to release oil from the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve was basically a political move to help Al Gore. But yesterday he added a twist to his partisan analysis: he said it was an ineptly handled political move. THE TWO E's  Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, making another in a series of environmental speeches, said yesterday that Democrats were committed simultaneously to protecting the environment and promoting economic growth, but that Republicans believed it was impossible to do both. With new technology, Mr. Lieberman argued, it is possible to slow global warming and make the nation more energy efficient without hurting the economy. Speaking in New York to the national convention of the League of Conservation Voters, he said that President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore had managed over the past seven years to block many attempts to weaken environmental protections. But, he warned, ''if George Bush is elected president, I fear that those same measures will be welcomed on a red carpet through the front door of the White House.''
 Several prominent Democratic Congressional leaders, after watching the three presidential debates, bluntly question Gov George W Bush's capacity to lead, reinforcing a theme that surrogates for Vice President Al Gore plan to voice repeatedly in final days of campaign (M) After watching the three presidential debates, several prominent Democrats on Capitol Hill bluntly questioned Gov. George W. Bush's capacity to lead yesterday, reinforcing a theme that surrogates for Vice President Al Gore plan to voice repeatedly in the final days of the campaign. After watching the three presidential debates, several prominent Democrats on Capitol Hill bluntly questioned Gov. George W. Bush's capacity to lead yesterday, reinforcing a theme that surrogates for Vice President Al Gore plan to voice repeatedly in the final days of the campaign. President Clinton joined in the criticism yesterday, though he restricted his comments to a contention by Mr. Bush in Tuesday's debate about a 1997 Texas law that allowed patients to sue health maintenance organizations for denying coverage. Mr. Bush took credit for that provision even though he initially opposed it, allowed the bill to become law without his signature and vetoed an earlier version of the legislation. Mr. Clinton said the Bush campaign was trying to deceive voters about Republican positions on the issues. ''As hard as we try to bring clarity,'' Mr. Clinton said, ''they're really good at clouding up.'' The comments by Mr. Kerrey and other lawmakers came a day after Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, William M. Daley, visited Capitol Hill to meet with Congressional leaders. Several senators told Mr. Daley that the debates had convinced them that an effective political argument should be made against Mr. Bush's capacity for presidential leadership, and Mr. Daley encouraged them to make it, officials in Congress and the Gore campaign said. The campaign has tried to make that case in recent weeks through its spokesmen. One of them, Chris Lehane, said last week that Mr. Bush would be ''held to presidential standards when it comes to describing his policy views,'' and asserted that ''thus far he has not met the Quayle standard,'' a reference to former Vice President Dan Quayle. Steve Elmendorf, the chief of staff to Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, said leaders in each house would question Mr. Bush's leadership in news conferences, floor speeches and media interviews. ''As people have watched these debates, they have come in with a real sense that this is something we've got to talk about,'' Mr. Elmendorf said. Like Mr. Kerrey, Mr. Elmendorf said House members would not question Mr. Bush's intellect. ''Being president requires a lot more than brains,'' Mr. Elmendorf said. ''But particularly when you put him up against Gore, you can question his experience and ability to lead.'' Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, characterized such comments as ''echoes of former Gov. Ann Richards,'' who was defeated by Mr. Bush in 1994 after a campaign in which she regularly belittled him. ''The governor is very proud of how he has brought people together in a bipartisan way to lead and get things done in Texas,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''I do want to say that the worse Al Gore does in the polls, the more he and his surrogates are going on the attack, and the more they go on the attack, the worse Al Gore will do in the polls.'' Mr. Kerrey, who is retiring from the Senate early next year to become president of the New School University in New York, said in the interview that ''competency is an issue and there are serious questions about Governor Bush.'' Mr. Kerrey said he was particularly concerned about Mr. Bush's ability to handle complicated trade, defense and foreign policy matters. ''Many of the answers in the debate indicated to me that on foreign policy and defense issues he's going to have to contract out to get other people to advise him,'' Mr. Kerrey said. Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, also speaking in a telephone interview, made a similar point by noting the complexity of the annual negotiations over appropriations bills. ''I read where Governor Bush doesn't like meetings of more than 15 minutes and one sheet of paper kind of things,'' Mr. Leahy said. ''These negotiations get so complex that the president really needs to know the details.'' He said that if Mr. Bush wanted to demonstrate his leadership abilities he should, as the leader of his party, instruct Senate Republicans to vote on federal judgeships for a number of women and minorities that have been held up in that chamber. In the same vein, Mr. Gephardt, speaking in the same Congressional leadership meeting as Mr. Clinton, challenged Mr. Bush to lobby House Republicans to approve the president's request for money to hire teachers and build new schools.
 Current budget surplus of $81 billion could have been equally large deficit were it not for lucky confluence of circumstances; taxes thrown off by soaring stock market contributed handsomely, as did higher tax rates on the rich, enacted just before their incomes surged ahead of other Americans' in booming economy of 1990's; cutbacks in military spending after cold war also helped significantly; economists did not expect the surplus, and some warn that Congressional Budget Office projections that surplus will continue for another decade may be ill-founded; both Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George Bush are counting on the good luck to last in their tax and spending programs; charts of deficit/surplus, tax revenues and defense spending since 1992 (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas are counting on the good luck to last. They propose to use up -- in tax cuts and new spending -- nearly all of the surplus projected by the Congressional Budget Office over the next 10 years. The projections of the budget office, a nonpartisan research arm of Congress, assume that the mix of fortuitous circumstances that swung the budget from deficit to surplus will continue over the next decade, at least on the revenue side. That would happen even if the economy slowed, the budget office estimates. That assumption goes unchallenged by Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush -- although the recent sell-off in the stock market, if it continues, could eventually undermine tax revenue. The candidates accept the surplus projections of the budget office, although Jason Furman, a senior economist in the Gore camp, says that to be on the safe side, Mr. Gore's proposals would fall $300 billion short of spending the entire $2.2 trillion in surpluses projected by the budget office through 2010. Mr. Bush is taking the budget office projection on faith. ''What else can a politician do but rely on the best estimates?'' said Ari Fleischer, a Bush spokesman. The $2.2 trillion surplus does not include Social Security, which is expected to generate an additional surplus of $2.4 trillion by 2010. Mr. Gore would put this extra money aside to help pay retirement benefits when Social Security is projected to start running deficits in about three decades. Mr. Bush would put aside slightly more than half, but use about $1 trillion to finance individual retirement accounts. Congress set the stage a decade ago for the budget surpluses appearing today. Tax rates rose for the wealthiest Americans as a result of  legislation in 1990, when Governor Bush's father was president, and in 1993, under President Clinton. A 1997 law undid some of the 1993 tax rate increases, but tax rates on wealthy Americans were still sharply higher when the economy suddenly roared ahead in 1996. The boom lifted nearly everyone's taxable income, but a far larger share of the gain -- in the form of stock options and bonuses as well as higher pay -- went to people with taxable incomes above $200,000. But if tax revenue has grown faster than the economy itself and well above historical trends, in the view of the Congressional Budget Office, spending certainly has not. The spending restraint also fattened the surplus, but now seems in conflict with some of the stated plans of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush.
 ''I will stay here with you,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''If we don't finish by Wednesday, we're going to day-by-day continuing resolutions.'' He also used the meeting to criticize Gov. George W. Bush for comments in Tuesday's debate about a patients' bill of rights in Texas.
 Dr William R Archer III, Texas commissioner of health whose comments about ethnicity and health insurance have become a campaign embarassment for Gov George W Bush, is placed on indefinite leave of absence (S) The Texas commissioner of health, whose public comments had become a embarrassment for Gov. George W. Bush, was placed on an indefinite leave of absence today. The decision to remove the commissioner, Dr. William R. Archer III, came from the state's commissioner of health and human services, Don A. Gilbert, but there was little doubt that Mr. Bush had played a role. The Texas commissioner of health, whose public comments had become a embarrassment for Gov. George W. Bush, was placed on an indefinite leave of absence today. The decision to remove the commissioner, Dr. William R. Archer III, came from the state's commissioner of health and human services, Don A. Gilbert, but there was little doubt that Mr. Bush had played a role. ''The question is, can Dr. Archer continue to lead the agency effectively and with credibility after a series of inappropriate comments,'' said Linda Edwards, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush approved Dr. Archer's appointment as commissioner in 1997.
 U.S.-Jordan Trade Pact  The United States and Jordan plan to sign a free trade agreement next week. The deal is seen as supporting a partner in the Middle East peace process while helping Vice President Al Gore show he can reinvent the way trade deals are done. Once Close to Clinton, Gore Keeps His Distance  Vice President Al Gore is keeping his distance from President Clinton, to what is said to be the puzzlement and consternation of the president, who believes his political heir needs the campaign advice that Mr. Clinton is anxious to give. Gore aides say such a distancing is a must. Mr. Gore said Gov. George W. Bush's tax cut proposal would drain Social Security, jack up interest rates and undermine economic growth. Several prominent Capitol Hill Democrats questioned Mr. Bush's capacity to lead, a theme that Gore surrogates plan to voice repeatedly. Bush Fires Back at Ads  Gov. George W. Bush, striking back at Democratic commercials attacking his Social Security plan, said Vice President Al Gore was pitting ''grandparents against grandchildren'' for political gain and accused him of not facing up to Social Security's coming fiscal problems. Mr. Bush appeared on the ''Late Show with David Letterman,'' where the comedian grilled him on the death penalty, violence in the Mideast and pollution in Texas. Rivals Break Bread  The annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner, a charity fund-raiser, brought under one roof Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, and Hillary Rodham Clinton and Rick A. Lazio.
 MARTIN PERETZ, a friend of Al Gore's, on the vice president's relationship with President Clinton. [A26] MARTIN PERETZ, a friend of Al Gore's, on the vice president's relationship with President Clinton. [A26]
 Democratic National Committee releases new commercial attacking Gov George W Bush's proposal to create private investment accounts in Social Security system; ad described; photo (M) The Democratic National Committee released a new commercial this week attacking Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to create private investment accounts in the Social Security system. Building on criticism that Vice President Al Gore directed at the Bush plan in the final presidential debate on Tuesday night, the commercial says Mr. Bush cannot meet his promise to create investment accounts for younger workers without shortchanging retirees. The Democratic National Committee released a new commercial this week attacking Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to create private investment accounts in the Social Security system. Building on criticism that Vice President Al Gore directed at the Bush plan in the final presidential debate on Tuesday night, the commercial says Mr. Bush cannot meet his promise to create investment accounts for younger workers without shortchanging retirees. ON THE SCREEN -- Opens with pictures of Mr. Bush. Shifts to shots of dollar bills streaming by, followed by a pensive-looking older woman. Flashes the front page of The Wall Street Journal, and closes with a picture of Mr. Bush. THE SCRIPT -- Announcer: ''What would George W. Bush's plan do to Social Security? He's promising to take a trillion dollars out of Social Security so younger workers can invest in private accounts. Sounds good. The problem is: Bush has promised the same money to pay seniors their current benefits. The Wall Street Journal shows he can't keep both promises. Which promise is he going to break?'' ACCURACY -- The commercial is correct in saying that Mr. Bush is proposing to take $1 trillion out of the revenues from the payroll tax that finances Social Security benefits. That money would go to help establish accounts through which individuals could invest in stocks and bonds for retirement. But the commercial is somewhat misleading in its implication that Mr. Bush's plan would not leave enough money to pay current retirees. Social Security is taking in more money than it needs to pay benefits, although that situation will reverse in 15 years. Because of the complex way in which the government accounts for Social Security revenues, there is enough money available to pay benefits even if $1 trillion is diverted to private accounts in the next decade. On the other hand, Mr. Bush's plan would arguably move up the date at which the federal government would need to begin using general tax revenues to help pay benefits to current retirees. SCORE CARD -- The Gore campaign has been frustrated by its inability to make Mr. Bush pay a political price for his Social Security proposal, which would be the biggest change to the retirement system since its inception. The commercial tracks the theme Mr. Gore has emphasized on the stump for the last few days, that there is a price to be paid for the approach Mr. Bush is advocating. In political terms, the commercial is clearly intended to suggest that older people -- who reliably vote against tinkering with Social Security -- have something to fear from Mr. Bush. In doing so, it opens Mr. Gore to accusations of using scare tactics.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore seems to be feeling more energized since his third debate with Gov George W Bush; notes that polls have gone back and forth between two candidates, and it will be interesting to see whether undecided voters have yet another reversal of momentum left in them (M) ''Ah am talkin' 'bout YOU!'' cried 5Al Gore at a big rally in Flint, Mich. Populist Al is back, sounding as if he had just emerged from the overnight shift at the steel mill. Like George W. Bush, Mr. Gore is more Southern on some days than others. The one thing we know about the next administration is that it will be headed by a guy with hot and cold running accents. Emotionally, at least, Mr. Gore has been on a roll. It'll be interesting to see whether those pesky undecided voters have another reversal of momentum left in them. Gore-Bush-Gore-Bush -- the polls are starting to look like DNA. We could keep doing this over and over until Nov. 7, like musical chairs. Last guy to grab the Big Mo wins. Last guy to grab any Mo wins. ''Ah am talkin' 'bout YOU!'' cried 5Al Gore at a big rally in Flint, Mich. Populist Al is back, sounding as if he had just emerged from the overnight shift at the steel mill. Like George W. Bush, Mr. Gore is more Southern on some days than others. The one thing we know about the next administration is that it will be headed by a guy with hot and cold running accents. Emotionally, at least, Mr. Gore has been on a roll. It'll be interesting to see whether those pesky undecided voters have another reversal of momentum left in them. Gore-Bush-Gore-Bush -- the polls are starting to look like DNA. We could keep doing this over and over until Nov. 7, like musical chairs. Last guy to grab the Big Mo wins. Last guy to grab any Mo wins. The debate thrilled the Gore campaign. More important, even the crowd in Flint caught the tide and bellowed ''You won! You won!'' as Mr. Gore, in shirtsleeves, beamed. Mr. Gore has been to a million town halls like the one on TV Tuesday. His  questioners usually try to go for his strong suit, the cerebral. A man this week asked him to recompute the rate of return on Social Security. Mr. Bush has been to a lot of town halls this year too, but the questions tend to be less demanding. ''Can I have a hug?'' a woman asked the other day. Hugging is, of course, what governors do. But it is not all that great of a preparation for standing on national television and having an average citizen ask whether you actually enjoy executing murderers. Did the Undecided Voters notice that Mr. Gore sounded smarter? Will they reward him with a bump in the weekend polls? Who are these people, anyway? Are they really undecided, or are they just holding out for a gig in a network focus group? Do they e-mail each other, taking secret votes on whether or not to send the CNN tracking poll up 15 points tomorrow? Mr. Gore, at least, seems to feel they're paying attention, and that they're good for at least one more total reversal of direction. ''You are the wind beneath my wings! That's how I feel right now!'' he cried to the crowd in Flint after delivering the requisite smooch to Tipper. He described his opponent as the sort of guy who will ''just talk and talk and give all these fancy words. . . .'' This is how you know a campaign is coming near the end -- when Al Gore starts warning people about George W. Bush, that silver-tongued devil with the stuck-up vocabulary. But it can't hurt Mr. Gore's chances that he seems to be feeling more energized. When he gets that way, he goes into emotional overdrive. He could get worked up while waiving the reading of the minutes of the last meeting. ''I said before and I'll say again -- and this is controversial at a gut level -- I don't believe the presidency is a popularity contest,'' he told a group of senior citizens in Des Moines. Seated in the audience was Winnie Skinner, the elderly Iowan who became a star after she told Mr. Gore that she pays for her prescription drugs by collecting recyclable cans. Like a lot of Mr. Gore's examples of true-life woe, Ms. Skinner's lot turned out to be not quite so bad as it seemed at first. Her son in Texas informed the press that he had plenty of money and was perfectly willing to help out his mother, if only she'd let him. But Mr. Gore, who has had to drop all the references to the girl who had to stand during science class in Florida and the dog whose arthritis medicine was cheaper than his mother-in-law's, was not willing to abandon Ms. Skinner, his favorite Real Person. ''The national media tried to make a big deal out of the fact her son is well-to-do. She doesn't have to pick up cans to pay for her prescription drugs. She can go and ask her son for money. But you don't want to do that, do you, Winnie?'' said the vice president. Everybody loves spunky old ladies with attitude. But in the great scheme of things, it's hard to see Ms. Skinner as the reason we need a multibillion-dollar prescription drug program for the elderly. If Mr. Gore loses, we may look back and conclude that his fatal error was that his Real People had too much money. It's easy to locate impoverished seniors or schools without enough desks. But finding them in middle-class neighborhoods in swing states is a challenge.
 Editorial says Vice Pres Al Gore, in final debate with Gov George W Bush, hammered away at Bush's tax giveaway to rich; notes that low- and middle-income Americans pay more in payroll taxes than they do in income taxes, and payroll taxes would not be cut under Bush plan; notes also that Gore forced Bush to acknowledge that his partial privatization of Social Security would divert $1 trillion from surplus into private accounts, siphoning off funds that will be needed in future to pay benefits to retirees Both presidential candidates used their final debate this week to set up their stretch drives to the election. Gov. George W. Bush proclaimed himself the cure for partisan bickering in Washington and painted Vice President Al Gore as a big-spending, big-government liberal. But Mr. Gore came away with two overriding issues to exploit in the closing weeks. He hammered away at Mr. Bush's tax giveaway to the rich, and he forced Mr. Bush to acknowledge that his partial privatization of Social Security would divert $1 trillion from the surplus into private accounts, siphoning off funds that will be needed in the future to pay benefits to retirees. Federal spending. Governor Bush distorted reality when he said that Mr. Gore's campaign proposals added up to ''the largest increase in federal spending in years.'' The Bush campaign cited figures this week to show that the Gore program would raise federal spending, in terms of dollars, by more than at any time since the Great Society program of the 1960's. But that is a misleading measure. President Johnson's programs raised federal spending as a percentage of national income, from 17 to over 21 percent. The Gore program would head in the opposite direction. Federal spending as a percentage of national income would fall, from about 18 percent to less than 17.5 percent by 2010, the lowest level since the mid-1960's. That can hardly be described as big government run amok. Both presidential candidates used their final debate this week to set up their stretch drives to the election. Gov. George W. Bush proclaimed himself the cure for partisan bickering in Washington and painted Vice President Al Gore as a big-spending, big-government liberal. But Mr. Gore came away with two overriding issues to exploit in the closing weeks. He hammered away at Mr. Bush's tax giveaway to the rich, and he forced Mr. Bush to acknowledge that his partial privatization of Social Security would divert $1 trillion from the surplus into private accounts, siphoning off funds that will be needed in the future to pay benefits to retirees. Federal spending. Governor Bush distorted reality when he said that Mr. Gore's campaign proposals added up to ''the largest increase in federal spending in years.'' The Bush campaign cited figures this week to show that the Gore program would raise federal spending, in terms of dollars, by more than at any time since the Great Society program of the 1960's. But that is a misleading measure. President Johnson's programs raised federal spending as a percentage of national income, from 17 to over 21 percent. The Gore program would head in the opposite direction. Federal spending as a percentage of national income would fall, from about 18 percent to less than 17.5 percent by 2010, the lowest level since the mid-1960's. That can hardly be described as big government run amok. Tax cuts. Mr. Gore made it clear that he would continue to pound Mr. Bush for proposing tax cuts that would primarily benefit the richest 1 percent of the American population. Mr. Bush tried to parry the thrust by saying that the share of taxes paid by wealthy families would actually rise under his plan, to 64 percent from 62 percent. But his figures apply only to income taxes. Low- and many middle-income families pay more in payroll taxes than they do in income taxes, and payroll taxes would not be cut a dime under the Bush plan. Mr. Bush also calls for gutting the estate tax, which is paid almost entirely by the richest families. So even if wealthy families pay a slightly larger fraction of income taxes under the Bush plan, they will pay a lower share of all federal taxes. Social Security. The vice president sounded an important theme when he accused Mr. Bush of financial legerdemain -- promising to use $1 trillion to set up private retirement accounts while needing to use the same dollars to pay current retirees. Mr. Gore's accusation applies more to the future than to the present. For the next few years, Social Security will run huge surpluses, providing enough money to create private accounts and to pay retirees. But those surpluses are temporary, and eventually Mr. Bush must find dollars to serve both purposes. Indeed, to make his program work he will be forced to cut benefits well below current guarantees, raise taxes or borrow, an issue he refuses to confront. Mr. Bush wants to create the private retirement accounts alongside the existing public trust fund by diverting, say, a sixth of the current Social Security payroll tax. He defends the idea by saying that workers currently get only a ''paltry'' 2 percent return -- in terms of future retirement benefits -- on the money they pay in payroll taxes. But, he says, they could easily earn at least twice as much on private accounts invested in stocks and bonds. The comparison is highly misleading. More than 80 percent of the payroll taxes that workers pay into the common trust fund fly right back out to pay the benefits of current retirees. This money is never invested, earning a zero rate of return. The problem is that Social Security has promised to pay trillions of dollars to retirees in excess of taxes the system expects to collect in future years. These unfunded promises will not disappear under partial privatization. One way or another, taxpayers will foot the bill, making the private accounts far less attractive than Mr. Bush advertises.
