 Television coverage of Al Gore and George W. Bush has been quite superficial by stressing the candidates' clothing or facial expressions. Yet, undecided voters are guilty of not formulating a political philosophy to help them evaluate the candidates.
 MR. PRESSMAN -- Wait a minute. Didn't your presidential candidate, George W. Bush, also accept contributions?
 Dr. Andersen said that with the homey images the Lazio campaign was ''playing to the same sort of feelings Gore evoked with the kiss at the convention, the good family man.''
 SCORECARD -- Mr. Corzine, like Vice President Al Gore, here tries to alarm supporters of abortion rights over the possibility that his opponent would favor nominees to the Supreme Court who would make abortion illegal. By focusing on the somewhat slim chance that Roe v. Wade could soon be overturned, Mr. Corzine appeals to the overwhelming majority of New Jerseyans who support a basic right to abortion, with or without new restrictions. In doing so, he indirectly highlights what has been both a political strength and a weakness of Mr. Franks: his tendency to seem to take both sides of an important issue.
 Gore campaign tells Pres Clinton to steer clear of closely contested states like Michigan and Pennsylvania to avoid alienating swing voters who will play crucial role in choosing his successor; tells Clinton to concentrate on efforts to motivate black and Hispanic voters to get to polls, and to limit his travel to states that Gore is likely to win; polls show that while most Americans generally approve of Clinton's performance as president, his personal appeal among them is low; photo (M) The Gore campaign has told President Clinton to steer clear of battleground states like Michigan and Pennsylvania in the closing days of the presidential race to avoid alienating the swing voters who will play a crucial role in choosing his successor, Democratic officials say. The Gore campaign has told President Clinton to steer clear of battleground states like Michigan and Pennsylvania in the closing days of the presidential race to avoid alienating the swing voters who will play a crucial role in choosing his successor, Democratic officials say. But the Gore campaign, to which the president has granted final say on his political travel schedule, has told him to concentrate on efforts to motivate black and Hispanic voters to get to the polls, and to limit his travel to states that the vice president is likely to win, including New York, where Mr. Clinton will appear at a rally on Tuesday for his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. The Gore camp's analysis is that campaigning by the president, even if limited to statewide races, could discourage support for Mr. Gore among swing voters and energize Republicans to turn out on Election Day for Gov. George W. Bush. In addition to traveling to New York, Mr. Clinton will go next week to Kentucky, where the Gore campaign has approved a visit to help a Democratic candidate for the House, and to California, for two public rallies and fund-raisers for three House candidates. (California has apparently become not so safely in Mr. Gore's column as was previously thought, but Mr. Clinton is very popular there, and his visit was arranged by the state's Democratic governor,  Gray Davis.) Other presidential stops under consideration in the closing days of the race include Arkansas and Louisiana, places where the Gore campaign feels fairly confident. But numerous other states are now off limits, say Democratic officials, all speaking on the promise of anonymity. The visit has been blocked by the Gore campaign, however, prompting complaints from some local and national Democrats who consider Ms. Stabenow's race critical to their party's hopes of retaking Senate control. ''Al Gore,'' one Democratic strategist grumbled, ''is not out to win the Senate.'' Aides to Mr. Gore have studied polling data in deciding how Mr. Clinton might help, and Michigan is a prime example of the mixed reactions that they have determined a presidential visit would bring. The Gore campaign has also determined that Mr. Clinton would be a liability in other parts of the state, like Lansing, a relatively cosmopolitan college town, where he would discourage swing voters that the Gore campaign is counting on. And in Grand Rapids, where there are more conservative Republicans, he would likely energize Bush supporters. In Pennsylvania, the campaign of Representative Ron Klink, a Democrat challenging Senator Rick Santorum, also sought the president's aid. But that request, too, has been turned down by Gore aides. ''Hello, this is President Clinton,'' one says. ''I am calling today to talk with you about my friend Al Gore. Michigan is critical in deciding who will lead our country in the new century, so every vote is important.'' Though his itinerary is being restricted by the Gore campaign, the president's associates describe him as itching to hit the campaign trail.
 Vice Pres Al Gore returns to Pennsylvania to shore up support among traditional Democrats and convince undecided voters that he would assure prosperous future; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore returned to Pennsylvania today to promote his economic plan for new high-tech jobs, shore up support among traditional Democrats and convince undecided voters that he would assure a prosperous future. ''When you encounter an undecided voter, tell them the facts but then give them the passion in your hearts,'' Mr. Gore pleaded at a rally here at Carnegie Mellon University. ''Give me your help and give me your votes and give me your heart so I can fight for you, and I'll fight for your future.'' Vice President Al Gore returned to Pennsylvania today to promote his economic plan for new high-tech jobs, shore up support among traditional Democrats and convince undecided voters that he would assure a prosperous future. ''When you encounter an undecided voter, tell them the facts but then give them the passion in your hearts,'' Mr. Gore pleaded at a rally here at Carnegie Mellon University. ''Give me your help and give me your votes and give me your heart so I can fight for you, and I'll fight for your future.'' Faced with polls that show his lead in Pennsylvania narrowing, Mr. Gore spent much of the day reiterating parts of his economic plan, pledging to eliminate the national debt, target tax cuts to certain middle-class voters and provide tax deductions for college tuition. Here and during a morning rally in West Virginia, Mr. Gore also cast himself as a friend of coal miners, lambasted the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush for television commercials that Gore aides said went over the line, and relied on leaders of the steelworkers union and the mine workers union to help promote his candidacy. And as he traveled through the industrial heart of the old economy, Mr. Gore spent a significant part of his day talking about the new one. Mr. Gore said his approach to the economy could add 10 million high-tech jobs over the next decade. He said that over the next five years he wanted to double the federal government's spending on research in information technology, and over the next seven years double the amount spent on medical research. Mr. Gore's schedule is being stapled together on a moment-by-moment basis. He is campaigning in places where he did not expect to have to compete at this stage. On Saturday, after a morning speech in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., he travels to Washington to watch his son's football game, then is off to Minneapolis and Detroit. On Sunday he plans a bus trip across Michigan, and on Monday a bus trip across Wisconsin. Tuesday will see Mr. Gore in California, the most important state and one where Mr. Gore's once commanding lead has also thinned somewhat. He is to tape an appearance for the ''Tonight'' show with Jay Leno. Mr. Bush is appearing on the Leno show the night before. Mr. Gore is also planning a rally in Los Angeles, and he is expected to visit Oregon for the second time in 10 days. Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said that the trip to California was ''primarily an opportunity to do the Leno program, which is a great way to speak to a large number of people. Leno and Letterman, quite literally, have become the town squares of the campaign.'' Mr. Gore's schedule today reflected the renewed urgency that his campaign detects in Pennsylvania and in the Democratic bastion of West Virginia, where coal companies are worried that Mr. Gore's environmental concerns could lead to overregulation of the coal industry. Asked about the support for Mr. Gore in Pennsylvania, Terry Madonna, a political analyst at Millersville University, said the vice president was simply losing the personality contest. ''There is no one big issue for people to focus on, so they have the luxury of looking at the personalities of these candidates,'' he said. ''There are a substantial number of voters in this state, even Democrats, who don't like Gore. It's the only thing that really explains what happened to his campaign.'' Mr. Madonna said that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush were both moving gingerly around two big issues here, abortion and gun control, and how they affect two important groups in this state -- Republican women in the suburbs who favor abortion rights and white Democratic men in the western part of the state who favor gun rights. ''Gore's position on abortion helps him in the suburbs, but on gun control, he gets hurt by blue-collar, pro-union, white men in the $25,000-to-$60,000 income bracket, the big, white, Catholic, working-class majority.'' Mr. Madonna said. ''Bush can emphasize his anti-gun control, but that hurts him in the suburbs.'' ''You want somebody who understands coming from part of Appalachia,'' Mr. Gore said. ''My home in Tennessee is on the edge of Appalachia and my Congressional district that I started representing 24 years ago includes a big part of the district that is in Appalachia, with coal miners. I have spent many a Saturday night in a small courthouse filling out forms related to black lung.'' Mr. Gore and others noted that Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate and a former member of Congress, voted 18 times against increasing federal benefits for victims of black-lung disease. The vice president also said essentially that the Bush campaign was distorting his positions in television commercials because it was in the grip of special interests. ''The other side won't say to you plainly that they're in it to fight for the special interests,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Of course not. They fuzz it up, like the math. They will try to use all of the special-interest contributions to put misleading advertisements on the TV screen every few minutes to try to make you think that up is down and black is white and outside is inside.'' In West Virginia Mr. Gore was joined by Cecil Roberts, national president of the United Mine Workers, who said the coal operators were for Mr. Bush while the coal miners were for Mr. Gore. He was also joined by Richard Trumka, secretary-treasurer of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and former president of the mine workers union. Mr. Trumka made a plea for Mr. Gore, and concluded by yelling, ''We know that Nov. 7 is the day that we take back the country!'' Mr. Gore was introduced by Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, Democrat of West Virginia, who also vouched for Mr. Gore's devotion to coal. ''When Al Gore says that West Virginia is blessed by an abundance of coal,'' Mr. Rockefeller said, ''he knows the importance of coal, and he knows the importance of that to our future, doing it responsibly but doing it, mining it.'' In a final plea, Mr. Rockefeller said of Mr. Gore: ''He understands us. He is us.''
 How eager are the national parties to win control? When a special election for a vacant seat in Scranton was held in June, Vice President Al Gore campaigned in the district; President Clinton recorded radio commercials; and Governor Ridge, along with other notable Republicans, made local appearances. With nearly 17,000 people voting, the Democratic candidate, Jim Wansacz, won by 752 votes over the Republican, Tom Parry. TEXAS SENATE -- A victory by Gov. George W. Bush could actually help the state's Democrats increase the party's 17-to-13 advantage in the Washington delegation. If Mr. Bush wins, his lieutenant governor, Rick Perry, a Republican, will become governor for two years until the next election. But the Texas Constitution provides that Mr. Perry's successor will be chosen by the Senate, in which Republicans hold a one-seat margin, with 15 of 31 seats up for election this year. The competition is so intense that in the race for the only open Senate seat, the Democratic and Republican candidates say they have raised a total of $3.3 million.
 Were I a politician, I would forcefully state that the vibrancy of the American economy for our children and grandchildren depends on our investment in basic science today. I would insist that the science budgets of the National Science Foundation, NASA, the Department of Energy and the Department of Defense be strengthened. The only budget keeping up with the opportunities is that of the National Institutes of Health, and I would pledge -- as Al Gore did for cancer research -- that the momentum would be continued. I am confident that championing scientific accomplishment and higher education would be a vote-winning strategy for Vice President Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. It would be refreshing to see one or both of them adopt it.
 Mr. Franks also taped a television interview for the program ''Inside Trenton.'' Like Mr. Corzine, he acknowledged public concerns about spending, and he did so by distancing himself from the large tax cuts proposed by his own party's presidential candidate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''Candidly, I am a bit concerned about Governor Bush's tax cuts,'' Mr. Franks said. ''They depend on all those trillions in the surplus being realized year after year.''
 Gov George W Bush has conveyed conservative ideas without using conservative buzzwords that might turn off centrist Democrats and independent voters as he barnstorms through Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan (M) At a private Christian high school in this conservative region of southwest Michigan, Gov. George W. Bush brought an overflow crowd of faithful Republicans to their feet today -- though he often sounded like a Democrat. At a private Christian high school in this conservative region of southwest Michigan, Gov. George W. Bush brought an overflow crowd of faithful Republicans to their feet today -- though he often sounded like a Democrat. As he has barnstormed through Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan in recent days, Mr. Bush has succeeded in firing up huge rallies of dyed-in-the-wool Republicans, energetically conveying conservative ideas without using conservative buzzwords that might turn off the centrist Democrats and independent voters he also needs to win. Mr. Bush has called for big tax cuts, but he has spent almost as much time strongly defending two Democratic programs, Social Security and Medicare. He has endorsed the idea of school vouchers, but talks much more passionately about helping low-income students. He has praised the work of anti-abortion organizations without uttering the word abortion. In part, Mr. Bush's ability to rally his conservative base has stemmed from the potent combination of his personal charm and his supporters' gnawing hunger to put a Republican in the White House after eight years of the Clinton administration. But it also comes from choosing his words carefully. Rather than mentioning abortion, which he opposes, Mr. Bush praises the work of crisis pregnancy centers, organizations typically staffed by abortion opponents, who counsel pregnant women against having the procedure. ''These are places of deep compassion,'' Mr. Bush said in Kalamazoo, as the audience whooped its approval. Political scientists contend that Mr. Bush has little choice but to sidestep many of the contentious issues that divide Republicans from Democrats because the race is so close and he is competing in several states that have voted Democratic in recent years. In Pennsylvania, Mr. Bush's positions on abortion, gun control and school vouchers all play well in the conservative western end, where he campaigned yesterday. But they turn off many moderate Republicans and centrist Democrats, particularly women, in the suburbs outside Philadelphia. So he barely mentioned them, or mentioned them only obliquely, in his most recent visit on Thursday. ''This is Bush's way of raising morality issues without going down a road that offends suburban Republican women,'' said G. Terry Madonna, a political scientist at Millersville University in Pennsylvania. But Mr. Bush's message has clearly been getting through to its intended audiences. At each of his stops in recent days, Mr. Bush has been drawing huge, enthusiastic audiences, usually of several thousand people. They have stamped their feet, waved little flags and stood in wild ovation for their candidate. ''He doesn't have to talk about abortion,'' said Anna May Conelley, 65, who heard Mr. Bush in Kalamazoo. ''We know where he stands.'' Mr. Bush's ability to communicate his conservative message to conservative voters has also been greatly abetted by the work of independent groups that support him, like the National Right to Life Committee, the National Rifle Association and Americans for Tax Reform. All have financed commercials, mailings, Web sites and newsletters to their members, which have praised Mr. Bush's positions on the military, tax cuts, abortion or gun control. Mr. Bush has also avoided directly attacking President Clinton, who won in both Pennsylvania and Michigan in 1996. But political analysts say his focus on religion, family, character and values this week seems an effort to draw a sharp moral contrast to both Mr. Clinton and his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore.
 But sometimes it is hard to tell exactly what is happening on stage. The two characters with major party roles are unusually close in their views. The unwieldy cast includes three other candidates. And the audience, in a swath of eastern Long Island, is being tugged by two offstage presences: Mr. Lazio and Vice President Al Gore, both of whom appear to be running well here. But sometimes it is hard to tell exactly what is happening on stage. The two characters with major party roles are unusually close in their views. The unwieldy cast includes three other candidates. And the audience, in a swath of eastern Long Island, is being tugged by two offstage presences: Mr. Lazio and Vice President Al Gore, both of whom appear to be running well here. Both candidates realize they may be helped by politicians higher up on their tickets, though those benefits may cancel each other out. Mr. Lazio  remains very popular in the district, but Democratic polls show Mr. Gore running ahead of George W. Bush by 5 to 8 percentage points in the presidential race.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush campaigns accuse each other of using dirty advertising techniques to try to win election, including inflammatory telephone calls to voters and incendiary television spots; both sides had been keeping fairly tight lid on invective in close race; Republicans and Democrats are beginning to accentuate negative to mobilize their partisans and stir up as much doubt as possible about opposition among undecided voters (M)d From inflammatory telephone calls to voters by allies of Vice President Al Gore, to incendiary new television spots by supporters of Gov. George W. Bush, the presidential race reached a new level of mean-spiritedness yesterday. And each side sought to portray the other as the one dragging the campaign into the mud. In Michigan, the state Democratic Party placed calls to thousands of voters, with recorded messages from two women relating stories of death and illness in Governor Bush's Texas. In Wisconsin and the Northwest, a Republican group planned to begin running commercials showing footage of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, attacking Mr. Gore's environmental record. From inflammatory telephone calls to voters by allies of Vice President Al Gore, to incendiary new television spots by supporters of Gov. George W. Bush, the presidential race reached a new level of mean-spiritedness yesterday. And each side sought to portray the other as the one dragging the campaign into the mud. In Michigan, the state Democratic Party placed calls to thousands of voters, with recorded messages from two women relating stories of death and illness in Governor Bush's Texas. In Wisconsin and the Northwest, a Republican group planned to begin running commercials showing footage of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, attacking Mr. Gore's environmental record. Attack advertisements from outside groups are multiplying, and the automated phone campaigns are reported to be spreading to states like Florida, Illinois and Pennsylvania. One phone message, recorded for the Democrats by the actor Ed Asner, warns listeners that Mr. Bush's plans for reforming Social Security could threaten ''current benefits.'' In one recorded call, a Texas woman, Ann Friday, implies that Mr. Bush's failure to improve nursing home care in Texas contributed to the death of her husband, who died ''from an illness that his nursing home attendants failed to notice.'' In another, a woman from Houston, Charlotte Cherry, says of Mr. Bush's ''terrible record on the environment'': ''Governor Bush has accepted $1.3 million from corporate polluters, and he's allowed them to keep polluting while my kids suffer.'' Republicans denounced the Michigan messages as ''despicable,'' and Karen P. Hughes, the Bush campaign communications director, said of the Ann Friday message, ''It is wrong for Vice President Gore to try to use a tragedy involving an elderly woman for his own political purposes.'' The Democrats countered that the spot by the Republican Leadership Council using Mr. Nader's words against Mr. Gore was the true low blow. In the advertisement, which begins running on Monday in Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin, states in which Mr. Nader has substantial support, a sound bite is played in which Mr. Nader says, ''Al Gore is suffering from election-year delusion if he thinks his record on the environment is anything to be proud of.'' The Nader campaign did not think much of the commercial, either. ''The ad fails to mention that George W. Bush also has an abysmal environmental record,'' said Laura Jones, a Nader spokeswoman. The new moves came as criticism mounted of a Texas group backing Mr. Bush that began running an anti-Gore commercial yesterday modeled on the notorious ''Daisy'' spot that the Democrats ran against Barry Goldwater in 1964. The spot, which ran in small and medium-sized cities in swing states like Florida, Missouri and Ohio, shows a young  girl counting the petals of a flower and then switches to the countdown to a missile launching. Its message is that the United States is vulnerable to a nuclear attack from China because the Clinton administration traded away national security in return for campaign contributions. The commercial drew a furious condemnation by the Gore campaign. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the vice-presidential nominee, described the spot as ''the kind of sneak attack that we adopted legislation to stop, where moneyed interests come in at critical moments.'' Even Mr. Bush's advisers distanced themselves from the commercial; Ms. Hughes called the spot an ''anonymous attack ad that is in no way associated with our campaign'' and the kind the governor would seek to have abolished. Ms. Hughes added that Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, called the group sponsoring the ''Daisy'' commercial, Aretino Industries, yesterday to ask that it be pulled. Mr. Cramer said Aretino's members, whom he has declined to name, decided to withdraw the spot because ''they did not want to hurt the Bush campaign.'' He added that the news media's reporting on the spot was drowning out its message. Despite the modest size of the advertising ''buy,'' the Gore campaign went to great lengths yesterday to spread the word about the spot. In e-mail messages to reporters, the campaign identified Mr. Cramer as an executive of the Meridian Group, ''a consulting firm with ties to Newt Gingrich.'' The message continued,  ''Cramer is a follower of Machiavellian principles.'' ''These are real people leaving a message that is not scary,'' said Jennifer Backus, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee, adding that they follow the Democrats' established practice of questioning Mr. Bush's record. Ms. Cherry, whose voice is heard in the phone call warning about pollution in Texas, said in an interview yesterday that she taped her message for the Democrats on Wednesday, but that partisanship was not her motivation. A secretary who lives in Houston, Ms. Cherry said that she and her neighbors had long been trying to get Mr. Bush to address their concerns about emissions from chemical plants near her home.
 That was when Ralph Nader, the lanky pied piper of third-party politics who, as the Green Party's presidential candidate, has emerged as a notable thorn in the side of Vice President Al Gore, tapped her to run his presidential campaign. On Thursday, Vice President Al Gore in Madison, Wis., a Nader stronghold,  suggested that oil companies wanted people to ''vote for George Bush or in any case vote for Ralph Nader.'' Ms. Amato was interviewed about Mr. Gore's statement at a television news station here. Every screen in the control room was lit up with headlines exploring ''the Nader factor'' or ''the Nader effect.'' Ms. Amato shrugged, sitting at her cluttered desk, the sun filtering through white shuttered windows. She said she found Mr. Gore's suggestion absurd. She also found his efforts to ''scare'' voters into voting for him unpleasant. But beyond that she did not seem concerned.  She was more interested in the civics lesson that the campaign, now and after the election, could offer. O.K., fine. But how would she feel if she helped elect George W. Bush? Three times, the question was asked. Three times, she shrugged. ''I'm really not focused on Bush and Gore,'' came the unflappable response. ''I'm focused  on the Nader campaign.''
 Push-polling usually arises in frenzy at the end of campaigns, when politicians hope their tactics will not draw scrutiny. Just before the Republican presidential primary last March in South Carolina, Senator John McCain accused the campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of using this strategy, which Mr. Bush denied.
 Gov George W Bush, in his campaign speeches, is emphasizing his leadership skills; photo (M)2 There are times on the campaign trail these days when what Gov. George W. Bush seems to be offering is less a package of proposed legislation than a seminar on leadership. A leader, he tells crowds, does not pit one group of people against another. To lead, he says, is to stand firm on convictions, wrap one's fingers around even the thorniest problems and take the long view, no matter what the short-term impact. Variations on those words and themes course through almost every one of Mr. Bush's speeches. There are times on the campaign trail these days when what Gov. George W. Bush seems to be offering is less a package of proposed legislation than a seminar on leadership. A leader, he tells crowds, does not pit one group of people against another. To lead, he says, is to stand firm on convictions, wrap one's fingers around even the thorniest problems and take the long view, no matter what the short-term impact. Variations on those words and themes course through almost every one of Mr. Bush's speeches. His vision of Washington looms just as large, but he is not talking about a place on the map. He is assailing what he portrays as misbegotten thinking marked by arrogance, truculence and meddling, and personified in his Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore. ''We're a government of the people, by the people, and for the people,'' Mr. Bush said in Knoxville, Tenn., on Tuesday. ''We're not a government of Washington, for Washington and by Washington.'' Mr. Bush addresses specific issues, too: tax cuts, Social Security, Medicare, education. But what is most striking about his stump speech in this final, mad dash toward the finish line of the presidential race is the way in which almost every subject he discusses, almost every claim he makes, bolsters a more diffuse argument about character and tone. His Knoxville speech, as close to a standard set of remarks as any he made in the last week, was a perfect example. When he defined the differences between his plan for Social Security and Mr. Gore's, he moved beyond particulars to the assertion that his approach reflected a willingness to think boldly, differently. He insisted that his approach was also, in a sense, humbler, because it would encourage people to have more power over their futures and discretion over their money. The current iteration of Mr. Bush's stump speech, which has evolved considerably in the 16 months since he began his presidential campaign, provides a perfect window into the fundamental questions that dog his bid for the White House and his chosen strategies for answering them. ''The pundits have been saying, you know, that people don't want tax relief,'' Mr. Bush told the crowd in Knoxville, defending his tax-cut proposal, which many political analysts consider a liability. ''You know what my answer is?'' he continued. ''I really don't care what the polls say. I'm standing before you because I do what I think is right.'' ''Our economy is strong today not because of Al Gore,'' he said. ''Our economy is strong today because we're a land of dreamers and doers.'' He also insists that the choice before voters is not between jeopardizing prosperity and continuing it, as Mr. Gore claims, but between a shepherd of that wealth whose leadership they can respect and one whose methods are manipulative. ''I want to remind you of what my opponent said in Los Angeles, California, in his convention speech,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He said to the people out there he is going to make sure the 'right people' get tax relief.'' ''I want you to think about that for a potential president of the United States,'' Mr. Bush added, then liberally translated Mr. Gore's remarks. ''He said, 'Put me in Washington and I'm going to decide who the right people are.' That's not the way we think. That's not the American way.'' Mr. Bush's stump speech also reflects his considerable growth as a candidate. In the beginning, he delivered virtually the same remarks, in the same order, with the same intonation, wherever he went, as if clinging to a life line. Now he confidently rearranges the pieces. One aspect of Mr. Bush's speech has proved timeless, and its stamina underscores how firmly he believes that if the election turns on values and character, victory will be his. Always, at the close, Mr. Bush envisions his inauguration and the act of putting his ''hand on the Bible.'' He says he will be pledging not only to uphold the laws of the land, but also ''to uphold the honor and the integrity of the office to which I have been elected, so help me God.''
 Excerpts from Vice Pres Al Gore speech in Charleston, W Va (S)
 Excerpts from Gov George W Bush speech in Knoxville, Tenn (M)h Following are excerpts from a speech that Gov. George W. Bush delivered at a school in Knoxville, Tenn., on Tuesday as recorded by The New York Times: Following are excerpts from a speech that Gov. George W. Bush delivered at a school in Knoxville, Tenn., on Tuesday as recorded by The New York Times: We're going to drop the top rate to 33 percent for two reasons: one, there ought to be a principle involved. The federal government should take no more than a third of anybody's income. But two, I understand how capitalism works. The role of the federal government is not to create wealth but an environment in which entrepreneurs flourish, in which small businesses can grow to become big businesses. Our economy is strong today not because of Al Gore, I might add, our economy is strong today because we're a land of dreamers and doers, but also because of the tax cuts, Ronald Reagan's tax cuts in the 80's. It's time to knock down that toll booth on the road to the middle class. I've heard all the talk about rich people versus poor people. That's class warfare that Mr. Gore likes to put onto people. That's not how you lead. That's not what this nation needs. This nation needs somebody to bring us together. This nation needs a healer, not a divider. This nation needs somebody, somebody, who's going to stop the bickering and fighting and name-calling in Washington, D.C. . . .
 Republicans in Washington State, Oregon and Wisconsin will broadcast television commercial featuring Ralph Nader criticizing Vice Pres Al Gore in recent speech; Nader, campaigning in Iowa, assails Gore as being 'subservient' to corporations (M) Hoping to siphon votes from Vice President Al Gore, Republicans in three closely contested states prepared to broadcast a television commercial featuring Ralph Nader, as the candidate himself campaigned here tonight and continued to aim his sharpest barbs at the Democratic ticket. Speaking to a capacity crowd at Iowa Memorial Union hall on the University of Iowa campus, Mr. Nader painted Mr. Gore as ''unbelievably subservient'' to corporations and described Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, as ''the quintessential hermaphrodite of American politics -- a Republicrat.'' Hoping to siphon votes from Vice President Al Gore, Republicans in three closely contested states prepared to broadcast a television commercial featuring Ralph Nader, as the candidate himself campaigned here tonight and continued to aim his sharpest barbs at the Democratic ticket. Speaking to a capacity crowd at Iowa Memorial Union hall on the University of Iowa campus, Mr. Nader painted Mr. Gore as ''unbelievably subservient'' to corporations and described Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, as ''the quintessential hermaphrodite of American politics -- a Republicrat.'' In his quest for that percentage, Mr. Nader could drain enough votes from Mr. Gore to hand victory to the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the Republicans are now trying to capitalize on that possibility. One group, the Republican Leadership Council, has prepared a television commercial in which Mr. Nader attacks Mr. Gore and is ready to broadcast it in Oregon, Washington and and Wisconsin, where the Green Party has made significant inroads among Democrats. The commercial features a clip from a speech Mr. Nader made earlier this week. ''Al Gore is suffering from election-year delusions if he thinks his record on the environment is anything to be proud of,'' Mr. Nader is quoted as saying. The Gore campaign reacted angrily to that advertisement, noting that Mr. Nader also had some choice words for Mr. Bush in the speech (calling him ''nothing more than a corporation running for president disguised as a person'') that the Republicans had left out of the commercial. ''They've given up all hope of selling Mr. Bush,'' said Kym Spell, a Gore campaign spokeswoman, ''so now they're selling Nader.'' Mr. Nader had his own suggestion. ''Why don't the Democrats take my comments on Bush and do the same?'' he said. Mr. Lieberman confronted the Nader dilemma head-on, arguing that voting for Mr. Nader would only help Gov. George W. Bush, by draining votes from Vice President Al Gore. ''I'd urge you to think about how you'll feel on Nov. 8 and you wake up and George Bush has carried Oregon and is president because a lot of people voted for Nader,'' he said to Mike Manning and Bob Anderson, a pair of Nader supporters eating breakfast in the Bijou Cafe, an organic food restaurant. He said he found Mr. Bush repellent, but added: ''I will vote for Nader. I've got to think about my conscience.'' Meanwhile, at a rally here tonight, Mr. Nader and his supporters continued to talk about their sense that the Democratic Party has betrayed its liberal roots, pointing out its support for the death penalty, the war on drugs, strict new limits on the welfare system and a host of other causes. There was less mention made of the possibility that, by taking votes away from Mr. Gore, Mr. Nader could deliver the election to Mr. Bush. The Democrats, alarmed at the possibility have mounted an aggressive campaign to try to reclaim the votes of people who are leaning Green. Advocates of abortion rights have bought television advertisements warning that a vote for Mr. Nader is as good as a vote for Mr. Bush and could therefore endanger legal abortions. Environmentalists warn about Mr. Bush's record in Texas. And liberal Democrats have been sent to rally the faithful.
 Two dozen black voters in Norwalk, Conn, say they will vote for Vice Pres Al Gore even though they disagree with him on several issues; photos (M) If he were headed to the polls today, Curt Farrison, a real estate broker in the predominantly black neighborhood of South Norwalk, would gladly pull the lever for Al Gore. But Mr. Farrison, whose three children are all grown, said he disagreed with the vice president's opposition to vouchers, which would let poor parents use tax dollars to send their children to private schools. If he were headed to the polls today, Curt Farrison, a real estate broker in the predominantly black neighborhood of South Norwalk, would gladly pull the lever for Al Gore. But Mr. Farrison, whose three children are all grown, said he disagreed with the vice president's opposition to vouchers, which would let poor parents use tax dollars to send their children to private schools. Joseph E. Mann, a Democratic district leader in South Norwalk, is a party loyalist who has never considered voting for George W. Bush. But he disagrees pointedly with Mr. Gore's support for the death penalty. ''I happen to not be for it,'' Mr. Mann said. ''I think there are too many problems associated with it, especially for minorities.'' He added, ''I just don't think it's a deterrent and I don't think it's civilized.'' In conversations with two dozen black voters in this diverse city of nearly 80,000 people, the death penalty and school vouchers emerged as two issues on which even some of the staunchest Democrats could find reason to disagree with Mr. Gore. And yet, no voters said that a differing view on either of these issues would change their vote -- at least not in the presidential race. Cassandra Eaton, a private music instructor, said that as a black woman, she might not see eye to eye with Mr. Gore on all issues, but she considered his policies appealing to the middle class. ''Right now he is offering more for us in the middle class,'' she said. ''I am looking for someone to identify with. Obviously, the racial thing I can't identify with him. But there is something there, I am hoping. He has that edge for me.'' For this reason, Ms. Eaton said she could put aside her differences with Mr. Gore on school vouchers. As a 60-year-old grandmother of two young boys, 7-year-old Eric and 3-year-old Anthony, Ms. Eaton said she would like to see private school available to them. ''If I could get them in private school through vouchers, I would,'' she said. ''I would want that option.'' The voucher issue is far less crucial in Connecticut, a state that is firmly in the grasp of Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, than it is in Michigan, a swing state. There, a statewide ballot referendum on vouchers has drawn attention to a philosophical disagreement between Mr. Bush, who supports vouchers, and Michigan's Republican governor, John Engler, who opposes them. Although the stakes are not so high here, the issue is still sensitive enough that not everyone feels comfortable speaking about it. Ms. Eaton said she was hesitant to discuss the issue because it was so contentious. Opponents, including Mr. Gore, argue that vouchers would drain necessary resources from public schools, hinder public school reform and hurt the majority of poor students who would remain in public school. Robert E. Burgess, the director of Norwalk Economic Opportunity Now, a local nonprofit social service organization, said he was more concerned about the economy and Social Security but that he did agree with Mr. Gore on vouchers. ''The majority of kids in this country are in public school, and public school will always be needed,'' he said. ''So the voucher will be counterproductive to helping the majority of the children.'' Although he parts ways with Mr. Gore on school vouchers, he says he understands Mr. Gore's criticism of them. ''It's a Band-Aid,'' he said. ''But Band-Aids stop bleeding and they stop infection one day at a time. The true battle is about making the school systems equal. The quick fix-'ems are vouchers, obviously busing, etc. ''Those are just Band-Aids and any person worth his or her salt recognizes that,'' Mr. Farrison said, adding that Mr. Gore has the right long-term idea. ''He is saying exactly what I am saying. He is saying, 'Let's not use the Band-Aid, let's fix the system.' '' One reason that votes in the presidential race may not hinge on vouchers or the death penalty is that education and criminal justice are largely administered at the state or local level. That point was not lost on Mr. Farrison, who said that despite his support for Mr. Gore, he might not vote for other Democrats running in local races. ''In my opinion, the best way to vote is issue by issue, candidate by candidate,'' he said. The Rev. Albert D. Tyson, pastor of Bethel A.M.E. Church, said he agreed with Mr. Gore on vouchers and planned to vote for him because he favored the Democrats' economic proposals. Mr. Tyson, who is 73, said that his vote for Mr. Gore would not be deterred by his passionate disagreement with the vice president on the death penalty. After all, Mr. Tyson and other voters noted, Mr. Bush's home state of Texas has carried out more executions than any other state. Still, Mr. Tyson said he wished that Mr. Gore had a different view. ''Once a person's life is taken, you can't give it back to them if you have made a mistake,'' he said. ''And the justice system is not perfect, and that disturbs me.''
 Photos of Gov George W Bush campaigning in Michigan and Vice Pres Al Gore campaigning in West Virginia with Bill Cosby
 Anthony Lewis Op-Ed column disputes Ralph Nader's contention that there is no real difference between Al Gore and George W Bush; predicts that meaningful campaign finance reform would be put off indefinitely if Bush is elected (M) If George W. Bush is elected, one probable result will be to put meaningful campaign finance reform off indefinitely. That is not only because Governor Bush is opposed to serious change in the system. It is because of the appointments he is likely to make to the Supreme Court, which has the last word on whether and how campaign spending can be limited. That reality poses a hard question for Ralph Nader and his supporters. Mr. Nader has quite rightly called for an end to the obscene race for money that now marks political campaigns in this country. Yet he tells his rallies that there is no real difference between Governor Bush and Al Gore, ignoring the profound impact a Bush-appointed Supreme Court would have on the chance for reform. If George W. Bush is elected, one probable result will be to put meaningful campaign finance reform off indefinitely. That is not only because Governor Bush is opposed to serious change in the system. It is because of the appointments he is likely to make to the Supreme Court, which has the last word on whether and how campaign spending can be limited. That reality poses a hard question for Ralph Nader and his supporters. Mr. Nader has quite rightly called for an end to the obscene race for money that now marks political campaigns in this country. Yet he tells his rallies that there is no real difference between Governor Bush and Al Gore, ignoring the profound impact a Bush-appointed Supreme Court would have on the chance for reform. But conservative legal theory advanced by judicial appointees of Presidents Reagan and Bush is a forbidding obstacle to national environmental regulation. Some of those judges, in the Federal Courts of Appeals, have found regulations invalid either because Congress delegated rule-making power to administrative agencies -- which is the only way regulating gets done -- or because the rules went beyond federal power over interstate commerce. Campaign finance reform would be impossible if the views of Supreme Court Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas -- whom Governor Bush has called his models -- prevailed. They wrote last January that any limits on either campaign spending or contributions violated the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech. Nor do I believe that George W. Bush has fixed, extremist views on the law. He does not seem to have thought deeply about the kinds of questions that go into the appointment of Supreme Court justices. In Texas, judges are elected. Governor Bush has filled vacancies, however, and his appointees on the whole are respected judges, conservative but eschewing the extreme. But the realities of the Republican Party these days -- the highly conservative party it has become -- will severely limit a President George W. Bush's choices if and when Supreme Court vacancies arise. The right will expect nominees who reliably embrace its views. Governor Bush is surely aware of the bitterness on the right about one of his father's choices, Justice David Souter. In the primary campaign Steve Forbes, opposing Governor Bush, said, ''America simply cannot afford another Supreme Court justice like David Souter.'' Abortion is the prime issue for the right. Mr. Bush has said he would not make it a litmus test that his nominees would overrule Roe v. Wade. But in practice that will surely be a consideration. A leading anti-abortion figure, Gary Bauer, said on NBC's ''Today'' show the other day that if Mr. Bush became president and had more than one vacancy to fill on the Supreme Court, it was likely that ''Roe v. Wade would be overturned.'' All this makes Ralph Nader's performance cynical. He knows better than most people what a difference a Bush or Gore presidency could make in the Supreme Court. Yet he gives the impression, as a Wall Street Journal report put it, that ''he would be happy to cause a Gore defeat.'' And Mr. Nader is campaigning hard in states where his support could cost Mr. Gore the electoral vote. Yesterday he was in Iowa, a toss-up state.
 Gustav Niebuhr column notes that 7,000 Texas Baptists are considering taking step toward financial separation from Southern Baptist Convention; also notes that Muslim political action committee affiliated with American Muslim Political Coordinating Council is endorsing Gov George W Bush for president (M) Muslim Group Backs Bush Earlier this week, a Muslim political action committee, affiliated with the American Muslim Political Coordinating Council, which represents four Islamic organizations in the United States, said it was endorsing Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican presidential candidate. Coincidentally, that decision followed by less than a week the publication of a broad, though unscientific, survey of political opinion among American Muslims, a group that may number as many as six million. The survey, undertaken by the Council on American-Islamic Relations, an advocacy organization that belongs to the coordinating council, found Mr. Bush ahead of the pack. Forty percent of respondents favored Mr. Bush, while 25 percent supported Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, and 24 percent backed Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic candidate.
 Polls indicate that Vice Pres Al Gore is trailing Gov George W Bush in heavily Democratic West Virginia; photo (M) With time running out, here is how things stand for Al Gore in heavily Democratic West Virginia: Even among a crowd that had  gotten up extra early to stand in line for his rally on the statehouse steps this morning, a surprising number of people said they were either wobbly in their choice or had already decided to vote Republican. A steady trickle of those who came began leaving shortly after Mr. Gore started talking. And when Senator John D. Rockefeller IV told the crowd that Mr. Gore was especially in sync with West Virginians because ''He's an Appalachian, just like us,'' there were groans. With time running out, here is how things stand for Al Gore in heavily Democratic West Virginia: Even among a crowd that had  gotten up extra early to stand in line for his rally on the statehouse steps this morning, a surprising number of people said they were either wobbly in their choice or had already decided to vote Republican. A steady trickle of those who came began leaving shortly after Mr. Gore started talking. And when Senator John D. Rockefeller IV told the crowd that Mr. Gore was especially in sync with West Virginians because ''He's an Appalachian, just like us,'' there were groans. West Virginia is a place where Mr. Gore should not even have to show up. But with only 10 days to go, he is in a statistical dead heat nationally, and trailing here. Today's banner headline in The Charleston Daily Mail read: ''Bush Leads in New State Poll,'' over an article that showed the vice president down by 10 points in one survey. Local Democrats blame the other side for scaring hunters and coal miners. Mr. Gore's low poll numbers, they say, stem from Republican efforts to cast him as determined to take guns away from hunters -- a contention he has repeatedly denied -- because he supports a number of gun safety measures and wants all new handguns registered. And Mr. Gore's environmental record has been cast as a negative, a threat to coal miners, though the vice president has in fact pushed for increased health benefits for miners. Neither Mr. Gore nor his critics mention that his own father, Senator Albert Gore Sr., ran a coal company, Island Creek, after he was voted out of office in 1970 and that the company was heavily criticized by environmental groups. Still, some here who are not supporting the vice president said they had not been turned off only by these tactics. And the crowd waiting to see Mr. Gore seemed not so much scared as bored. Over and over, even people who said they supported Mr. Gore gave this as their sole reason: ''I'm a Democrat.'' Tom Daugherty, a Realtor, sighed and said, ''He's better than Bush.'' His wife, Chris, a state worker with the division of environmental protection, was even less enthusiastic. ''I don't like any of them,'' she said. ''I want another choice.'' Rebecca Willis, who was there to chaperone an elementary school class, said of Mr. Bush, ''I think he's for all the people, where Gore stresses middle class, middle class.'' Several young people said they were prepared to break with their Democratic parents on Election Day. And a number of colleagues and couples were split along party lines. ''I have liberal politics, so he's really the only choice I have,'' Gary Rezek, a data analyst, said of Mr. Gore. ''It took me a while to decide that, but I think he'll be a good president.'' Mr. Rezek said he almost went for Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate. But ''after seeing him on TV, he didn't seem that enthusiastic, either.'' Standing next to him, a co-worker, Jason Crowder, said he would definitely vote for Mr. Bush. ''I just want his values,'' he said, adding, ''I just came here to see the vice president. You never get a chance to see that.'' Bob Wise, the Democratic candidate for governor, cried, ''Let the word go forth from every hill and hollow: 'Al Gore for president.' '' Cecil Roberts, president of the United Mine Workers, was both more dire and more colorful. ''George Bush has been here saying coal miners are for him. They're confused. Coal operators are for him,'' he yelled. He told the crowd that Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, had voted 18 times in Congress to cut benefits for coal miners. Then, in the biggest applause line of the day, he thrilled groups of schoolchildren in the crowd by crudely describing the dimensions of Newt Gingrich's backside. When Mr. Gore took the microphone, rolling up his shirt sleeves as he began, he laughed and offered special thanks to Mr. Roberts. ''He'll probably be hearing again from Newt Gingrich,'' he said. But Mr. Gore left no doubt that he was fully aware of his predicament here, telling the crowd that Republicans ''tremble at the thought that all their efforts at confusion won't work and you'll see all their fuzzy-ness.'' The line drew applause, but one local Democrat suggested that in the most backhanded possible compliment to the Clinton-Gore administration, maybe West Virginians had gotten too comfortable to care. ''They can't stand prosperity,'' said Charlie Hodge, a retired steel worker. And on the way out, Mrs. Willis, a Bush supporter coming and going, gave this assessment: ''It ran a little long and my back hurts. I'll have to go home and do a hot tub.''
 GORE AND THE RAP STAR  In Vice President Al Gore's latest appeal to young voters, he sat for an interview with Queen Latifah, a rap singer and syndicated talk-show host whose audience is chiefly between 18 and 24, a lot of them generally switched off by politicians. In the interview, to be broadcast on Wednesday, Queen Latifah, whose real name is Dana E. Owens, gave Mr. Gore a ''pop-culture quiz,'' asking if he had ever worn leather pants. ''I don't think I ever got caught speeding on my motorcycle,'' Mr. Gore answered. ''Certainly I got caught speeding in my car when I was younger. But that wasn't to say I wasn't speeding sometimes on my motorcycle. I look back on those days and I feel like I'm very lucky to have survived.'' ''Actually, there was a blue light,'' Mr. Gore answered. ''And I can't say for sure that they were coming after us, but just on the chance that they were, we cut through an alleyway.'' And finally: ''On a woman, leather or lace?'' Mr. Gore mulled for a moment, then answered: ''Lace.'' UNION DOLLARS FOR GORE  The political action committee of New York State's largest health-care union sent a $1 million check to the Democratic National Committee this week to bolster the campaign of Vice President Al Gore. ''We are alarmed about the prospect of having George Bush as the next president and about the impact that will have on the labor movement,'' said Dennis Rivera, president of 1199, a division of the Service Employees International Union. THE NUMBERS  Vice President Al Gore spent yesterday searching for votes in Pennsylvania while Gov. George W. Bush boarded a bus for the second time this week and worked Michigan. The numbers: Length of official day: Gore, 16 hours; Bush 13 1/2 hours States visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 3 Official events: Gore, 5; Bush 6 Cities/towns visited: Gore, 5 (Charlestown, W.V.; Pittsburgh, Homestead, Allentown and Wilkes-Barre, Pa.); Bush, 6 (Toledo, Ohio; Kalamazoo, Benton Harbor, Battle Creek and Farmington Hills, Mich., and South Bend, Ind.) Miles traveled: Gore, 456; Bush, 348 Main message: Gore, the economy; Bush, responsible leadership
 As Race Nears Final Phase, Charges of Mudslinging Fly  The Gore and Bush campaigns accused each other of using dirty advertising techniques to try to win the election, including inflammatory telephone calls to voters and incendiary television spots. Republicans in Washington, Oregon and Wisconsin prepared to broadcast a television commercial featuring Ralph Nader criticizing Vice President Al Gore in a recent speech. Campaigning in Iowa last night, Mr. Nader assailed Mr. Gore as being ''unbelievably subservient'' to corporations. Clinton Being Kept in Check  The Gore campaign has told President Clinton to steer clear of closely contested states like Michigan and Pennsylvania to avoid alienating the swing voters who will play a crucial role in choosing his successor, Democratic officials said. Mr. Gore returned to Pennsylvania to promote his economic plan, to shore up support among traditional Democrats and to convince undecided voters that his election would assure a prosperous future. Recent polls show his lead narrowing over Gov. George W. Bush in Pennsylvania. Bush Picking Words Carefully  Gov. George W. Bush continued a barnstorming tour through Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan, often sounding like a Democrat as he conveyed conservative ideas without using conservative buzzwords that might turn off the centrist Democrats and independent voters he needs to win. Mr. Bush's energy policy contains a proposal nearly identical to one of Vice President Al Gore's that Mr. Bush has ridiculed -- tax credits for homeowners who install solar power panels.
 Gov George W Bush has ridiculed Vice Pres Al Gore's proposal to give tax credits to homeowners who install solar panels for electricity, but Bush included essentially same proposal when he outlined his energy policy last month (M) Gov. George W. Bush made it sound like the nuttiest clump of policy granola imaginable. ''How many of you own a rooftop photovoltaic system?'' Mr. Bush asked crowds at several campaign rallies this week, ridiculing Vice President Al Gore's proposal to give tax credits to homeowners who install solar panels for electricity. His message was that the vice president's approach to tax cuts was convoluted and, to many voters, irrelevant. Gov. George W. Bush made it sound like the nuttiest clump of policy granola imaginable. ''How many of you own a rooftop photovoltaic system?'' Mr. Bush asked crowds at several campaign rallies this week, ridiculing Vice President Al Gore's proposal to give tax credits to homeowners who install solar panels for electricity. His message was that the vice president's approach to tax cuts was convoluted and, to many voters, irrelevant. What Mr. Bush did not note was that he included essentially the same proposal when he outlined his energy policy last month. It was on the final pages of a long document, but it was there: a promise, like Mr. Gore's, to give a tax credit of up to $2,000 to homeowners who decided to harness energy from the sun. And while Mr. Bush frequently tears into Mr. Gore's ''targeted'' tax cuts for voters who, for example, put money into certain kinds of investment accounts, there are targets in his own proposals. Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said that to draw any such similarity was to  miss Mr. Bush's larger point: that what Mr. Gore is trying to sell as widespread tax relief comes almost entirely in the form of deductions and credits, leaving many Americans without benefit. Mr. Bush, by contrast, would reduce tax rates in every income bracket, in an effort, Mr. Bartlett said, to make sure everybody who pays taxes gets a break.  Mr. Bartlett said the Bush campaign's tax incentives for specific purposes were simply icing on the cake. Kym Spell, a Gore spokeswoman, said Mr. Bush was nonetheless indulging in doublespeak.
 The police said that on Tuesday, Mr. Moreno shot Joseph Gallo-Rodriguez, a trainee at a towing company, when Mr. Gallo-Rodriguez refused to give up his necklace, a chain with a crucifix, the authorities said. Mr. Gallo-Rodriguez had been changing a tire on a teacher's car in front of Bushwick High School on Irving Avenue when he was confronted. The teacher was not injured.
