 Ralph Nader, Green Party candidate for president, faces growing efforts by Democratic Party and its allies to deflate his support; Democrats are concerned that Nader is drawing away just enough liberal voters in several states, including Minnesota, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin, to threaten Gore's chances of winning election; for that reason, major campaign has begun to convince liberal voters that vote for Nader is effectively vote for Bush; photo (M) In the face of growing efforts by the Democratic Party and its allies to deflate his support, Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, criticized Vice President Al Gore today more sharply than ever before, accusing him of repeatedly breaking promises to clean up the environment, help the poor and reform the federal government. ''Al Gore is suffering from election-year delusion if he thinks his record on the environment is anything to be proud of,'' Mr. Nader said at a packed news conference at the National Press Club. ''He should be held accountable by voters for eight years of principles betrayed and promises broken.'' In the face of growing efforts by the Democratic Party and its allies to deflate his support, Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, criticized Vice President Al Gore today more sharply than ever before, accusing him of repeatedly breaking promises to clean up the environment, help the poor and reform the federal government. ''Al Gore is suffering from election-year delusion if he thinks his record on the environment is anything to be proud of,'' Mr. Nader said at a packed news conference at the National Press Club. ''He should be held accountable by voters for eight years of principles betrayed and promises broken.'' Mr. Nader's remarks came as Mr. Gore's supporters in the liberal wing of the Democratic Party have mounted an aggressive campaign using rallies, television commercials and phone banks to dissuade people in several closely contested states from voting for Mr. Nader. Today, for example, officials with the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League said the group would begin running television commercials in Portland, Ore., Minneapolis and Madison, Wis., late this week urging people who support abortion rights not to vote for Mr. Nader, on the premise that the election of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas  would lead to a Supreme Court that would overturn those rights. Mr. Nader also batted aside suggestions from some Democrats that he confine his campaigning to states where the race was not close, so he would not hurt Mr. Gore. Rather, he said, he planned to stump through several swing states over the next two weeks and hold major rallies in two of them: Wisconsin and Iowa. Democratic Party officials and their allies in the labor, women's and environmental movements are concerned that Mr. Nader is drawing away just enough liberal voters in several states, including Minnesota, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin, to threaten Mr. Gore's chances of winning the election. For that reason, a number of prominent labor unions and interest groups, including Naral, the League of Conservation Voters, the Sierra Club and the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest gay and lesbian organization, have recently begun major campaigns to convince liberal voters that a vote for Mr. Nader is effectively a vote for Mr. Bush. Naral's new commercial, for instance, warns that Mr. Bush's goal is ''ending legal abortion'' and concludes, ''Before voting Nader, consider the risk.'' Most of those organizations have said liberals should vote for Mr. Gore because Bush appointments to the Supreme Court could pose a threat to causes like abortion rights. But today, Mr. Nader shrugged off that argument, asserting that some Democratic nominees to the court have compiled conservative voting records. But Mr. Nader quickly moved to a wide-ranging attack on Mr. Gore's environmental record, accusing the vice president of reneging on a host of pledges over the past eight years. Among them: failing to close a hazardous waste incinerator in Ohio, not pushing for higher fuel-efficiency standards in automobiles and allowing federal prosecution of environmental crimes to decline. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said: ''Voters who are informed about the issues know that big things are at stake in this election, like a woman's right to choose. The voters who care about these issues know that the differences between Al Gore and George Bush are like night and day.'' He dismissed assertions that he might derail Mr. Gore's candidacy, paraphrasing David Letterman. ''Only Al Gore can beat Al Gore,'' Mr. Nader said. ''And he's been doing a pretty good job of that. Up against one of the most bumbling, corporate-indentured, horrible- record Republican candidates, George W. Bush, and he's still in a neck-and-neck race.'' ''In the addresses and debates by George W. Bush and Al Gore, there are lots of references to the middle class -- the shrinking middle class, but they don't mention that it's shrinking. There is very little reference to the working poor in this country. Forty-seven million full-time American workers in this country are making less than $10 an hour, many of them at the federal minimum wage of $5.15 an hour, and the rest not much more. The lack of affordable housing, the number of children who go to bed hungry every night and the more than 32 million Americans who live in poverty put the lie to the Gore-Lieberman claim of broad-based prosperity under the current administration's regime. Much like their Republican counterparts, Gore and Lieberman have great faith in the discredited concept of trickle-down economics.
 Vice Pres Al Gore is overcoming advantages Gov George W Bush was believed to have in Florida, making presidential race there breathtakingly close; New York Times/CBS News Poll shows Gore has considerable strength among state's elderly and independent voters and is seen as more likely than Bush to reduce cost of health care and prescription drugs and protect environment; poll shows Bush is seen as more likely than Gore to lower taxes, but that Florida voters consider tax issue to be less important than strenghtening Social Security and Medicare; Bush, whose brother is governor of Florida, hoped to win state easily and has focused his attention on swing states in Midwest; Gore made steady gains in Florida with his emphasis on plan for prescription drug coverage and his selection of Sen Joseph I Lieberman as running mate; chart (M) Vice President Al Gore is showing considerable strength in Florida among elderly and independent voters and is seen as more likely than his opponent to reduce the cost of health care and prescription drugs and protect the environment, a New York Times/CBS News poll shows. This strength has enabled Mr. Gore to overcome the advantages Gov. George W. Bush was believed to have had here at the start of the campaign, and it has made the presidential race in this, the fourth largest state with 25 crucial electoral votes, breathtakingly close. Vice President Al Gore is showing considerable strength in Florida among elderly and independent voters and is seen as more likely than his opponent to reduce the cost of health care and prescription drugs and protect the environment, a New York Times/CBS News poll shows. This strength has enabled Mr. Gore to overcome the advantages Gov. George W. Bush was believed to have had here at the start of the campaign, and it has made the presidential race in this, the fourth largest state with 25 crucial electoral votes, breathtakingly close. The statewide poll of 637 registered voters taken by telephone Sunday through Tuesday found that Mr. Bush is seen as more likely than his opponent to lower taxes. But a large number of Florida voters doubted that either candidate would really cut taxes. And when the voters were asked what should be done with the federal budget surplus, cutting taxes lagged way behind strengthening Social Security and Medicare. When Mr. Bush embarked on his presidential campaign, he and his staff had high hopes of winning Florida, in part because his brother Jeb is a popular governor here. But through the summer, as Mr. Bush concentrated his time and advertising money on swing states in the Midwest, Mr. Gore made steady gains here with his emphasis on a broad plan for prescription drug coverage and his selection of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut as a running mate. The poll also found that Mr. Bush was getting less of a lift than he had hoped from his brother. Among registered voters in Florida, the poll found Mr. Gore favored by 44 percent, Mr. Bush by 42 percent, Ralph Nader by 3 percent and Patrick J. Buchanan by 1 percent. Among those expected to vote, Mr. Gore was ahead of Mr. Bush 46 percent to 42 percent, with 3 percent for Mr. Nader and 1 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Recognizing the closeness of the race here, Mr. Bush has visited Florida about once a week since Labor Day and was here again today, campaigning with Senator John McCain of Arizona and Jeb Bush. The poll found that among likely voters in Florida 65 and over, Mr. Gore had a 10-point advantage. The two candidates are running basically even among likely voters who are under 65. Mr. Gore's strength among the elderly could be particularly important if the overall turnout is low on Nov. 7. Unlike most other states, Democrats benefit in Florida in presidential elections when the turnout is low, said Susan MacManus, a political scientist at the University of South Florida, because the elderly are more likely than others to vote Democratic and are such reliable voters. The Gore advantage among voters who think of themselves as independents was also striking. Nationally, polls show, Mr. Bush is about 10 points ahead among voters without strong party affiliation, but in Florida, Mr. Gore is more than 10 points ahead. In 1992, President George Bush carried Florida. In 1996, Mr. Clinton won the state. The Republican candidate got essentially the same proportion of the vote, 41 percent for Mr. Bush in 1992 and 42 percent for Bob Dole in 1996. But Mr. Clinton's vote rose to 48 percent in 1996 from 39 percent in 1992. Mr. Clinton was able to accomplish that because he picked up the biggest share of the Perot vote, which was 20 percent in 1992 but only 9 percent in 1996. Not surprisingly, the poll found Mr. Gore strongest on the Gold Coast, the area along the southeastern shore from Miami north to Palm Beach. Many people in this area moved from the Northeast, especially from New York and New Jersey, and brought their liberal, Democratic politics with them. Democrats nearly always do well there. The voters are closely divided between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush in the Tampa-St. Petersburg area, and Mr. Bush has a good lead in the rest of the state, the poll indicated. One source of Mr. Gore's strength is that a solid majority of voters said he could be expected to make health care affordable, protect the environment and reduce the price of prescription medicine. A majority of voters said Mr. Bush was not likely to accomplish each of these. Both candidates are viewed favorably by most Florida voters. What sets Mr. Bush apart from many other Republicans is that he is seen by as large a majority of voters as Mr. Gore as being someone who cares about the needs and problems of people like themselves. ''I like the way Bush presents himself,'' said Bill Griffin, 37, a criminal investigator who lives in the West Palm Beach area, one of the poll's respondents who was interviewed after the poll was completed. Mr. Bush's plan to allow workers to invest a portion of their Social Security taxes to create private retirement accounts received mixed reviews. Basically, most voters 44 and younger thought it was a good idea, and most older voters were uncomfortable with it. As for Gov. Jeb Bush, about three-fifths of the voters said they approved of how he was handling his job, and twice as many said they held a positive view of him personally as said they had a negative opinion. But his popularity seems unlikely to help his brother much. More than fourth-fifths of the voters said their view of Jeb Bush would not affect how they voted for president. Roslyn Glatz, 65, a retired convenience store manager in Ocala, said she voted for Jeb Bush for governor but planned to vote for Mr. Gore for president. Jeb Bush ''was the best candidate at the time,'' she said, ''but I'm not going to judge Bush on his brother.''
 Gore Muddles His Economic Ideas  Since the political conventions, Vice President Al Gore has emphasized the fiscal discipline of his agenda and referred less to programs for working families, confusing his message in the process. Jeff Madrick: Economic Scene. [C2.]
 As in the majors, C.B.A. teams play 162 games per season. Over time, there have been 41 teams and nearly 2,500 players. The highest single-season batting average, .497, is held by Warren G. Harding of the Washington Presidents. The Presidents' players tend to stay on its roster for years, although President Clinton spent last season on the ''morally disabled'' list. At present, Al Gore and George W. Bush are neck and neck in a home-run derby that will earn the winner a lineup spot in 2001.
 Bob Herbert Op-Ed column says Vice Pres Al Gore's personality problems and voter concern over Gov George W Bush's readiness to assume presidency have muted enthusiasm for both men and drawn attention away from issues that might otherwise have been decisive; says even debates became dreary popularity contests; says trends to watch now are whether Gore can keep personality questions behind him and get bounce from hammering home differences between him and Bush on specific issues, and whether Bush can avoid being undermined by voter unease over whether he is ready for White House (M) Not too long ago Al Gore was howling that he would debate George W. Bush anytime, anywhere. The debates were supposed to nail down the election for Mr. Gore. They nearly buried him. Not too long ago Al Gore was howling that he would debate George W. Bush anytime, anywhere. The debates were supposed to nail down the election for Mr. Gore. They nearly buried him. Mr. Bush has a similar problem. He's fine as long as he's shaking hands and smiling and hugging little children. He's got personality. But something weird happens when he puts aside his programmed responses and starts speaking extemporaneously. Mr. Gore's personality problems and voter concern over Mr. Bush's readiness to assume the presidency have muted enthusiasm for both men and drawn attention away from issues that might otherwise have been decisive. A Page 1 article in Monday's Times said: ''Even after absorbing three debates and months of campaigning, American voters are thoroughly ambivalent about their choices for president, still vexed by doubts about Vice President Al Gore's sincerity and Gov. George W. Bush's preparedness for the White House, the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll shows.'' That sigh of relief you just heard is coming from the Gore people. The vice president's personality has gotten in the way of his message throughout the campaign. Even at the Democratic convention, where it was generally agreed that Mr. Gore delivered a credible acceptance speech, the strongest case for continuing the policies of the Clinton administration was made by the president. Referring to his budget proposal in the first year of his first administration, Bill Clinton told the convention's roaring delegates: ''It passed by a single vote in both houses. In a deadlocked Senate, Al Gore cast the tie-breaking vote. Now, not a single Republican supported it. . . . Their leaders said our plan would increase the deficit, kill jobs, and give us a one-way ticket to a recession. Time has not been kind to their predictions.'' Mr. Clinton is itching to take that message to the American people one more time. But polls have tended to show that Bill Clinton campaigning full-blast for Al Gore would turn off substantially more voters than he would turn on. So the big dog remains leashed. If, finally, the spotlight is turned away from Al Gore's personality, the last days of this campaign are likely to focus on the differences between the two candidates on the following: the fate of Social Security and the budget surplus, tax cuts, appointments to the Supreme Court, abortion, federal aid to public education, the environment and a variety of health care issues, including the future of Medicare, proposed prescription drug benefits and the establishment of a so-called patients' bill of rights. The trends to watch over the next several days are whether Al Gore can keep the personality questions behind him and get a bounce from hammering home the differences between him and Mr. Bush on specific issues, and whether Mr. Bush, in the pressurized finale of a presidential campaign, can avoid being undermined by voter unease over whether he is ready for the White House.
 William Safire Op-Ed column lists members of possible Bush and Gore administrations (M) Based on a few tips and heavy thumbsucking, here is a way to compare possible Bush and Gore administrations. For secretary of state, Al Gore is expected to choose Richard Holbrooke, the current U.N. delegate.  George W. Bush has hinted that Colin Powell would be his choice. Based on a few tips and heavy thumbsucking, here is a way to compare possible Bush and Gore administrations. For secretary of state, Al Gore is expected to choose Richard Holbrooke, the current U.N. delegate.  George W. Bush has hinted that Colin Powell would be his choice. But what if Powell prefers Health and Human Services, where his current interest lies? Then the Bush SecState would probably be Condoleezza Rice, now provost at Stanford. If Bush thought Rice better suited to be his national security adviser, he might pick Senator Richard Lugar. Meanwhile, Gore would back up Holbrooke at State with his national security adviser, Leon Fuerth. At Defense, President Gore might well sound out the Republican John McCain; he would probably decline, looking toward a presidential race in 2004. Gore might then turn to Representative John Murtha of Pennsylvania or former Senator Sam Nunn. President Bush might also choose Nunn, a Democrat, or turn to Paul Wolfowitz or Paul O'Neil. If Gore chose the former Texas governor Ann Richards for H.H.S., he could then break Clinton tradition and choose a male attorney general: Jack (Tell 'Em Nuthin') Quinn, a former White House counsel. George W.'s first choice to head Bush Justice would be John Danforth, the former Missouri senator. Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, hoping to be a Gore holdover, may think his competition is the current Fannie Mae chief, James Johnson. But a more intriguing Gore choice would be Bill Bradley, who demonstrated loyalty and has Senate Finance credentials. For Treasury in a Bush administration, PaineWebber's Don Marron has the inside track, though Representative Jennifer Dunn of Washington is in the running. Gore's chief economic adviser would be Alan Blinder, and Bush's is Lawrence Lindsey; both are former Federal Reservists. At Agriculture, Gore could fend off a possible conservative Democratic  revolt in the choice of House speaker, if Democrats win a majority, by picking the Texas ''blue dog'' leader, Representative Charles Stenholm. Bush will look toward Gov. Frank Keating of Oklahoma (a hawk on regulating hogs and poultry) and Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas. At Education, Gore would be torn between North Carolina's governor, Jim Hunt, and Representative Jesse Jackson Jr. of Illinois, whose father leads the liberal charge against Ralph Nader's surprising uprising. Bush could reach across party lines to pick the Democrat Gerhard Casper, Stanford's ex-president, or stick with Lynne Cheney, his vice president's better campaign half. Dick Cheney would have a cabinet pick, probably former Senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming, for Interior. Gore's Interior choice to tiptoe between development and environmental interests could be the New Mexico Representative Tom Udall (Stew's son and Mo's nephew) or Washington's governor, Gary Locke, a Chinese-American. At Labor, Gore entries are Donna Brazile, his campaign manager, and Representative Harold Ford Jr. of Tennessee. Some Bush people have their eye on the outgoing New Jersey governor, Christie Whitman. Commerce (or Trade Representative) for Bush: former Gov. Carroll Campbell of South Carolina, and Robert Hormats. For Gore: Tom Downey. Energy might see a Clinton holdover in Bill Richardson, a Hispanic.  Bush's energy secretary may be Representative J. C. Watts of Oklahoma, unless the G.O.P. holds the House and this black Republican moves up in the leadership. HUD: Gore would look at California's Norman Mineta, recently appointed to Commerce, while a Bush cabinet post will go to Stephen Goldsmith, ex-mayor of Indianapolis and a close adviser. At the C.I.A., with George Tenet becoming a diplomat, Gore could go for Warren Rudman; Bush could switch the F.B.I. director, Louis Freeh, to C.I.A. and replace him with the prosecutor Charles La Bella. Bush's White House chief of staff would be Dan Evans and his Counselor, Karen Hughes, with Karl Rove to the R.N.C. and manager Joe Allbaugh set free to earn a living. Gore's chief would be William Daley and his Counselor Frank Hunger, with Fred Meyer to the D.N.C. Bush's Mike Gerson or Gore's Eli Attey will draft the Inaugural Address. The other guy will go home and write a book.
 Meanwhile Mr. Lautenberg is doing what retiring senators do. He is soaking up accolades, such as the naming of the old federal courthouse and post-office building in Newark in his honor; arranging for the transfer of his papers to a new archive at Rutgers University; and musing over what possible role he might play in a Gore administration. (Democratic headhunters, be advised: he is not interested in an ambassadorship because it would require him to spend too much time away from his eight grandchildren.)
 Article compares and contrasts proposals by Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush to keep Social Security system solvent; chart; photos (M) With the population about to get decidedly older and the nation enjoying a moment of prosperity, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush agree that now is the time to put Social Security on sound footing for generations to come. With the population about to get decidedly older and the nation enjoying a moment of prosperity, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush agree that now is the time to put Social Security on sound footing for generations to come. Mr. Gore, playing to older voters who turn out reliably at the polls, has been asserting that Mr. Bush's plan would drain from the system $1 trillion needed to pay benefits to current retirees. Casting themselves as the true reformers, Mr. Bush, of Texas, and his advisers said Mr. Gore's plan would saddle today's young people with $40 trillion in debt. Mr. Bush wants to harness the power of the financial markets by allowing individuals to invest a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes in stocks and bonds. Mr. Gore wants to leave the system unchanged and maintain the current level of guaranteed benefits even as the number of retirees grows substantially. To do so he would supplement payroll tax revenues with general income tax receipts. Separately, he has proposed tax incentives to help low and middle income people save for retirement outside of Social Security. While Mr. Bush's proposal would bring more far-reaching changes to the system, each approach is revolutionary in its own way. Mr. Bush's plan would move the system away from its identity as a collective pact under which each generation of workers helps support the retirement of its predecessors. The Bush plan would nudge the system in the direction of having each worker save for his or her own retirement, shifting both opportunities and risks to individuals. Mr. Gore's plan would end the tradition of Social Security being wholly self-financed through the payroll tax, and in the long run would require higher taxes, reduced spending or additional government borrowing. Critics say the change would undermine support for Social Security by making it more like welfare than a pension, a pawn in the unceasing battle over taxes and spending. Mr. Bush's plan would allow workers to place into their own investment accounts each year a little more than one-sixth of what they and their employers currently contribute directly to Social Security -- that is, 2 percentage points of the 12.4 percent payroll tax. Mr. Bush's plan would be voluntary. People who are retired or near retirement would not see any changes in benefits. For those who do participate, Mr. Bush has said, there would be a menu of relatively safe and conservative investment options available. But his approach creates problems that Mr. Bush avoids discussing. The most immediate is that allowing workers to place a portion of their payroll taxes in a private accounts reduces the amount of money available to pay benefits. Prodded by Mr. Gore in their final debate last week, Mr. Bush acknowledged that he would need to use $1 trillion out of the surplus over the next decade to cover the shortfall created by the establishment of personal accounts. Because Social Security is projected to run a surplus of more than $2 trillion during that period, using $1 trillion for private accounts would not immediately imperil the system's ability to pay full benefits to current retirees, as Mr. Gore has implied it would. According to the Gore camp, diverting two percentage points of the payroll tax into personal investment accounts would exhaust the trust fund in 2023, 14 years earlier than under the current system. In 2024, assuming no other changes are made, the system would be short of the money needed to pay benefits by hundreds of billions of dollars. But Mr. Bush and his advisers have declined to say if they would reduce the guaranteed benefit, a step that would clearly open a new line of attack for Mr. Gore. Indeed, Mr. Bush has not been willing to provide any details of how their plan would work, saying the specifics would have to be hashed out in a bipartisan way between Congress and a Bush administration. A guide to what a complete Bush plan might look like comes from similar plans introduced in Congress in recent years. All of them would cut guaranteed benefits, pump substantial amounts of general revenues into the system or require individuals to return to the system a portion of their investment gains from the personal accounts. The possible benefit cuts include such politically unpopular steps as raising the retirement age and reducing annual cost of living adjustments. And Mr. Bush has not given any indication of whether or how workers would be insulated from the risk of a stock market downturn around the time they retire. Mr. Gore's approach would dedicate nearly all of the Social Security surplus to paying off the $3.4 trillion national debt within a dozen years. Starting in 2011, Mr. Gore would then allocate to Social Security, out of general tax revenues, an amount equal to the interest saved from debt reduction -- $250 billion a year by 2016. The additional money, and the interest paid on it, would extend the system's solvency to 2054 from 2037. On Monday, Mr. Bush said the revenue transferred to Social Security by Mr. Gore's plan, plus interest, would total nearly $40 trillion over four decades ending in 2050. That huge sum, Mr. Bush said, would weigh down the economy and future generations of taxpayers. Aides to Mr. Gore said the $40 trillion number had to be considered in the context of the size of the problem. Using the same type of calculation, they said, Mr. Bush's plan would require $57 trillion between 2023 and 2054 to keep the system solvent, unless Mr. Bush was willing to reduce guaranteed benefit payments or increase the payroll tax. Still, Mr. Gore's reliance on general revenues means much of the bill would be borne by people decades down the road in the form of higher taxes, reduced spending or increased borrowing.
 Democratic officials voice fears that threatened teachers' strike in Philadelphia could hurt Vice Pres Al Gore's chances in Pennsylvania by suppressing voter turnout in heavily Democratic Philadelphia, if there are picket lines around hundreds of schools that double as polling places (S) Democratic officials are voicing fears that a threatened teachers' strike in Philadelphia could hurt Vice President Al Gore's chances in Pennsylvania by suppressing voter turnout in heavily Democratic Philadelphia. Democratic officials are voicing fears that a threatened teachers' strike in Philadelphia could hurt Vice President Al Gore's chances in Pennsylvania by suppressing voter turnout in heavily Democratic Philadelphia. Pennsylvania, with 23 electoral votes, is the country's fifth-largest electoral prize and one of a half-dozen or so major battlegrounds in the 2000 campaign. Polls show Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in a tight race in Pennsylvania, as in the rest of the country. To win the state, Mr. Gore must do well in Philadelphia to counter Mr. Bush's strength in the rest of the state. Several Democratic officials said it was odd that Philadelphia's teachers' union could hurt Mr. Gore when both the union, which represents 21,000 teachers, and its parent, the American Federation of Teachers, had endorsed the vice president. ''Every vote that I don't get to the polls is a vote that I'm not able to give to Mr. Gore,'' said Jonathan A. Saidel, the city's controller and a leader of Philadelphia's Democratic Party. ''I think the turnout in Philadelphia, where we hope to bring in a 250,000-vote plurality for the Gore-Lieberman ticket, is indispensable for Gore winning Pennsylvania and the presidency.'' Teachers' union officials said they in no way intended to discourage voting. But they talked as if they did not mind that the fears that a strike might hurt Mr. Gore might pressure Mayor John F. Street, a Democrat, to settle the dispute.
 Mr. Davis's appearances here and later at Berkeley Springs High School emphasized the party. ''You don't want to send a president to Washington and have a Congress hostile to him,'' he told the students, whose show of hands had made it clear they overwhelmingly preferred Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.
 Nobody knows this better than Tyler McKell and Barrett Bonella, two fresh-faced young men charged with hitting the bricks of Bushwick, Brooklyn, to spread the word of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Nobody knows this better than Tyler McKell and Barrett Bonella, two fresh-faced young men charged with hitting the bricks of Bushwick, Brooklyn, to spread the word of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Now that Bushwick and the rest of the city have been plunged into a new round of World Series psychoanalysis, it is difficult to get a rational answer to the question of why fans are rooting for their chosen teams, let alone figure out who is going to win this thing. Elders McKell and Bonella, both 20, landed in Bushwick a month ago and spend from 6:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. every day except Wednesday walking the neighborhood for potential converts. They knock on doors. They set up appointments to visit people in their homes. They approach strangers on the street in a type of missionary cold call known as a ''fearless.'' According to their observations, nearly two of three Bushwick residents are Yankees fans, leaving the Mets a minority in the mostly black and Hispanic neighborhood. Both men, though, insisted that there is something special about Bushwick. ''Bushwick is right on the border of Queens, so you get the best of both worlds,'' Elder Bonella said. ''From the perspective of the mission, you find the miracles of Brooklyn gradually turning into the miracles of Queens.''
 The Republican presidential candidate, Gov. George W. Bush, also appeared by proxy. ''When it comes to wishing people happy birthday, I've crossed party lines and got it done,'' the impersonator said, mimicking the cadences of the Texas governor and repeatedly mangling Mrs. Clinton's first name. ''I wish you a happy birthday, or as they say in Spanish, feliz Navidad.'' The Broadway actor Nathan Lane acted as moderator, gently poking fun at the birthday girl.
 Op-Ed article by Barbara Ehrenreich says support for Ralph Nader in presidential race is only one small sign of much larger growing alienation from electoral process and two parties that benefit from it; says starker sign of alienation is that majority of eligible voters are unlikely to vote; says many Nader supporters feel betrayed by Democratic Party, and by Vice Pres Al Gore's refusal to stand up for populist principles; says they see Nader campaign as chance to prod party to left, and to re-energize American democracy; says vote for Nader is neither vote for Gov George W Bush nor vote nihilistically thrown away; says for old-fashioned Democrats, it is statement of affirmation and hope; drawing (M) As Election Day approaches with the major candidates in a dead heat, Democratic denunciations of Ralph Nader supporters grow louder and more bitter. We are accused of disloyalty and irresponsibility, of ignoring the differences between the candidates and of being willing to throw the election to George W. Bush so that we can indulge in a meaningless gesture. Or, on the assumption that Nader supporters are all of the upper middle class, we are mocked for having the ''luxury'' of contributing to a Republican victory for which the vulnerable poor will suffer. As Election Day approaches with the major candidates in a dead heat, Democratic denunciations of Ralph Nader supporters grow louder and more bitter. We are accused of disloyalty and irresponsibility, of ignoring the differences between the candidates and of being willing to throw the election to George W. Bush so that we can indulge in a meaningless gesture. Or, on the assumption that Nader supporters are all of the upper middle class, we are mocked for having the ''luxury'' of contributing to a Republican victory for which the vulnerable poor will suffer. Our parents or grandparents, who were, in many cases, yellow-dog, blue-collar Democrats, would barely recognize the party of Bill Clinton and Al Gore as their own. To summarize the downside of the Clinton-Gore record: They failed to lift the minimum wage even up to the poverty level, although executive pay soared to more than 400 times that of the average working person. They pursued a trade policy rejected by unions and a majority of Americans. They blew their chance to create a national health insurance program, offering instead a plan that favored the big insurance companies. Mr. Gore's vision of health reform is even more constricted, consisting of little beyond proposed extension of Medicare coverage to prescription drugs. The Clinton-Gore administration has presided over a stunning expansion of the prison system -- necessitated by an increasingly senseless, and thoroughly bipartisan, war on drugs. For many Nader supporters, especially the feminists among us, the Democratic Party's biggest betrayal was the so-called ''reform'' of welfare. Instead of the generously financed welfare-to-work program that he initially proposed, Mr. Clinton signed an exceedingly punitive bill that essentially leaves the poorest single mothers and their children at the mercy of labor market, where entry-level wages remain at about $7 an hour. Mr. Gore boasts of his advocacy of welfare reform, but Deborah Leff, president of America's Second Harvest, a consortium of food banks, has said that food pantries all over the country are unable to meet the ''torrent of need.'' Yes, like most Democrats who vote for Mr. Nader, I will be sorry if George Bush defeats Al Gore. I do see differences between the two candidates, not least in the kind of the Supreme Court appointments they are likely to make. But in the case of a Bush victory, don't expect me to be apologetic. It's not my fault if Mr. Gore has refused to stand up for the populist principles that might draw America's disenchanted majority back to the polls. A vote for Mr. Nader is neither a vote for Mr. Bush nor a vote nihilistically thrown away. For old-fashioned Democrats and adherents of a vigorous democracy generally, it's a statement of affirmation and hope.
 Gov George W Bush makes aggressive appeal to elderly voters of Florida, pitching his plans for Social Security and Medicare as superior to Vice Pres Al Gore's, and casting Gore's assertions to contrary as blatant scare tactics; says his plan to partly privatize Social Security would not threaten retirees' payments; says elderly would fare better under his plan to change Medicare and give them prescription drug benefit by encouraging them to join government-subsidized private insurance plans; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush made an aggressive appeal to elderly voters in Florida today, pitching his plans for Social Security and Medicare as superior to Vice President Al Gore's and casting Mr. Gore's assertions to the contrary as blatant scare tactics. ''I know it's Halloween time, and I know the man is trying to scare you into the voting booth,'' Mr. Bush said during a speech in Daytona Beach, where he began a long day of campaigning with two high-profile Republican companions: his brother, Jeb, the Florida governor, and Senator John McCain of Arizona. Gov. George W. Bush made an aggressive appeal to elderly voters in Florida today, pitching his plans for Social Security and Medicare as superior to Vice President Al Gore's and casting Mr. Gore's assertions to the contrary as blatant scare tactics. ''I know it's Halloween time, and I know the man is trying to scare you into the voting booth,'' Mr. Bush said during a speech in Daytona Beach, where he began a long day of campaigning with two high-profile Republican companions: his brother, Jeb, the Florida governor, and Senator John McCain of Arizona. ''But not this time, Mr. Gore,'' Mr. Bush added. ''And not this year.'' At a succession of grandly staged, densely crowded rallies in a state where Mr. Bush is being forced to fight much harder than he had wanted or expected to, he implored retirees not to believe claims about his Social Security plan that Mr. Gore and other Democrats have made. They have said that by partly privatizing the entitlement program, Mr. Bush would endanger retirees' current level of benefits, a charge that Mr. Bush cannot afford to let stick. Retirees make up a disproportionately large percentage of voters in Florida and may well hold the key to its 25 electoral votes, the fourth most in the country. ''We've got a plan that says to seniors: we're going to keep our promises,'' Mr. Bush said in Daytona Beach. He repeated that pledge later at rallies in Sanford and Brandon. He said elderly people would fare better under his plan to change Medicare and give them a prescription drug benefit by encouraging them to join government-subsidized private insurance plans that included it. Mr. Gore would expand the government's Medicare program so that a drug benefit would be available voluntarily to all older Americans for an additional monthly premium. ''He forces every senior from Florida who wants prescription drug coverage to join a government-controlled H.M.O. for prescription drugs,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He calls it a 'pharmaceutical benefit manager.' '' ''But it works like an H.M.O.,'' Mr. Bush continued. ''It acts like an H.M.O. It quacks like an H.M.O. He can call it a P.B.M., but that's Washington talk for H.M.O. And if you don't like the one the government puts you in, that's just too darned bad, because you don't have any choices under his plan.'' Mr. Bush has visited Florida about once a week since Labor Day. His decision to cross the state by bus today, less than two weeks before Election Day, underscored the surprising tightness of the race here. According to a new poll by the New York Times and CBS News, Mr. Gore leads Mr. Bush here by four percentage points among likely voters. Mr. Bush had begun his current swing through Florida with a rally in Jacksonville on Tuesday night, and from that moment on, there was a palpable sense of urgency and electricity to his events, which had the feel of eve-of-election exhortations. Held mostly in enormous spaces, Mr. Bush's rallies variously featured thundering music, dramatic lighting designs, fireworks, confetti, balloons and big, foot-stomping, passionately shouting crowds. He stoked crowds into cheers and boos with increasingly sharp language about Mr. Gore, whom he portrayed as an inveterate exaggerator and wanton spender under whom the size of the federal government would become ''Gore-gantuan.'' And he kept both his brother and Mr. McCain, both of whom had faced questions about whether they were doing enough to promote Mr. Bush's campaign, close at his side. Jeb Bush repeatedly vowed to deliver a victory in Florida to the Bush campaign. Mr. McCain, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam, bolstered that effort, vouching for Mr. Bush's ability to keep America secure. He even went so far as to bring the recent bombing of a Navy ship in Yemen, which killed 17 Americans, into the political fray. ''We just saw in the tragedy that befell those brave young Americans onboard the U.S.S. Cole that we still live in a very dangerous world,'' Mr. McCain said in Daytona Beach. Then he said: ''We need a steady hand on the tiller. We need the kind of leadership that George W. Bush and Dick Cheney will provide this country so we cannot have those kinds of tragedies ever happen again.'' Mr. Bush derided Democrats for phone calls that the Florida party had placed to thousands of voters to tell them that Mr. Bush's plans ''would undermine'' Social Security. Those words were part of a recorded message from the television actor Ed Asner that Mr. Bush said was intended to scare older voters. At the rally in Brandon, near Tampa, tonight, Jeb Bush said: ''Let's tell Ed Asner to go back to Hollywood where he belongs.'' He did so today by repeating his accusation that Mr. Gore's Social Security plan would create $40 trillion in debt by the middle of the century, a projection and figure that the Gore campaign has vigorously disputed. Many experts say Mr. Bush's own Social Security proposal, which would allow people to start investing part of their Social Security payroll taxes in private retirement accounts, also has extraordinary costs that he has been unwilling to acknowledge. Mr. Bush has not answered many questions about the transition from the current system to the one he is suggesting. And while Mr. Bush turned H.M.O. into a nasty set of initials for the purpose of attacking Mr. Gore, many of the private insurance plans that his proposed changes in Medicare would coax people into would be H.M.O.'s. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, in fact described the Bush plan as a deliberate effort to line the pockets of private companies, saying it was created ''for and by special interests.'' Ms. Spell also said that Mr. Bush was grossly mischaracterizing Mr. Gore's proposals.
 Gore's Russia Deal Called Legal  A 1995 deal signed by Vice President Al Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister, allowing Russia to sell weapons to Iran without the United States imposing economic sanctions, was legal and did not threaten security, State Department officials told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. California Is No Longer A Sure Thing for Gore  Hard campaigning by Gov. George W. Bush and the Republican Party has tightened the presidential race in California, which Vice President Al Gore -- and most political analysts -- at one time had solidly in the Democrats' column. And the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, also figures in the erosion of Mr. Gore's once double-digit lead over Mr. Bush. Mr. Nader accused Mr. Gore of repeatedly breaking promises to clean up the environment, help the poor and reform the government. Mr. Gore, campaigning in his home state, Tennessee, framed his differences with Mr. Bush on education by emphasizing his commitment to public schools and describing Mr. Bush's proposals as ''half-measures'' and his Texas record as ''hollow.'' Mr. Gore is showing surprising strength in Florida among elderly and independent voters, a New York Times/CBS News poll found. Bush Makes Case to Floridians  Gov. George W. Bush made an aggressive appeal to elderly voters in Florida, pitching his Social Security and Medicare plans and accusing Vice President Al Gore of employing scare tactics.
 The shooting took place about 5:30 p.m. Tuesday outside Bushwick High School as the man, Joseph Gallo Rodriguez, 18, who was working for a garage, was changing a tire on a teacher's car, the authorities said. The car was parked on Irving Avenue outside the school. It was Mr. Rodriguez's fourth day on the job at Quality Automotive Services, said his mother, Joanne Gallo. The shooting took place about 5:30 p.m. Tuesday outside Bushwick High School as the man, Joseph Gallo Rodriguez, 18, who was working for a garage, was changing a tire on a teacher's car, the authorities said. The car was parked on Irving Avenue outside the school. It was Mr. Rodriguez's fourth day on the job at Quality Automotive Services, said his mother, Joanne Gallo. A group of seniors who congregated outside Bushwick High yesterday said their school had become more orderly since their freshman days. Metal detectors were installed and misbehavior was punished more severely, they said. But one teacher, who declined to be named, said he was considering calling in sick today to avoid a scheduled open house that required teachers to stay past sundown. ''Something like this scares me off,'' said the teacher, a 17-year Bushwick High veteran. ''I'd consider leaving, but it's so hard to do once you've been in a place so long.''
 Jeff Madrick Economic Scene column on whether Presidential candidates Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore are flip-flopping over how to manage economy; says if Gore loses the election, it will be wrong to say he overemphasized social spending; holds, to the contrary, he doggedly tried to prove he was fiscal conservative, and confused his message in the process; photo (M) JUST after the political conventions this summer, it looked as if America had a clear-cut choice about how the economy should be managed. About $2.7 trillion of the projected $4.6 trillion in surpluses over the next 10 years are estimated to be generated by Social Security and Medicare. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas favored giving most of the rest -- some $1.3 trillion -- back to Americans in the form of a tax cut. Vice President Al Gore wanted to spend roughly $350 billion of it on a Medicare-based prescription drug plan for the elderly, but much of the rest, he said, should be devoted to a litany of programs for America's ''working families.'' Mr. Gore bolted out of the Democratic convention with a ratings lead. JUST after the political conventions this summer, it looked as if America had a clear-cut choice about how the economy should be managed. About $2.7 trillion of the projected $4.6 trillion in surpluses over the next 10 years are estimated to be generated by Social Security and Medicare. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas favored giving most of the rest -- some $1.3 trillion -- back to Americans in the form of a tax cut. Vice President Al Gore wanted to spend roughly $350 billion of it on a Medicare-based prescription drug plan for the elderly, but much of the rest, he said, should be devoted to a litany of programs for America's ''working families.'' Mr. Gore bolted out of the Democratic convention with a ratings lead. Since then, however, the vice president has made a rhetorical course correction. He started emphasizing the fiscal discipline of his agenda and referred less to what he would do for working families. Today, it would be hard to find a man or woman on the street aware of Mr. Gore's most interesting social proposals, including his provocative program to provide up to $200 billion in a program to help middle-income people accumulate long-term savings. Now, of course, Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are about dead even in many polls. In truth, once we had a closer look at Mr. Gore's budget proposal, it was clear that he had locked himself into a stingier program than his convention rhetoric suggested. He earmarked the Social Security and Medicare surpluses -- $2.7 trillion -- to pay down most of America's federal debt. He set aside another $300 billion as a cushion because the surpluses were no sure thing. Chalk up about $3 trillion, therefore, or 65 percent of the projected surplus, to demonstrate fiscal probity. Working with a smaller pie, Mr. Gore also gave precedence to the elderly over working families. The Social Security and Medicare surpluses would be placed in a ''lock box'' so they could not be spent. The prescription drug proposal was his largest social program by far, and some complained that even it was too restrictive. That left $1 trillion or so for other social programs, or $100 billion a year, including his own tax cut. He only proposed another $115 billion for education over 10 years, for example. Despite that, Mr. Gore came up with several enticing ideas. He proposed to spend $200 billion to match the savings of middle-  and lower-income Americans, which he called Retirement Savings Plus. A couple earning $25,000 a year, for example, could put away $500 and receive another $1,500 from the government. The federal match would decline as incomes rose. Mr. Gore proposed universal schooling for preschoolers and tuition tax credits -- solid new economy ideas. He wanted a higher minimum wage and a more generous earned-income tax credit. His tax cuts in general were aimed more at middle-  and lower-income workers than Mr. Bush's. But once Mr. Bush started accusing Mr. Gore of being a big spender and stressing a few social programs of his own, the tone of the campaign changed. One of the first hints was that the Gore campaign started using the term ''middle-class families'' instead of ''working families.'' In the 1980's and early 1990's, politicians made hay over the middle-class fear that social programs, especially for the poor, were eating into their standard of living. Apparently, Mr. Gore did not want to rekindle those fears, even though most American families, not just the poor, were still strained by stagnating incomes and more hours of work. As part of the new plan, he also spent a lot of time criticizing Mr. Bush's budget plans. And Mr. Bush certainly appeared vulnerable. His stimulative tax cuts were proposed at the height of the business cycle, when they might have been most inflationary. The governor also refused to be specific about how he would pay for his Social Security privatization plan -- estimated to cost $1 trillion. Mr. Gore must have thought that he would strike gold, but so far it is lead. How good are Mr. Gore's own fiscally conservative economics? A strong case can be made that paying down some of America's debt -- that is to say, not spending all of the projected surplus -- makes economic sense. It may raise scarce savings when the nation is overly dependent on borrowing from overseas to meet its capital needs. But the tax increases under former President George Bush and President Clinton, along with federal spending cuts of the early 1990's, were also intended to raise national savings. What happened instead was that, while the government reduced its deficit, individual Americans saved less and borrowed more. Over all, national saving has not risen appreciably to this day. The true benefit of the tax increases and spending cuts, it turned out, was that they calmed investors, who bought bonds and sent interest rates lower. Today, the nation simply does not have to pay off the entire national debt, as Mr. Gore wants to do, to retain investors' confidence. The new economy has new needs, including better education, more accessible child care, flexible work hours and higher wages for lower-income workers. If Mr. Gore loses the election, it will be wrong to say he overemphasized social spending. To the contrary, he doggedly tried to prove he was a fiscal conservative -- and confused his message in the process. Correction:  October 27, 2000, Friday  The Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday, about Vice President Al Gore's proposals for the projected budget surplus, misstated the surname of the executive director of the Working Families Party. He is Daniel Cantor, not Cohen. The Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday, about Vice President Al Gore's proposals for the projected budget surplus, misstated the surname of the executive director of the Working Families Party. He is Daniel Cantor, not Cohen.
 Carol Feit Lane letter comments on Frank Rich's Oct 21 Op-Ed column on problems with Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign Frank Rich aptly articulates some of the problems with Al Gore's campaign (column, Oct. 21). But it's not too late for the vice president to let the country know that he is the man we need. Frank Rich aptly articulates some of the problems with Al Gore's campaign (column, Oct. 21). But it's not too late for the vice president to let the country know that he is the man we need. First, Mr. Gore must re-connect with President Clinton and show that he is aligned with all that is good about the administration. This is not in conflict with ''being one's own man.'' He needs to emphasize that he will continue the popular policies of the Clinton administration, which have led to the prosperity and well-being of the last eight years. Second, Mr. Gore can let Mr. Clinton help deliver the message that we should not ''change horses in mid-stream,'' especially in view of the crisis in the Middle East.
 Presidential race tightens in California, state once considered sure win for Vice Pres Al Gore; California Republican Party is spending $1.5 million a week on television advertisements in support of Gov George W Bush, including new round of Spanish-language ads; Democrats have no plans for anything but some radio ads, and Gov Gray Davis wants Pres Clinton to visit state for final get-out-the-vote tour; Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, has been digging into Gore's once-double-digit lead in state where voters tend to be more liberal than national norm; Gore, who courted California in his eight years in White House, has not visited state since Sept 20, while Bush has spent 30 days in state since June 1999 and has several appearances scheduled next week; photos (M) For more than a year, the smartest money in both major political parties on both coasts held that Gov. George W. Bush could not win California, that his positions on gun control, abortion and the environment were out of step with voters in a state where the Republican Party was reeling. Most of the smart money still thinks that Mr. Bush will not win here, but it is harder these days to find experts in either party who say flatly that he cannot. As the candidates seesaw for the lead in national polls, the race has tightened in the biggest state of all. Mr. Bush is suddenly giving Al Gore a run for his money here in the one state that most experts say the vice president must win to take the White House. For more than a year, the smartest money in both major political parties on both coasts held that Gov. George W. Bush could not win California, that his positions on gun control, abortion and the environment were out of step with voters in a state where the Republican Party was reeling. Most of the smart money still thinks that Mr. Bush will not win here, but it is harder these days to find experts in either party who say flatly that he cannot. As the candidates seesaw for the lead in national polls, the race has tightened in the biggest state of all. Mr. Bush is suddenly giving Al Gore a run for his money here in the one state that most experts say the vice president must win to take the White House. More precisely, the California Republican Party is spending $1.5 million a week on television advertisements in support of Mr. Bush, including a new round of Spanish-language advertisements to start this week, while the Democrats are not spending a dime on television, and have no plans to, though they plan to run some radio commercials and -- at the request of Gov. Gray Davis -- to import President Clinton for a final get-out-the-vote tour. Mr. Gore, who has courted California assiduously in his eight years in the White House, has not visited the state since Sept. 20 and has no plans to return before Election Day. By contrast, Mr. Bush has spent 30 days in the state since June 1999, and is to come back next week to campaign and appear on the ''Tonight'' show with Jay Leno. Meantime, the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, has been digging into Mr. Gore's once-double-digit lead in a state where voters tend to be more liberal than the national norm on issues like offshore oil drilling and restrictions on handguns. The institute's latest statewide poll ending last week found that Mr. Gore's lead over Mr. Bush had shrunk to five points among likely voters, 44 percent to 39 percent, with 6 percent for Mr. Nader. That is half the size of Mr. Gore's lead in the same poll a month ago, and some Democratic consultants say their own private surveys show the race even closer (within the margin of sampling error) among the likeliest voters. A Los Angeles Times poll, concluded on Monday and published today, showed Mr. Gore with a seven-point lead, 48 percent to 41 percent for Mr. Bush, with Mr. Nader at 5 percent. Mr. Gore's advisers say they are confident that his campaign has stabilized and is trending upward again after the dip that coincided with his performance in the first two presidential debates. But the unsettled situation here reflects the overall volatility of a close race, in which Mr. Gore finds himself struggling in states he should have locked up long ago, like Tennessee, his home state, and in which Mr. Bush is in a close contest in Florida, where his brother is governor and he had figured on a strong advantage. Mr. Bush still faces formidable obstacles here. Mr. Gore holds a comfortable advantage among voters on most issues, from education to health care, Social Security and Medicare, and The Los Angeles Times poll shows that just over half of California voters have an unfavorable opinion of Mr. Bush, while 6 in 10 view Mr. Gore favorably. While Mr. Gore has lost support to Mr. Nader, other minor-party candidates and the undecided column, Mr. Bush has not gained support, according to the Public Policy Institute poll. Among Hispanic voters, a group Mr. Bush has taken great pains to court, Mr. Gore still leads by ratios of better than two to one, and Mr. Bush's showing is little better than that of Dan Lungren, the party's failed nominee for governor here in 1998. Even Mr. Bush's advisers here are cautious in a state where Democrats hold an 11-point edge in voter registration and control all but one statewide office and both houses of the Legislature. Told by a reporter that Mr. Bush seemed to be doing well, his state campaign chairman, Gerald Parsky, said quickly, ''Better.'' But Mr. Parsky also noted that the campaign had done what it said it would more than a year ago, by bringing Mr. Bush to the state often for major policy speeches and appearances, by raising money to help the state party retire its debt, by grass-roots organizing intended to field 30,000 volunteers to help get out the vote on Election Day and by backing it all up with paid television advertising. The campaign began with a modest $600,000 a week statewide advertising push just after Labor Day and accelerated its efforts two weeks ago. In his appearances here, Mr. Bush has gone out of his way to try to soften the bad aftertaste, among Hispanic voters especially, left by Gov. Pete Wilson's strong campaigns against illegal immigration and affirmative action, and to reflect the reality that successful Republican presidents since the days of Dwight D. Eisenhower have all had a substantial political base here. Indeed, Democrats here are more than a little worried about turnout. Partly because the Gore campaign long ago declared the state safe, there has been little sense of urgency here, and Mr. Gore has never managed to generate the enthusiasm among California Democrats that Mr. Clinton did in two aggressive campaigns. Mr. Bush is leading in traditional swing areas like the Central Valley and the Inland Empire east of Los Angeles, while Mr. Nader is drawing double-digit support in the San Francisco Bay area, which should be a Democratic stronghold. Last week, reflecting pent-up frustrations, Governor Davis's chief political adviser, Garry South, issued a sharp public warning that the Gore campaign risked taking the state for granted and pleading for more support. After his comments caused a stir, Mr. South swiftly took pains to say that Mr. Gore would still win, but his point was not lost on Republicans, who for the last two elections have found themselves pleading with their national party for a serious effort in a state that former President George Bush's aides publicly abandoned in 1992 and where Bob Dole made a desperate last-minute push in 1996. Gore campaign officials profess confidence. ''Every piece of evidence that we rely on shows that Al Gore remains in a very strong position in California,'' said Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager. ''We watch it very closely. It's obviously a critical state for us. But Al Gore's positions on the issues are so much more in sync with Californians than Bush's are.'' But other Democrats here point to more complicated realities. Mr. Gore is fighting fires on too many other fronts to suddenly open an advertising campaign in California's brutally expensive media markets, and the mere act of doing so could set off broader anxiety about his campaign's overall prospects that could have a snowball effect. ''Unfortunately for the Gore campaign, they set up a perception for a long, long time that they were safe here, and they sold it and they spun it and they're stuck with it,'' said a Democratic operative here who spoke on the condition of anonymity but worries that Mr. Gore is vulnerable here. ''I sympathize with them, and they've got other states to worry about. But we are not crying wolf.''
 Appraisal of television commerical about education from Bush-Cheney presidential campaign; photo (S) The Bush-Cheney campaign has begun showing more television commercials about education. Mindy Tucker, a campaign spokeswoman, said the advertisements were being shown in ''battleground'' states, which she would not identify. One is titled ''Expect More.'' ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial opens with a boy tossing a baseball and catching it. Then a girl is shown watching through a screened backstop. The boy reaches for the ball on the ground. Gov. George W. Bush is then shown in shirt sleeves, then with a little girl in a schoolroom, in what appears to be a campaign photo opportunity. Then children wave flags as the words ''leave no child behind'' appear on the screen. Mr. Bush then appears again, speaking, in shirt sleeves. Then a little boy in a classroom appears, followed by Mr. Bush in a suit with some adults in a classroom. Then Boy Scouts raise a flag. Finally, Mr. Bush appears again in shirt sleeves, as he finishes his comments and the words ''accountability,'' ''discipline'' and ''end social promotion'' appear on the screen. Children in half-tones wave as the commercial ends. The Bush-Cheney campaign has begun showing more television commercials about education. Mindy Tucker, a campaign spokeswoman, said the advertisements were being shown in ''battleground'' states, which she would not identify. One is titled ''Expect More.'' ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial opens with a boy tossing a baseball and catching it. Then a girl is shown watching through a screened backstop. The boy reaches for the ball on the ground. Gov. George W. Bush is then shown in shirt sleeves, then with a little girl in a schoolroom, in what appears to be a campaign photo opportunity. Then children wave flags as the words ''leave no child behind'' appear on the screen. Mr. Bush then appears again, speaking, in shirt sleeves. Then a little boy in a classroom appears, followed by Mr. Bush in a suit with some adults in a classroom. Then Boy Scouts raise a flag. Finally, Mr. Bush appears again in shirt sleeves, as he finishes his comments and the words ''accountability,'' ''discipline'' and ''end social promotion'' appear on the screen. Children in half-tones wave as the commercial ends. THE SCRIPT -- Governor Bush: ''How come the hard things don't get done? Because they're hard. If we really want to make sure no child gets left behind in America, we need the courage to do some tough things. We need to raise standards in our schools. We need more accountability and more discipline. And we need to stop promoting failing kids to the next grade because we've given up on them. It's easy just to spend more. Let's start by expecting more.'' SCORECARD -- This advertisement was prepared and started showing before a recent study by the RAND Corporation, a California research organization, challenging the claims Mr. Bush has made about progress in education in Texas. Its pace is not as frantic as some earlier commercials. It deals with the issue that voters, regardless of whether they support Mr. Bush or Vice President Al Gore, cite more often than any other as the most important issue facing the next president and Congress. The return to this theme emphasizes the central issue that Mr. Bush has used to portray himself to voters as a different kind of Republican.
 Members of the groups contribute to Republicans and Democrats alike, and have been courted by various politicians, including Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. He recently met with the American Muslim Council in Michigan, which has a sizable Arab-American population, and received its backing. The council also says it considers Senator Joseph I. Lieberman a friend, and it gave him an award a few years ago. The Bush campaign said yesterday it would return $1,000 that had been donated by Abdurahman Alamoudi, a board member of the American Muslim Council, who was quoted in interviews as supporting the radical Islamic group Hamas. The two Muslim groups belong to the larger American Muslim Political Coordination Council Political Action Committee, which endorsed Mr. Bush at a news conference in Washington on Monday. Tahir Ali, the Massachusetts chairman of the American Muslim Alliance, said he had held fund-raisers for both Democrats and Republicans, including Gov. Paul Cellucci of Massachusetts. Dr. Yahya Mossa-Basha, a radiologist in Michigan who is president of the American Muslim Council, said he had met twice with Mr. Bush -- once last month -- and once with Vice President Al Gore, Tipper Gore and Hadassah Lieberman. He said he had recently had discussions with the Gore campaign about meeting the vice president this Sunday, but no date had been set. He also said he was invited to a Lazio fund-raising event attended by Mr. Lazio last August in Michigan, but decided not to attend. The Lazio campaign said it did not invite Mr. Mossa-Basha, but said it did not know if a Lazio supporter had invited him. Mr. Alamoudi, whose $1,000 contributions are to be returned by the Clinton and Bush campaigns, was out of the country and could not be reached for comment, Mr. Mossa-Basha said. But Mr. Mossa-Basha said that as an organization, the council is clear about Hamas and violence in the Middle East. Mrs. Clinton implied that the Daily News article was prompted by the Republicans, suggesting that they would be eager to associate a prominent Democrat with the Muslim organizations at the time the groups were endorsing Mr. Bush. The Daily News, however, referred to research by Steven Emerson, who identified himself as a freelance journalist preparing a magazine article on terrorism; he became well known when he initially strongly suggested that the Oklahoma City bombing was the work of Arab terrorists. Mr. Emerson, who attended Mrs. Clinton's news conference, said Republicans and Democrats were both willing to associate with groups that he considered sympathetic to terrorists or aligned with them.
 Rival Social Security Plans  A comparison of the Social Security proposals of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush shows that each side has a point. PAGE A33
 Vice President Al Gore has repeatedly asserted that Texas, under Gov. George W. Bush, neglected the health care needs of its residents. In view of such criticism, governors said, it was paradoxical for the Clinton administration to try to slash Medicaid payments to states like Illinois and New York, which say they have used the money to expand health programs for the poor.
 Editorial says Ralph Nader is flinging charges and espousing positions without having to worry about their impact on his chances of winning presidential race, or even about having to govern on basis of his promises; says his 'willful prankishness' is disservice to electorate no matter whose campaign he is hurting; says country deserves clear up-or-down vote between Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore, who have waged hard, substantive and clean campaign Back in June, we criticized Ralph Nader's presidential bid as a self-indulgent crusade that could gull some voters into thinking that there were no clear policy choices between Al Gore and George Bush. As the election nears, what once seemed a speculative threat has become a very real danger to the Gore campaign, with polls suggesting that Mr. Nader's meager share of the vote could nevertheless make the difference in eight states with 70 electoral votes. That is one reason Mr. Gore returned this week to places like Washington and Oregon. In these and other states that once seemed safe for the vice president, Mr. Nader is wooing liberals by arguing that both parties are captives of the same financial interests. He also appears to be hurting Mr. Gore with charges that he has betrayed his principles and promises on the environment. We would regard Mr. Nader's willful prankishness as a disservice to the electorate no matter whose campaign he was hurting. The country deserves a clear up-or-down vote between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, who have waged a hard, substantive and clean campaign. Of course, voters who want to cast an ideological protest vote for Mr. Nader have a perfect right to do so. But more tactically minded voters should recognize that unlike Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, Mr. Nader can fling charges and espouse positions without worrying about their impact on his chances of winning or even about having to govern on the basis of his promises. Back in June, we criticized Ralph Nader's presidential bid as a self-indulgent crusade that could gull some voters into thinking that there were no clear policy choices between Al Gore and George Bush. As the election nears, what once seemed a speculative threat has become a very real danger to the Gore campaign, with polls suggesting that Mr. Nader's meager share of the vote could nevertheless make the difference in eight states with 70 electoral votes. That is one reason Mr. Gore returned this week to places like Washington and Oregon. In these and other states that once seemed safe for the vice president, Mr. Nader is wooing liberals by arguing that both parties are captives of the same financial interests. He also appears to be hurting Mr. Gore with charges that he has betrayed his principles and promises on the environment. We would regard Mr. Nader's willful prankishness as a disservice to the electorate no matter whose campaign he was hurting. The country deserves a clear up-or-down vote between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, who have waged a hard, substantive and clean campaign. Of course, voters who want to cast an ideological protest vote for Mr. Nader have a perfect right to do so. But more tactically minded voters should recognize that unlike Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, Mr. Nader can fling charges and espouse positions without worrying about their impact on his chances of winning or even about having to govern on the basis of his promises. For Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, every adjustment in a position gains or costs votes. Mr. Nader has the luxury of taking free throws. In a recent interview with The Wall Street Journal he seemed almost excited by the idea that a Gore defeat could lead to a ''progressive convulsion'' -- a leftward shift among Democrats away from the Clinton administration's centrist policies. Yet anyone who has followed the course of progressive politics over the last quarter-century knows that such a shift is a formula for defeat precisely because it does not reflect the mood of those voters inclined to support moderate or liberal candidates. The spectrum has shifted, and Mr. Nader cannot jerk it back by demolishing Democratic chances. Mr. Nader's description of Mr. Gore's environmental record is particularly obtuse, for there is no area in which voters are being offered a clearer choice. Mr. Bush would explore for oil in the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Mr. Gore would not. Mr. Gore would prohibit new roads and logging on more than 40 million acres of national forest, Mr. Bush would not. Mr. Gore holds open the option of tearing down four dams that threaten Snake River salmon runs, while Mr. Bush flatly opposes decommissioning. Mr. Gore favors the vigorous enforcement of clean air rules to reduce industrial pollutants, Mr. Bush favors a negotiated approach. Whichever side one favors, the Texas governor and the vice president offer as stark a choice on the environment as was ever put on view in a presidential contest. Mr. Nader's other main complaint is that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are equally beholden to the special interests, and certainly the candidates and their parties have parallel histories in regard to seeking corporate contributions. But their approaches to systemic reform of the electoral system are very different. For example, Mr. Gore would eliminate all forms of soft money -- corporate, labor and individual contributions -- whereas Mr. Bush would allow the large individual contributions that have done so much to corrupt the system. Yet Mr. Nader acts as if the presidential election would have no impact on the future of campaign finance legislation. In so doing he deludes his followers, brightens Mr. Bush's prospects and dims his own legacy as a reformer. He calls his wrecking-ball candidacy a matter of principle, but it looks from here like ego run amok.
 Vice Pres Al Gore, campaigning in Tennessee, frames his differences with Gov George W Bush on education by emphasizing his commitment to public schools while criticizing Bush's proposals as 'half-measures' and his Texas record as 'hollow'; photo (M) Forced to campaign in his home state today, Vice President Al Gore framed his differences with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on education by emphasizing his commitment to the public schools while criticizing Mr. Bush's proposals as ''half-measures'' and his Texas record as ''hollow.'' After rallying their headquarters staff and attending a series of fund-raisers that brought in $4.3 million in Nashville on Tuesday night, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, campaigned in two distinct media markets in central and western Tennessee today before the vice president flew to Kansas City for an evening rally. Forced to campaign in his home state today, Vice President Al Gore framed his differences with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas on education by emphasizing his commitment to the public schools while criticizing Mr. Bush's proposals as ''half-measures'' and his Texas record as ''hollow.'' After rallying their headquarters staff and attending a series of fund-raisers that brought in $4.3 million in Nashville on Tuesday night, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, campaigned in two distinct media markets in central and western Tennessee today before the vice president flew to Kansas City for an evening rally. It is disconcerting for the Gore campaign that the vice president cannot take Tennessee and its 11 electoral votes for granted at this point, and that the Democratic National Committee has had to invest money in advertising there. But Mr. Gore and his aides have argued that the vice president's roots in Carthage, Tenn., and his 24-year political career in the state cannot be expected to overcome its recent political domination by Republicans. With Mr. Gore as his running mate, President Clinton won the state by only two percentage points in 1996 and by five percentage points in 1992. Its governor, both of its United States senators, and five of its nine members of Congress are Republicans. ''I think Tennessee always is a competitive state in national races,'' Mr. Gore said today in an interview with WTVF in Nashville. ''This is a classic border swing state.'' At a rally in Jackson, his grandmother's West Tennessee hometown, Mr. Gore asked how many relatives he had in the crowd and beamed when dozens of hands were raised. After summarizing his philosophy about the role of government on Tuesday, Mr. Gore turned his attention today to education in his address to students at Tennessee State University, a historically black college. Mr. Gore outlined his proposals for using federal money to hire 100,000 new teachers, to reduce class sizes, to provide universal preschool to 4-year-olds, to provide families with tax deductions of up to $10,000 a year for college tuition, to force states and local school boards to change the administration of persistently failing schools and to increase testing of  students and teachers. But Mr. Gore devoted most of his remarks to arguing that Mr. Bush's support for private school vouchers would undermine public education, that his ''budget-busting tax cuts for the wealthiest'' demonstrate misplaced priorities and that the integrity of student testing in Texas was questionable. Mr. Bush, he said, ''would give more in tax cuts to the wealthiest 90,000 multimillionaires than he would give in the form of all the new investments he has proposed to make in all 90,000 public schools combined.'' As he has throughout the campaign, Mr. Gore rejected the concept of vouchers, which would provide some parents of children in poor-performing schools with grants to send their children to private schools. Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said Mr. Gore's comments defined him as ''the chief defender of the status quo in the public schools.'' Mr. Gore laced his attack with provocative new metaphors. Mr. Bush's voucher plan, he said, would make Washington ''a national private school headmaster.'' Because not all students would receive help from vouchers, the plan amounts to ''education roulette,'' he said. Mr. Bush's opposition to spending federal money to hire thousands of new teachers, Mr. Gore added, ''is like trying to write on a blackboard without any chalk.'' Mr. Gore also used the speech to make his first remarks about a study released this week by the RAND Corporation, a research organization in Santa Monica, Calif., that raised questions about the effectiveness of student testing in Texas. Because Mr. Bush has made his educational record in Texas a hallmark of his campaign, the Gore forces have treated the RAND study as an October gift. Mr. Lieberman used it to attack Mr. Bush on Tuesday, and Mr. Gore took his turn today. ''This is the bottom line,'' Mr. Gore said. ''We cannot afford to teach kids how to take a state test while leaving them with serious learning deficits. We cannot afford that kind of short-sighted shortcut in education policy any more than we can afford it in economic policy where we cannot afford to cook the books and bust our budget, leaving America with endless financial deficits.'' Mr. Gore said practices like teaching to the test ''might elevate the reputations of school administrators and politicians but actually do nothing to really raise standards.'' Now, my opponent, Governor Bush, has a different approach because he has different priorities. He would give more in tax cuts to the wealthiest 90,000 multimillionaires than he would give in the form of all the new investments he has proposed to make in all 90,000 public schools combined. . . . Under the Bush plan, states would be forced to offer vouchers and finance them out of their budgets -- a brand new federal mandate -- whether states and local school districts like vouchers or not. . . . Governor Bush says he doesn't want a national superintendent of schools, but his mandatory voucher plan would make Washington, D.C., a national private school headmaster.''
 Political Notebook comments on Vice Pres Al Gore's efforts to portray himself as devoted dad who has not spent his career trying to make money (M) If Vice President Al Gore has failed to close the sale with some voters on policy grounds, like promising to put the Medicare surplus in a lockbox, he has now come up with a few new arguments. First, there is the notion that Mr. Gore does not care about making money and never has. Not like some oil speculators and baseball team owners he could mention. And this apparently is a good thing, even though many Americans would love to have made $15 million by selling a baseball team, as Gov. George W. Bush did when his partnership sold the Texas Rangers in 1998. If Vice President Al Gore has failed to close the sale with some voters on policy grounds, like promising to put the Medicare surplus in a lockbox, he has now come up with a few new arguments. First, there is the notion that Mr. Gore does not care about making money and never has. Not like some oil speculators and baseball team owners he could mention. And this apparently is a good thing, even though many Americans would love to have made $15 million by selling a baseball team, as Gov. George W. Bush did when his partnership sold the Texas Rangers in 1998. ''I have not spent the last quarter century in pursuit of personal wealth,'' Mr. Gore told a crowd in Everett, Wash., on Monday. ''I have spent the last 24 years fighting for middle-class working families.'' Mr. Gore's aversion to wealth apparently has the approval of his wife, Tipper. ''This is a man who has spent his time not getting up every day figuring out how much money he can make for himself,'' Mrs. Gore said in introducing her husband in Little Rock, Ark., on Tuesday, ''but figuring out how he can fight for working people.'' Still not persuaded? Maybe that is because you were not aware that Mr. Gore has attended all of his son's high school football games this fall, despite his rigorous campaign schedule. The Gores had kept politics and football separate until this week, when an article in The New York Times documented the vice president's devotion to the Sidwell Friends Quakers. Now they seem to have concluded that it is a story worth telling. ''He has made every single one of our son's football games,'' Mrs. Gore said at a rally on Tuesday in Shreveport, La., in remarks aimed directly at women. ''I don't really want to share that with everybody. It's personal. But it matters.'' For each of the last three mornings, Mr. Gore has gone about the task of making pretty pictures by holding ''kitchen table'' discussions with voters. None have actually taken place at a kitchen table, but that is beside the point. On Monday, he sat down at a bakery in Portland, Ore., with a small business owner; on Tuesday in Little Rock, he helped Bobbie and Mollie Goza walk their two children to elementary school; today, in Nashville, he sat down with the guys at a local firehouse. Such camera-friendly encounters with ''real people'' have become a campaign staple for Mr. Gore, who spent numerous nights at teachers' homes and took walks on a Florida beach with 13 citizen advisers to help prepare for the debates. Some moments have been so staged as to appear campy, like Mr. Gore's stroll to school with the Gozas, who typically do not walk their children the few blocks to Thomas Jefferson Elementary. And the conversation, or at least the snippets that reporters have made out from a distance, has often been less than edifying. ''Ian, you're really in kindergarten?'' Mr. Gore asked the Gozas' 5-year-old son, who nodded affirmatively. Then there was Mr. Gore's reaction to discovering a rubber Halloween spider in a planter of yellow chrysanthemums on the Gozas' doorstep. ''Yikes!'' he said. ''That's scary.'' But whether Mr. Gore's words make news is also beside the point. Thus far, the gimmick has worked precisely as intended. In both Portland and Little Rock, pictures of the kitchen-table moments landed on the front pages of local newspapers and were featured prominently in local television broadcasts. The national television networks have also made liberal use of the images, and a picture of Mr. Gore with the Gozas appeared today in The New York Times. After two years of campaigning -- some would say after eight years of campaigning -- it is not every day that Mr. Gore gets a question he has yet to consider. But while speaking to a few reporters on Air Force II on Tuesday, Mr. Gore was confronted with one of the great queries of our time. ''What do you think of the designated hitter?'' asked Bill Douglas of Newsday. Mr. Gore had already taken an expedient pass on the question of which team he likes in the World Series, saying ''I'm for New York.'' Now, said the reporters on the plane, Mr. Gore paused for 20 to 30 seconds, as if calculating the swing-state impact of his response on undecided voters in various American League and National League cities.
 RIFLE ASSOCIATION BACKS BUSH  Without fanfare, the National Rifle Association's political action committee has endorsed Gov. George W. Bush for president, posting a notice on its Web site earlier this week. Though it has been clear for months that the politically potent group would work to defeat Vice President Al Gore, there had been questions about whether it would endorse Mr. Bush because of concerns among some Republicans that the group's backing could turn off centrist voters and women. But in his monthly column in one of the rifle association's magazines, the group's president, Charlton Heston, trumpets the endorsement, saying that ''Bush has steadfastly supported gun owners' rights.'' In September, the organization also contributed $961,826 to help Mr. Bush's campaign, federal election records show. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said the endorsement showed that Mr. Bush ''is the candidate of the gun lobby.'' But Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, replied, ''When it comes to special interest funding and support, Al Gore knocks it out of the park.'' RIFLE ASSOCIATION BACKS BUSH  Without fanfare, the National Rifle Association's political action committee has endorsed Gov. George W. Bush for president, posting a notice on its Web site earlier this week. Though it has been clear for months that the politically potent group would work to defeat Vice President Al Gore, there had been questions about whether it would endorse Mr. Bush because of concerns among some Republicans that the group's backing could turn off centrist voters and women. But in his monthly column in one of the rifle association's magazines, the group's president, Charlton Heston, trumpets the endorsement, saying that ''Bush has steadfastly supported gun owners' rights.'' In September, the organization also contributed $961,826 to help Mr. Bush's campaign, federal election records show. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said the endorsement showed that Mr. Bush ''is the candidate of the gun lobby.'' But Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, replied, ''When it comes to special interest funding and support, Al Gore knocks it out of the park.'' THE VIDEOTAPE INCIDENT  A lawyer for Thomas J. Downey, a senior Gore adviser who six weeks ago received a videotape of Gov. George W. Bush's debate preparation, asserted yesterday that it was becoming evident that the incident was a dirty trick by people in the Bush campaign. The lawyer, Marc E. Miller, in a letter to the attorney general and the director of the F.B.I., said that the two top law enforcement officials should make a public statement on their conclusions before Election Day. Mr. Miller wrote, ''It now appears to be more likely than not that the original transmission of the material to Mr. Downey was not, in fact, a misguided act of a single person acting alone as Mr. Downey had initially assumed, but rather the concerted, intentional act by more than one person associated with the Bush campaign.'' The Bush camp has denied that it was involved in any plan to make the Gore campaign look like it was cheating in preparation for the debates. Law enforcement officials said yesterday that they had not yet completed their investigation of the incident. McCAIN TRUMPETS BUSH  Given the bitterness of his losing battle against Gov. George W. Bush in the Republican primaries, Senator John McCain of Arizona still endures suspicions about how much he looks forward to a Bush presidency. But yesterday, during a rare full day of campaigning at Mr. Bush's side, Mr. McCain tried to put those questions to rest. He told a crowd in Sanford, Fla., that service to causes greater than self-interest was ''what a Gore-Cheney presidency means.'' Space aliens should already be behind Bush, if one of the more far-fetched supermarket tabloids, the Weekly World News, is to be believed. ''Space Alien Backs Bush for President!'' its front page trumpeted back in May. ''Same alien helped Clinton win top job in 1992!'' PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY WEIGHS IN  Citizens for Better Medicare, a group largely financed by the pharmaceutical industry, says that over the past few months it has spent more than $8.3 million on television advertisements that take aim at the Clinton-Gore administration's proposal to provide prescription drug benefits under Medicare. The advertisements, warning that the proposal would lead to government price controls and rationing of life-saving drugs, are running in many of the same television markets around the country in which Gov. George W. Bush is running commercials. Like Mr. Bush, the pharmaceutical industry favors a plan that would subsidize individual purchases of medicines. The finances of Citizens for Better Medicare had been shrouded in secrecy for months. But a few days ago it was forced to report details under provisions of a new federal law. Among other things, the first report revealed that all of the group's advertising money has gone to National Media, a firm run by Alex Castellanos, who also coordinates advertising by the Republican National Committee and the Bush campaign. THE NUMBERS  Vice President Al Gore spent much of yesterday working his home state, Tennessee, while Gov. George W. Bush rode a bus across parts of Florida. The numbers: Length of Official Day: Gore, 12 hours; Bush 13 hours States Visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 1 Official Events: Gore, 4; Bush 3 Cities/Towns Visited: Gore, 3 (Nashville and Jackson, Tenn.; Kansas City, Mo.); Bush, 5 (Jacksonville, Daytona, Sanford, Brandon and Tampa, Fla.) Main Message: Gore, education; Bush, Social Security and Medicare
 State Dept officials tell Congress that 1995 deal approved by Vice Pres Al Gore allowing Russia to sell large cache of conventional weapons to Iran was legal and did not threaten American security; agreement exempted Russia from law requiring that economic sanctions be imposed on countries that sell arms to nations that sponsor terrorism, including Iran (M) State Department officials told Congress today that a 1995 deal approved by Vice President Al Gore allowing Russia to sell a large cache of conventional weapons to Iran was legal and did not threaten American security. The agreement, signed in 1995 by Mr. Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister, exempted Russia from a law requiring that economic sanctions be imposed on countries that sell arms to nations that sponsor terrorism, including Iran. State Department officials told Congress today that a 1995 deal approved by Vice President Al Gore allowing Russia to sell a large cache of conventional weapons to Iran was legal and did not threaten American security. The agreement, signed in 1995 by Mr. Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former Russian prime minister, exempted Russia from a law requiring that economic sanctions be imposed on countries that sell arms to nations that sponsor terrorism, including Iran. The 1992 law was sponsored by then-Senator Gore and Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona. Senator Sam Brownback, Republican of Kansas, convened the hearing to draw attention to what he contends was a flawed deal by Mr. Gore that was illegally concealed from Congress. The agreement required Russia to stop all sales of conventional weapons to Iran by the end of 1999. But the sales have continued past that deadline, prompting complaints to Moscow by Mr. Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright. The weapons permitted under the Gore-Chernomyrdin deal included a sophisticated Kilo-class diesel submarine with long-range torpedoes, hundreds of tanks and armored personnel carriers and thousands of mines, bombs and artillery shells. Senator Brownback expressed frustration with the administration's refusal to provide Congress with documents that spell out the terms of the Gore-Chernomyrdin agreement. In Moscow, Mr. Chernomyrdin said today that the criticism in Congress of his deal with Mr. Gore was politically inspired, and he defended the arrangement as serving the interests of the United States and Russia.
