 Directed by Laurence Fishburne; written by Mr. Fishburne, based on his play, ''Riff Raff''; director of photography, Abe Schrager; art director, Diann Duthie; music by Branford Marsalis; produced by David Bushell, Mr. Fishburne and Helen Sugland; released by Lions Gate Films. Running time: 93 minutes. This film is rated R.
 Op-Ed article by William J Bennett and Chester E Finn Jr disputes Rand Corp study that questions rising student test scores in Texas; says study, by Stephen P Klein, is admittedly unsophisticated and based on incomplete data; notes that more complete study conducted at Rand by David Grissmer last July contradicts Klein's findings; says fact remains that black and white fourth graders in Texas performed best in nation according to most recent national test scores, while Hispanic fourth graders placed sixth; says Gov George W Bush can rightly claim very impressive accomplishments in area of education (M) Predictably, the Gore campaign claimed that the new study ''devastates'' Gov. George Bush's education claims in Texas. But to draw that conclusion from this flawed and misleading study is wrong. To the degree that this study draws attention to Governor Bush's record in Texas, we believe it should work to his advantage. He can rightly claim very impressive accomplishments in the area of education; the closer people look at the Texas record, the better it is. Nothing in the latest report contradicts this.
 West Virginia and Pennsylvania, two of the largest steel-producing states, are seen as competitive in the presidential election. Vice President Al Gore needs union workers to turn out in large numbers in those states to beat Gov. George W. Bush.
 It is also disappointing, hoping for a peek at a collection of vintage cards, to learn that the only baseball card Mr. Shorin owns is one in a limited edition he made for President George Bush.
 Bush Raises Character Issue  Gov. George W. Bush, campaigning in western Pennsylvania, questioned the integrity, courage and moral character of Vice President Al Gore and called the presidential race a matter of values. Veiled Appeal to Nader Bloc  Vice President Al Gore, campaigning in Madison, Wis., a college town where Ralph Nader enjoys strong support, promoted his ''progressive values'' to more than 30,000 people, speaking ardently to issues that have moved Nader supporters but uttering Mr. Nader's name only once.
 But miners feel no less aggrieved, said Dick Kembler, president of Local 2935 of the United Mine Workers. Mr. Kembler is a lifelong Democrat who said he was voting Republican this year and bucking the national union's endorsement of Vice President Al Gore and Mr. Wise. He accused the Clinton administration of trying to finesse the issue, first siding with the lawsuit victors but then shifting positions as the court ruling came under appeal and the election approached. ''I'd still be working if it wasn't for the mountaintop lawsuit,'' said Mr. Kembler, who has been courted prominently this election season by Mr. Underwood and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in his presidential campaign visits here. ''This is such a close race that little places like West Virginia can settle it,'' Mr. Kembler said of this heavily Democratic state. ''Gore will be sorry because he's an extreme environmentalist and that's what started this problem.''
 I am disheartened by the attempt by Al Gore's campaign to dissuade supporters of Ralph Nader from voting for him. Too many times over the last two decades, I have endorsed the lesser of two evils, only to watch both major parties move to the center.  Meaningful difference and debate disappear, and more and more special-interest money fills their coffers.  I am determined to cast my ballot for something this year and not against.
 Linda Gavigan letter asks what Ralph Nader and his supporters expect George W Bush to do for their agenda if Bush is elected president (S) If Ralph Nader hands the election to George W. Bush by continuing to campaign in closely contested states, he and his supporters are going to have a lot of explaining to do on Nov. 8. First on my list is an explanation as to what they expect President George W. Bush to do to further their agenda.
 Without even taking up most of the big-ticket promises made by Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush in their race for the White House, the Republican-controlled Congress and President Clinton are negotiating over tax cuts and spending increases that could use up $900 billion or more of the projected non-Social Security surplus of $2.17 trillion over the next decade, the analysts said. Without even taking up most of the big-ticket promises made by Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush in their race for the White House, the Republican-controlled Congress and President Clinton are negotiating over tax cuts and spending increases that could use up $900 billion or more of the projected non-Social Security surplus of $2.17 trillion over the next decade, the analysts said. Mr. Bush has proposed tax and spending programs totaling at least $1.9 trillion over 10 years. Mr. Gore's budget proposal totals at least $1.5 trillion. Whatever the final figure, the allocation of such a big chunk of the surplus even before voters go to the polls suggests how quickly unimaginably large sums of money can come and go in Washington. And it is an indication that the agendas set out by Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush could prove overly ambitious even in this age of fiscal plenty. The Bush campaign said it was confident that money would be available for its $1.3 trillion tax cut and other initiatives and that if elected Mr. Bush would end the profligacy of both parties in Congress. ''Each of the past three years, despite Congress and the president agreeing to spend more money, the surplus surged as a result of stronger than anticipated economic growth,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''The best way to stop politicians from spending more money is to put George W. Bush in the White House.'' Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said he did not want to comment on a situation that was still hypothetical. On the campaign trail, the candidates continued to attack each other today over their budget proposals. Much of the back and forth was about a report by the American Academy of Actuaries concluding that Mr. Bush's budget and Social Security plans would leave the nation unable to pay off the $3.4 trillion national debt. Aides to Mr. Bush said the report's assumptions were flawed and stood by their estimate that their proposal would pay off the debt by 2016. Mr. Gore, who says his plan would pay off the debt in 2012, said the report was evidence that Mr. Bush's agenda was fiscally irresponsible.
 Remake of 'Daisy' commercial--perhaps most infamous of all political attack advertisements--is being shown in several states, but target is Vice Pres Al Gore, not Barry Goldwater as it was in 1964; new commercial contends that China has ability to launch long-range nuclear warheads at American homes because Clinton-Gore administration 'sold' nation's security to China in exchange for campaign contributions; commercial was paid for by Texas-based not-for-profit organization, Aretino Industries; 1964 ad, made for Pres Lyndon B Johnson, created such a furor that it was withdrawn after appearing only once; Kathleen Hall Jamieson of Annenberg School of Communication says such an imflammatory ad risks producing public backlash against Bush campaign; photos (M) A remake of the ''Daisy'' commercial -- perhaps the most infamous of all political attack advertisements -- is being shown in several states today, but the target this time is Vice President Al Gore, not Barry Goldwater. The commercial contends that because the Clinton-Gore administration ''sold'' the nation's security ''to Communist Red China in exchange for campaign contributions,'' China has ''the ability to threaten our homes with long-range nuclear warheads.'' A remake of the ''Daisy'' commercial -- perhaps the most infamous of all political attack advertisements -- is being shown in several states today, but the target this time is Vice President Al Gore, not Barry Goldwater. The commercial contends that because the Clinton-Gore administration ''sold'' the nation's security ''to Communist Red China in exchange for campaign contributions,'' China has ''the ability to threaten our homes with long-range nuclear warheads.'' ''This is a heavy-handed ad,'' Ms. Jamieson said. ''It lacks the subtlety of the original ad, it is not factually accurate and, if anything, it risks that the press coverage over it will produce a backlash against the Bush campaign.''
 + ''THE GOREY DETAILS.'' A musical anthology of genially macabre stories by the writer and artist Edward Gorey, many of them from previous shows. As in many an omnibus, the skits are variously successful, and you'll be particularly impatient if you're the sort who waits for a punch line or a concluding moment. That isn't where Gorey's imagination flourished. A sudden death offered with a hapless shrug is the most frequent curtain-closer in these tales, which is of course the kind of philosophical resignation that informed most of his work. The humor is, rather, largely dependent on mood, the sense that in this peculiar world, with its atmosphere of a gleefully haunted house, life will go on in all its bizarre idiosyncrasy until it doesn't. It's hard, of course, to escape the poignant underscoring of Gorey's death in April, and in the end the show is something of an animated headstone, a memorial he would doubtless have appreciated (2:00). Century Center, 111 East 15th Street, (212) 239-6200. Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 p.m.; Sundays at 3 and 7 p.m. Tickets: $45 (Weber).
 Appraisal of commercial issued by National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, warning that vote for Ralph Nader in presidential race could help Gov George W Bush win election; photo (M) The National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League this week released a commercial, ''Think,'' that warns voters that a vote for Ralph Nader could help Gov. George W. Bush of Texas win the presidential election on Nov. 7. The National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League this week released a commercial, ''Think,'' that warns voters that a vote for Ralph Nader could help Gov. George W. Bush of Texas win the presidential election on Nov. 7. ON THE SCREEN -- The commercial begins with a photograph of Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, and the words ''Thinking of voting for Ralph Nader?'' followed by the exterior of the Supreme Court building with the words ''Narrow Decision protects Roe v. Wade.'' Then a picture of a statue outside the court of a man representing the authority of law, and the words ''A single vote.'' Then the interior of the courtroom and photos of Governor Bush and Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas. Mr. Bush's picture appears again, along with a gavel and the words ''Bush's Goal / End Legal Abortion.'' Then Mr. Nader's photo, Mr. Bush's photo and the Supreme Court exterior and finally the words  ''It's your choice.'' ''If you're thinking of voting for Ralph Nader, please consider: This year, a 5-to-4 Supreme Court decision narrowly protected Roe v. Wade. A single vote saved a woman's right to choose. As president, George Bush would reverse the Court with anti-choice Justices Scalia and Thomas in control. Bush's goal? Ending legal abortion. Voting for Ralph Nader helps elect George W. Bush. Before voting Nader, consider the risk. It's your choice.'' ACCURACY -- Mixed. The 5-to-4 decision invalidated a Nebraska law on the late-term procedure that opponents call partial birth abortion, and some advocates of abortion rights have said this means that the underlying Roe v. Wade decision of 1973 is imperiled. But many students of the Court believe the Roe decision retains the support of six justices. Mr. Bush has said Justices Thomas and Scalia are the sort he would nominate. They believe Roe should be reversed, as does Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist. Mr. Bush has called for a constitutional amendment banning abortion except in cases of rape, incest or when the woman's life is threatened -- a policy that would prohibit almost all abortions. But he has also said he does not believe that an amendment will be enacted soon. In 1994, when he first ran for governor, he said, ''I do not like abortions; I will do everything in my power to restrict abortions.'' SCORECARD -- This is a tough advertisement, translating the fears of abortion rights groups regarding Mr. Bush's attitude on abortion -- which he has kept almost invisible as he seeks to appeal to moderates -- into confident but unprovable predictions.
 With less than two weeks left in his campaign for Senate against Hillary Rodham Clinton, Mr. Lazio gave one of the most detailed speeches of his entire campaign, a tough-talking address that echoed the criticisms of the White House made by George W. Bush this year. With less than two weeks left in his campaign for Senate against Hillary Rodham Clinton, Mr. Lazio gave one of the most detailed speeches of his entire campaign, a tough-talking address that echoed the criticisms of the White House made by George W. Bush this year. In addition, while Mr. Lazio was pointed and detailed in offering criticism of Mr. Clinton's policies, at times sounding very much like Mr. Bush, he was comparatively vague in offering his own proposals and did not stop to hold a news conference with reporters today to discuss the speech. Echoing a line of attack that Mr. Bush has used against Vice President Al Gore presidential race, he also said the nation's armed forces had been hurt by cuts in defense spending and by being deployed on what he said were too many ill-defined overseas missions. ''America is once again headed toward a hollow military: the readiness and morale of our troops is in steep decline.''
 Op-Ed column by Gail Collins appraises Gov George W Bush's campaign as it travels through central Florida; says Bush has improved his delivery, but his message is same one he delivered during primaries; says if Bush wins election, it will be because Vice Pres Al Gore ran sodden, plodding campaign, and Bush stretched just enough to leap across a three-inch bar (M) ''The next president of the United States! He's my brother and I love him more than life!'' cries Florida's governor, Jeb Bush. As the Bush motorcade sped through central Florida this week, it was hard to decide who was having less fun -- Jeb, who got to hear himself referred to as ''my big little brother'' at every stop, or John McCain, whom George W. repeatedly thanked for his assistance in ''putting me through my paces'' in the New Hampshire primary. ''There is nobility in serving a cause greater than your self-interest, and that's what a Gore-Cheney presidency means,'' he told a crowd at Seminole Community College. It was what we in the Bush bubble like to call a subliminable moment. When George W. took the stage, he prowled back and forth, microphone in hand, shoulders just a little hunched, head jutting forward, talkin' trash about Al Gore as if they were scheduled for an upcoming rumble over the W.W.F. Intercontinental Television Championship Title Belt. The George W. Bush who's ending this campaign is a different candidate from the one who started it. Temperamentally, he's always been very even. (Given the fact that he's gotten virtually everything he's reached out for since his 40th birthday, a certain degree of sunniness seems like the least he could do.) But he no longer keeps referring every topic back to how they do things in Texas, and he's finally figured out how to explain his tax plan. At long last, he has applause lines. This has him so pleased and proud he's practically levitating. Except for a new fascination with prescription drugs for the elderly, Mr. Bush's issues are still the ones he was hammering away at during the primaries. The tax cut for wealthy Americans is still a matter of morality. (''It's the right thing to do! It's the right thing to give people's money back!'') He still avoids the sticky social issues, although in Florida the Boy Scouts suddenly popped up in his examples of the ''vast army of compassion'' the government has to encourage. He's still promising to end gridlock in Washington, as if he were an emissary from another continent preparing to negotiate a truce between the Gegs and the Tosks. He still promises to let the young'uns invest their Social Security money, and he is still not telling how much the government will cut their benefits in return. But if he wins the election, it will be because Al Gore ran a sodden, plodding campaign, and Mr. Bush stretched just enough to leap across a three-inch bar. Plus, he had much better fireworks.
 Many voters, Ms. Michelman argues, simply do not believe that Gov. George W. Bush, as president, would try to end most legalized abortion. Many voters, Ms. Michelman argues, simply do not believe that Gov. George W. Bush, as president, would try to end most legalized abortion. Anti-abortion forces counter that voters know exactly what they would be getting with Mr. Bush and are glad of it: an anti-abortion president and a fundamental shift in the abortion and reproductive health policies of the last eight years. On paper, the candidates offer a stark choice: Vice President Al Gore is a supporter of abortion rights, while Mr. Bush is on record supporting a constitutional amendment that would outlaw abortion except in cases of rape, incest or when the life of the pregnant woman was in danger. Yet Mr. Bush has sent many signals, and has occasioned endless speculation about how energetically he would try to end abortion as president. His critics say Mr. Bush has done a masterful job of neutralizing, if not burying, an issue that has tormented past Republican nominees, who are often torn between the party's anti-abortion base and the independent suburban voters who decide elections. Abortion rights groups contend that many voters, including many independent and Republican women who support abortion rights, are either unaware of Mr. Bush's stand or do not believe he would pursue it. David J. Garrow, a historian at Emory University and a scholar of the abortion rights movement, said, ''Abortion rights groups should not be surprised in the slightest that their voters do not seem frightened, because Governor Bush has consistently, for many months now, worked very hard to seem unfrightening to pro-choice voters.'' Mr. Bush's political adroitness on the abortion issue has also involved giving enough quiet reassurance to right-to-life advocates that they have not revolted when, among other things, he has said he would not have a litmus test on the issue for his federal court nominees. ''Here's someone who openly professes to be pro-life, and on those issues that are politically possible, he's with us, whereas we know Al Gore to be hostile,'' said Richard Lessner, vice president of American Renewal, the lobbying organization associated with the conservative Family Research Council. On the other hand, Mr. Lessner added: ''There's never a guarantee.  We have to remember that the previous President Bush appointed Justice Souter, so there's a certain risk there.'' Justice David H. Souter proved to be a bitter disappointment to conservatives after he took the bench, often voting with the liberal bloc. Gloria Feldt, head of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, the group's political arm, argued that a Bush presidency ''will be devastating to reproductive rights and health as we have come to know it in this country.'' Each side is campaigning hard at the grass roots. For the first time in its 84-year history, Planned Parenthood has plunged into presidential politics, with a $7 million advertising campaign focused on women in seven close states. ''I don't want government in my private life, telling me what to do,'' a woman says in one of the group's television commercials.  ''And that's why I have a problem with George W. Bush.'' And this week the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, or Naral, said it would begin running commercials in swing states where Ralph Nader, the Green Party presidential nominee, is strong. The advertisement warns that a vote for Mr. Nader would come at the expense of Mr. Gore, and could give Mr. Bush an opportunity to appoint anti-abortion justices. Ms. Tobias, while declining to discuss the details of her side's efforts, said, ''Grass-roots pro-lifers are excited and energized about George Bush'' and will ''do whatever they can to help him win.'' Indeed, each candidate is a lightning rod to the other side. Mr. Gore has become an unswerving supporter of abortion rights, with the whole-hearted support of abortion rights groups. Although he opposed federal spending for abortions in his early years in Congress, he reversed his position after he entered the Senate and has supported such spending for many years. Anti-abortion forces assert he abandoned his principles because of his national ambitions. Governor Bush has engendered similar contempt from abortion rights advocates for embracing his party's anti-abortion platform plank.  ''I am pro-life,'' he said in a statement to the National Right to Life Convention in June 1999. With those moves, Governor Bush allayed most doubts on the right about his commitment to the cause. But Mr. Bush has also tried to allay the fears of more centrist voters by suggesting that a constitutional amendment is a very distant goal. (In fact, the last time such an amendment came to a vote in Congress was 1983.) In an interview on NBC last week, for example, he said, ''In America, it's not going to be outlawed until a lot of people change their minds. And there's going to be abortions, one way or the other.'' To the abortion rights side, Mr. Bush is trying to have it both ways. In a New York Times/CBS News poll conducted in early September, a fourth of Mr. Bush's supporters said they thought it was likely that he would appoint justices to the Supreme Court who would keep abortion a legal right. An additional 30 percent said they did not know what kind of justices Mr. Bush would appoint. For example, Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for Governor Bush, said the candidate ''does not support the use of federal taxpayers dollars for abortion or abortion counseling in the United States or internationally.'' Mr. Sullivan declined to elaborate, but abortion rights groups say they expect Mr. Bush to push for a ''gag rule'' on counseling about abortion in federally funded family planning clinics. President George Bush's administration pushed for such a rule. There has long been a ban on the use of federal money to perform most abortions. Mr. Bush is also advocating a much greater emphasis on abstinence; he argues that education programs urging sexual abstinence until marriage should get ''at least'' as much financing as teenage contraception programs. The newly approved abortion pill, RU-486, would also be treated very differently by a Bush administration.  The pill was banned in President Bush's administration, but was approved by the Food and Drug Administration this fall. Governor Bush said that he thought the approval was ''wrong,'' but that he did not believe a president could overturn it. Mr. Sullivan said, however, that Governor Bush would support the new restrictions on the drug now being pushed by Republicans in Congress, which would substantially reduce its availability.
 Vice Pres Al Gore visits liberal college town of Madison, Wis, considered Ralph Nader territory, and promotes his own 'progressive values' to more than 30,000 people; focuses his speech on Gov George W Bush, but he speaks fiercely to issues that have moved Nader supporters to stick with their man, who is being labeled by some as a spoiler; Gore says he has supported environmental issues for 24 years, and pledges never to back down; pledges to push for overhaul of campaign finance system, another central issue for Nader supporters; Wisconsin is one of six usually Democratic states where Nader could win enough of popular vote to throw electoral vote to Bush; Nader supporters there have so far spurned pleas from Democrats to stop promoting him; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore strode into Ralph Nader territory in this liberal college town today and promoted his own ''progressive values'' to more than 30,000 people, the biggest crowd he has drawn so far in his campaign and perhaps one of the most important. He focused his speech on Gov. George W. Bush, but his eye was on Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate who threatens to siphon enough votes here to cost him this state and perhaps five others, which, combined, could kill his hopes for the White House. Vice President Al Gore strode into Ralph Nader territory in this liberal college town today and promoted his own ''progressive values'' to more than 30,000 people, the biggest crowd he has drawn so far in his campaign and perhaps one of the most important. He focused his speech on Gov. George W. Bush, but his eye was on Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate who threatens to siphon enough votes here to cost him this state and perhaps five others, which, combined, could kill his hopes for the White House. In a 45-minute speech, Mr. Gore mentioned Mr. Nader's name only once, when he said that the big oil companies want people to ''vote for George Bush or in any case vote for Ralph Nader,'' a name he hesitated to utter then slid over quickly. ''For 24 years, I have never backed down or given up on the environment, and I never will in my whole life,'' Mr. Gore roared to the crowd, which roared back its approval. ''It won't be a symbolic act!'' Mr. Gore yelled. ''I'll fight like hell for it. Governor Bush is opposed to it. Once again, he's got his own proposal that's fuzzy and phony and does not do anything.'' ''I want you to tell anyone who is undecided, anyone who is leaning toward supporting another candidate'' -- here the crowd chuckled -- ''about the issues that we have discussed here this evening,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I want you to tell them the facts. I want you to disabuse them of some of the fuzzy logic and confusion that the other side has been trying to stoke. I want you to tell them that I'm perfectly aware that I may not always be the most exciting politician, but tell them that I will work hard for you every day and I will never let you down. I will never give up. I will always fight for you.'' In a feat of political organizing, the Gore campaign took over the streets around the Capitol. Gargantuan Gore pennants hung from towering construction cranes, and the last-minute addition of the singer Melissa Etheridge as a warm-up act helped turn out masses of supporters as the sun slipped behind the Capitol. Nader backers were kept at bay and out of the television shots by putting them in a separate ''protest area.'' Lt. Bill Housley of the Madison Police Department estimated the crowd at ''upwards of 30,000'' and said it was larger than the crowd that gathered to see Bill Clinton in 1992, although that was earlier in October. Recent polls in Wisconsin have ranged wildly, with Mr. Gore ahead in some and Mr. Bush ahead in others. But in either case, Mr. Nader is clearly a significant factor here in ''Madtown,'' one of the most liberal college towns in the country. Wisconsin is one of six usually Democratic states -- the other five are Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, Oregon and Washington -- where Mr. Nader could win enough of the popular vote to throw the electoral vote to Mr. Bush, perhaps allowing him to win the presidency. That is attracting strong campaign activity to Wisconsin, where Mr. Gore is returning on Monday and Mr. Bush is scheduled to appear on Saturday. Nader supporters here have so far spurned pleas from Democrats to stop promoting him. Mr. Bush is winning in Wisconsin, they argue, and so the state is no longer in the swing category and Mr. Nader's candidacy will not hurt the vice president. ''Four years of Bush wouldn't be an unmitigated disaster,'' he added, explaining that he had no qualms about voting for Mr. Nader even if it cost Mr. Gore the election. Like Mr. Jahnke, much of the crowd here was under 30, and Mr. Gore sprinkled his speech with the youth-speak that he often uses to show a certain hipness. ''Hull-oh?'' he said at one point. ''Give me a break!'' he pleaded at another. Describing a Bush position, he said: ''What is that all about?'' And in a new interactive play with his crowds, he asked those here ''what kind of math'' Mr. Bush based his proposals on. ''Fuzzy!'' came the reply. Mr. Gore was accompanied to the stage by his daughter Kristin and an actor, Bradley Whitford, who plays Josh, the deputy chief of staff, on the television series ''The West Wing.'' He proclaimed Mr. Gore ''the single most-qualified'' person to run for president and Mr. Bush ''the single least-qualified.'' Mr Whitford added: ''With all due respect, Mr. Bush, your record in Texas stinks,'' and he said this election had real consequences. ''This ain't no stinking TV show,'' he declared. Mr. Gore's decision not to mention Mr. Nader directly was based on his desire to talk about issues, said Bob Shrum, one of his top media advisers. That is the way Mr. Gore feels most comfortable in making his appeal, Mr. Shrum said, adding, ''He's not here to make a political argument.'' ''The big polluters are supporting Governor Bush and they are wanting to be in control of the environmental policies. In his state of Texas -- I've talked about some of the statistics there -- they're No. 1 in something. They rank No. 1 out of all 50 in industrial pollution. They rank No. 1 as the smoggiest state. Houston just solidified its title as the smoggiest city. He put a lobbyist for the chemical manufacturers in charge of enforcing the environmental laws. Made some of the environmental laws voluntary. And then the state sank in its ratings.
 Many Oregon voters are agonizing over voting for Ralph Nader or Vice Pres Al Gore; Democratic leaders have mounted ferocious appeal to convince such people that vote for Nader is tantamount to vote for Gov George W Bush, but many voters in state will not accept that argument; Oregon has voted for Democratic presidential nominee in last three elections, but Bush stands good chance of winning state and its seven electoral votes if Nader draws away critical votes from Gore in large cities; many who support Nader say main point is not to elect him president, but to get him 5 percent of total vote, which would award Green Party federal campaign funds for 2004 presidential election; photos (M) In the downtown streets of the biggest city in Oregon, it is remarkably easy to find people who say they are truly struggling with how to cast their vote this year. But it is remarkably difficult to find people in that group who see the decision as a choice between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Instead, the choice they find so agonizing is between Mr. Gore and Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate. In the downtown streets of the biggest city in Oregon, it is remarkably easy to find people who say they are truly struggling with how to cast their vote this year. But it is remarkably difficult to find people in that group who see the decision as a choice between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush. Instead, the choice they find so agonizing is between Mr. Gore and Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate. Democratic leaders here and around the country have mounted a ferocious appeal to convince such people that a vote for Mr. Nader is tantamount to a vote for Mr. Bush. But while this argument weighs heavily on many minds here, there are also many voters who will have none of it. Oregon is the closest thing to Nader country, after all, where polls suggest his support is higher than in any other state. ''I'd like to vote for Nader, I really would,'' explained Kevin McGrorty,  31, the proprietor of Bad Kitty Koffee, a sidewalk stand. ''I like what he stands for. I like the questions he's raising. But I've got to vote for Gore. I'd feel horribly guilty if I woke up the day after the election and Bush won, and if I felt that my particular vote had in any way could have swayed things toward him.'' But no such conflict troubled one of Mr. McGrorty's customers, Danielle DeDee, a sales clerk at a local gallery and a fiercely pro-Nader voter. She knows her candidate is an extreme long shot on Nov. 7, though she said that was no reason to withhold a vote for him. And though she firmly believes that Governor Bush, of Texas, is ''dangerous,'' especially on environmental issues, that does not mean that she would rather see Mr. Gore become president. ''If Bush gets in, I feel that it might bring things to a head much more quickly,'' Ms. DeDee said. ''Pollution's going to increase in the short term, but I think that will bring a lot more people into the environmental movement a lot more quickly. Sometimes you've got to hit bottom before you come back up.'' But with plenty of support in the suburbs and rural regions of the state, Mr. Bush stands a very good chance of winning this state and its seven electoral votes if Mr. Nader drains away critical votes from Mr. Gore in cities like Portland and the college town, Eugene. The same dynamic is at work in neighboring Washington State, and in some Midwestern states like Minnesota and Wisconsin, and perhaps even in California, the biggest electoral prize of all. But in no other state but Oregon does there seem to be more of a risk for Mr. Gore. That goes a long way toward explaining why the vice president showed up here at a rally on Sunday night, pledging to ''fight to protect the environment with all my heart and soul.'' Polls this year in Oregon have shown Mr. Nader with support ranging from 5 percent all the way into double digits. An American Research Group poll of 600 likely Oregon voters, taken Oct. 20-24 and released today, showed Mr. Bush with 45 percent, Mr. Gore with 41 percent, and Mr. Nader with 10 percent. (Of self-identified Republicans, just 1 percent said they were for Mr. Nader; among Democrats, the figure was 12 percent.) The margin of sampling error for the entire group surveyed is plus or minus four percentage points. The advertisements are aimed at voters in states with significant percentages of people who have indicated they support Mr. Nader. They focus on issues such as the environment or the prospects that Supreme Court nominees under a Bush presidency would be far more hostile to abortion rights than those who would be selected if Mr. Gore wins. The argument that a vote for Mr. Nader could help put Mr. Bush in the White House seems to be backfiring.  ''It's manipulative,'' said Joe Reinhorn, a shipping clerk for a computer parts company. ''Some of my friends are arguing, 'Well, Bush is really bad, and Gore is somewhat bad, so it's important to vote for Gore.' Whatever happened to voting your conscience?'' In some cases, the choice has split households. Susan Harlan, an associate professor of art at Portland State University, said she is veering toward Mr. Nader while her husband backs Mr. Gore. ''He loves Nader, but he does not want to see George W. Bush in the White House,'' she explained. ''I appreciate Nader's left-leaningness,'' said Steve Fosler, who owns an architectural firm. ''But a vote for Nader takes a vote away from Gore. It's as simple as that. Tim Hibbitts, an independent pollster in Portland, has calculated that among those who indicate a preference for Mr. Nader in the polls, about half are unlikely to change their minds, in part because they view both major parties as ''two peas in a very corrupt pod.'' The other half, he said, are more up in the air, and may well decided to weigh in on the Bush-Gore match-up if the race looks to be very close in their state, which it certainly does now. ''If it wasn't so close, I'd go for Nader for sure, just to show my support for what he's talking about,'' he said. ''But if it's close, I want to be realistic. If there's really a chance of Bush getting elected, I guess I'd like to have a say about that. I don't want that to happen.''
 ''If he vetoes the tax bill, there will not be another tax bill,'' said Rep. Roy Blunt, a Republican from Missouri, the liaison between House Republicans and the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''Let the next president sign an even better tax bill.''
 Roster of states that are tossups in general election is expanding in closing days of presidential campaign, forcing Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore to hustle around nation even more than past nominees; total of 18 states are still in play; shift has given voters in several states much greater attention--and influence--than in past; maps (M) The roster of states that are tossups in the general election is actually expanding in the closing days of the presidential campaign, a marked departure from previous elections and one that has forced Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore to hustle around the nation even more than past nominees. The roster of states that are tossups in the general election is actually expanding in the closing days of the presidential campaign, a marked departure from previous elections and one that has forced Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore to hustle around the nation even more than past nominees. But with polls in so many states within the margin of sampling error, the Bush and Gore operations are pumping resources and campaign time into states that they never expected to be in play. Most of the shifting is occurring on traditionally Democratic turf. The Bush campaign has sought to wrest away states like Wisconsin, Minnesota and West Virginia, all of which went Democratic in the last three national elections. Democrats are making inroads in Florida, a state Republicans never expected they would have to vigorously defend. The ever-changing electoral puzzle has forced both sides to upend their closing game plans. Mr. Bush, sensing he can win Wisconsin, flew to Milwaukee for a rally on Monday and is returning to the state on Saturday. Mr. Gore popped up this evening in Madison. And he added more stops in the state for Monday. ''There's just so much territory, too many places to visit,'' said Gov. Gary Locke of Washington, a Democrat. ''I wish for Gore that there were 48 hours in the day and it was daylight every hour of the day -- and that he could survive on two minutes of sleep.'' Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, a Republican, who stumped in his state today with Mr. Bush, put it this way: ''I can't imagine a race since 1960 where there were so many places in play. It's pretty remarkable. Maybe it's a sign that the strength of party affiliation in this day and age isn't as strong as it used to be, and appeals to independent-thinking folks on either side may be attractive.'' Because so many states are toss-ups, polls show that Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are far short of the magic 270 electoral votes needed to win the White House. Mr. Bush has a slight edge in the state-by-state count, but the map is quite fluid. Adding to the uncertainty and trepidation on both sides is that many polls are far from infallible. This was demonstrated just this week, when a poll published on Monday found that Mr. Bush was nine percentage points ahead here in Wisconsin. Today, another survey was published that said Mr. Gore was seven points ahead. ''Our whole schedule is last minute,'' said Tad Devine, a strategist for Mr. Gore. ''We want to retain complete flexibility about potential electoral targets. We constantly have scheduling meetings involving senior staff to look at the research and revise the schedule.'' The race is so tight in these states that officials in both campaigns said they were braced for the unlikely, but certainly possible, prospect that Mr. Gore could reach the White House by capturing the electoral college while Mr. Bush could prevail in the popular vote. The last time there was such an outcome was in 1888, when Benjamin Harrison defeated Grover Cleveland. Under that sequence of events, Mr. Bush would be more likely to win the popular vote because in many big states like Texas he is poised to win with larger margins than Mr. Gore is in the states where he is ahead. ''It's a very serious question,'' said Mark A. Siegel, a Democrat who is an authority on the Electoral College and a fellow at American University. ''You could have a situation where clearly Gore can have 300 Electoral College votes and Bush could have a million more popular votes and lose significantly in the Electoral College. It would be a legal election. But we don't know whether a president elected that way could legitimately govern.'' The principal reason the candidates ventured into Illinois was to go to Chicago to raise money -- or appeal to women nationwide by appearing on the ''Oprah'' program. But in a season of ever-changing calculations, even that could change. The Bush campaign, sensing that Mr. Gore could be newly vulnerable in Illinois, announced today that it would begin running commercials there. Beyond the close race, the altered map reflects other factors in the campaign. Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, threatens to drain votes from Mr. Gore in states like Wisconsin, Minnesota and Washington, and that has contributed to the competitiveness. In other states, local issues have been engaged. In West Virginia, for example, traditionally a Democratic state, Mr. Gore has troubles in coal country because of his reputation as a champion of the environment. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, said: ''There really is a changing map. The old paradigm is decaying. Part of it is changing demographics and part of it is two different candidates and issue agendas.'' Traditionally, Republicans built their electoral base on a clear swath down the midsection of the country, from the Dakotas to Nebraska to Texas. The party also has long been potent in western states, including Idaho, Utah and Arizona, as well as in the South. Mr. Bush has enjoyed strong support in all those states. But this year, Mr. Gore is struggling in Washington and Oregon and, while he appears safe in most of the Northeast, finds himself in a tight race in Pennsylvania. ''If you think of this as a football game, we're on their 30-yard line,'' said Matthew Dowd, a Bush strategist. ''They're not contesting any of the Republican base states. I would not have expected Wisconsin to be leaning in our direction. I would never have guessed that we would have been contesting West Virginia, Minnesota and Tennessee.'' But Mr. Devine countered that a must state for Mr. Bush, Florida, is up for grabs, and said that it was inevitable that the battle would be largely on Democratic turf because Democrats won the White House the last two elections. ''We haven't seen this kind of attention in years,'' said Gov. Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin, a Republican. ''Bush has been here 10 times in 12 months. And he's coming again Friday night.'' Bob Dole, Mr. Thompson said, drew ''very minuscule'' interest in this state in 1996, and in 1992, President Bush took ''his ill-fated train trip across Wisconsin and it was all collapsing around him.'' Questioning polls showing that Mr. Nader has cost Mr. Gore support in Wisconsin, Mr. Feingold said: ''The Nader candidacy is helping energize the race for Democrats and progressives in a way that's going to help Gore. It's going to lead to a better turnout.'' One state that is even more traditionally Democratic is Minnesota. The governor, Jesse Ventura, an independent, said the Nader candidacy and lack of enthusiasm for either Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore would probably help the Texas governor. While some experts predicted a virtual dead heat on Election Day, most said they expected Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore to pick up momentum by the middle of next week or into the last weekend.
 The petulance of the Democrats who support Ralph Nader is staggering. Barbara Ehrenreich (Op-Ed, Oct. 26) writes that she ''will be sorry if George Bush defeats Al Gore,'' but if he does, ''don't expect me to be apologetic.'' The petulance of the Democrats who support Ralph Nader is staggering. Barbara Ehrenreich (Op-Ed, Oct. 26) writes that she ''will be sorry if George Bush defeats Al Gore,'' but if he does, ''don't expect me to be apologetic.''
 BOY SCOUTS TAKE ISSUE -- The campaign of Gov. George W. Bush stirred up unhappiness yesterday on an unusual front: The Boy Scouts of America want the campaign to excise a 3 1/2-second image of scouts raising a flag from a new commercial, which talks about education and never mentions the scouts directly. Gregg Shields, national spokesman for the scouts, said their lawyer had told Bush campaign that ''it would be inappropriate to imply any endorsement by the Boy Scouts of America.'' Mr. Shields said such use of scout pictures in political ads happened from time to time, but the spots were ordinarily altered after complaints. Mindy Tucker, speaking for the Bush campaign in Austin, said no complaint had been received. BOY SCOUTS TAKE ISSUE -- The campaign of Gov. George W. Bush stirred up unhappiness yesterday on an unusual front: The Boy Scouts of America want the campaign to excise a 3 1/2-second image of scouts raising a flag from a new commercial, which talks about education and never mentions the scouts directly. Gregg Shields, national spokesman for the scouts, said their lawyer had told Bush campaign that ''it would be inappropriate to imply any endorsement by the Boy Scouts of America.'' Mr. Shields said such use of scout pictures in political ads happened from time to time, but the spots were ordinarily altered after complaints. Mindy Tucker, speaking for the Bush campaign in Austin, said no complaint had been received. IACOCCA SPEAKS OUT FOR BUSH -- Lee A. Iacocca, the former Chrysler chairman who became a household name in the 1980's by appearing in car commercials, is now appearing in a Republican television campaign in Michigan, contending that Vice President Al Gore's views on the environment are a threat to jobs in the state's automotive industry. ''Al Gore may see the car as our enemy, but in Michigan, it's our jobs,'' Mr. Iacocca says in the 30-second television commercials, designed to help Gov. George W. Bush steal some of the heavily Democratic auto union vote. He accuses Mr. Gore of holding extreme views on vehicles, the internal combustion engine and the effect of exhaust emissions on global warming. Democratic leaders in the state are already firing back at Mr. Iacocca, saying that he was never a true friend of auto workers. ELECTION GUIDE IS FOUND LACKING -- Third-party candidates do not agree on many issues, but in Denver they agree on one: The Rocky Mountain News has treated them unfairly, they say. The newspaper's 24-page election guide published last Sunday all but ignored them. The only third-party candidates mentioned were those running for president. They received a line each, compared with full reports on Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. The Denver Post, a rival, published a 52-page election guide, including information on all candidates who provided some. On Wednesday, representatives from Colorado's third parties -- Libertarian, Reform, Green, Natural Law and Constitution -- took to the streets, protesting in front of the newspaper's downtown offices. FUN WITH STATE CAPITALS -- In the end, it was hard to tell whether he had taught her so well after all. Vice President Al Gore's 23-year-old daughter, Kristin, a comedy writer for the Fox TV program ''Futurama,'' has been introducing her father at rallies in the Pacific Northwest. In her lighthearted speeches, she has credited him with teaching her to list the Beatles' albums in chronological order and with grilling her on state capitals. At a rally in Portland, Ore., on Sunday night, she demonstrated his pedagogical skill by announcing that the capital of Oregon was Salem, while admitting that she used to ''fall into the Portland trap.'' But at a rally later in the week in Everett, Wash., it was hard to know whether she was joking, or had fallen into another trap of the Pacific Northwest. ''He also was the guy,'' she said of her father, ''who helped me study for my third-grade state capital quiz. Seattle. Got it down.'' The crowd hissed loud enough to be heard in Olympia, the real state capital. Gore aides later insisted the line was just one of her standard jokes. ED ASNER ON THE LINE -- Democrats have begun making tens of thousands of recorded phone calls featuring the actor Ed Asner assailing George W. Bush's Social Security plan. The calls, begun over the weekend in several battleground states, echo the message being delivered this week in more than $10 million worth of television advertising. A direct-mail blitz is to follow. Like the television commercials and the letters about to be mailed, the phone calls suggest Mr. Bush cannot maintain benefits for retirees and at the same time allow younger workers to divert some of their tax money into private accounts. ''George W. Bush has a proposal that would undermine Social Security, even threatening current benefits,'' warns Mr. Asner, an advocate of liberal causes who is best known for playing Lou Grant on ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show.'' He says that ''intelligent changes'' are needed in the Social Security program ''but not at the cost of current retirees.'' THE NUMBERS -- Vice President Al Gore took his message of environmental prosperity to Midwestern swing states yesterday, while Gov. George W. Bush headed for Pennsylvania, an Eastern swing state. The numbers: Length of Official Day: Gore, 18 hours; Bush 13 hours States Visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3 Official Events: Gore, 5; Bush 3 Cities/Towns Visited: Gore, 4 (Moline, Ill., Davenport, Iowa; Madison, Wis., and Charleston, W.V.); Bush, 4 (Tampa, Fla.; Pittsburgh and Erie, Pa.; and Toledo, Ohio) Miles traveled: Gore, 920; Bush, 1172 Main message: Gore, environment; Bush, leadership
 The presidential campaign is not a game or a publicity machine. It is supposed to give us a choice between candidates. Whoever wins will profoundly affect the lives of every resident of the United States. If Mr. Nader's efforts give us George W. Bush as president, we will suffer profoundly in ways every Democrat is aware of. The presidential campaign is not a game or a publicity machine. It is supposed to give us a choice between candidates. Whoever wins will profoundly affect the lives of every resident of the United States. If Mr. Nader's efforts give us George W. Bush as president, we will suffer profoundly in ways every Democrat is aware of.
 Susan Gellman letter praises Ralph Nader's campaign for bringing important issues to forefront, but urges him now to throw support to Al Gore (S) But he's accomplished that. And now that the race is so tight, it is unfortunately true that a vote for Mr. Nader is a vote for George W. Bush.  Many Nader supporters would welcome a green light from their candidate to vote pragmatically under these circumstances. The Nader campaign is a success  because it reached its goals of education and enlightenment. For Mr. Nader to give Al Gore his support would be further success, not surrender.
 Diversity in national elections should be a hallmark of the electoral process, in which many voices both inside and outside political office contribute to the debate about America's future. By framing this debate and election in ''Al Gore or George W. Bush'' terms, you do a disservice to democracy.
 Evidently, Al Gore's supporters feel the Nader threat enough to mount serious campaigns against him in swing states (front page, Oct. 25). But this ''serious'' campaign's only argument seems to be the Ralph Nader-as-spoiler argument. How about keeping voters away from Mr. Nader by challenging his policies? Evidently, Al Gore's supporters feel the Nader threat enough to mount serious campaigns against him in swing states (front page, Oct. 25). But this ''serious'' campaign's only argument seems to be the Ralph Nader-as-spoiler argument. How about keeping voters away from Mr. Nader by challenging his policies?
 Ms. Ehrenreich inadvertently confirms the case against the supporters of Ralph Nader. She says ''it is not clear that the poor would fare very well under another four years of Democratic rule.'' It is true that the differences between George W. Bush's campaign and the Clinton-Gore record on welfare and the minimum wage are marginal. But by definition, the poorest in society are those for whom marginal differences count most -- something clearly not understood by Mr. Nader's relatively privileged supporters. Ms. Ehrenreich should realize that politics is about real choices, not ideal ones.
 If third parties were actively in the debate process, it might be Mr. Nader who would be saying a vote for Al Gore is a vote for George W. Bush.
 Bush and Gore campaigns and two major parties have surgically sliced up advertising map to rare level, spending more than $100 million thus far to run commercials in only about 20 states in which polls show contest to be close; Kansas is not one of them; Kansas, with 6 electoral votes and strong Republican voting tradition, will almost certainly go for Bush; residents of other states are being inundated with campaign spots, but Kansans have not seen one; lack of campaign on the air makes campaign seem more of abstraction to many in state; map (M) The airwaves of southwestern Kansas are commercial free at least as far as the Bush and Gore campaigns are concerned. There are no 30-second spots with a grinning Gov. George W. Bush on television here, no soft-focus montages of a glad-handing Vice President Al Gore. The airwaves of southwestern Kansas are commercial free at least as far as the Bush and Gore campaigns are concerned. There are no 30-second spots with a grinning Gov. George W. Bush on television here, no soft-focus montages of a glad-handing Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Daniels added that he felt so detached from the race that he did not even respond when the Gore campaign offered to send him some yard signs. He says he may even vote for Ralph Nader, the Green nominee. With its strong Republican voting tradition and the near certainty that it will go for Mr. Bush, Kansas might as well be in the South Pacific as in the middle of the country, for all the attention paid to it. Not even a distant relation of Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush, residents say, has come to campaign in the cattle-and-grain belt of southwest Kansas. But the region is by no means unique. The Bush and Gore campaigns and the two major parties have surgically sliced up the advertising map to a rare level this year, spending well more than $100 million thus far to run commercials in only about 20 states in which the polls show the contest to be close. Kansas is not one of them. Indeed, even though the presidential contest is the closest in decades, nearly half of the nation's top 75 media markets have not broadcast a single presidential commercial. As a result, the nation has been divided into electronic haves and have-nots. Consider, for example, New Jersey, which has no network affliates of its own and is served by the largest and fourth-largest media markets in the nation. Southern New Jersey is being deluged with advertising because it is in the media orbit of Philadelphia, in the swing state of Pennsylvania. But northern New Jersey sees virtually no presidential spots, because New York City is in a state considered safe for Mr. Gore. (New Jersey itself, initially thought to be a swing state, seems safely in Mr. Gore's column.) Local residents like Gladys Reece, retired from the J. C. Penney's here, and Walter Page, a retired plasterer, and his wife, Virginia, who works for a title search company, said that they had gleaned a lot about the presidential candidates from the debates, and that that helped them decide whom to support; Ms. Reece is leaning toward Mr. Gore, while the Pages favor Mr. Bush.
 It is still possible that a spurt of spending could occur at the end of the race. Mrs. Clinton's aides, while acknowledging that these groups have not been a significant factor so far, say that they fear a sudden attack by an existing or little-known one. They note that just before the Republican presidential primary in New York in March, a newly created group that supported Gov. George W. Bush of Texas paid for commercials attacking Mr. Bush's opponent, Senator John McCain of Arizona.
 The fund-raising event sponsored by Mr. Saeed's group for Mrs. Clinton and the endorsement this week of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas by an umbrella Muslim American organization that includes the American Muslim Alliance were political activities gleaned from the basic textbook of American politics. Mr. Saeed, Mr. Al-Marayati and a growing number of Muslim Americans across the country have spent much of the past decade trying to make inroads in politics and to avoid those pitfalls. Four of the biggest groups recently formed a joint political organization, the American Muslim Political Coordination Council Political Action Committee, which made its first major Muslim American presidential endorsement this week -- for Mr. Bush.
 Soon, predicted Sig Rogich, a well-connected Las Vegas public-relations man who once worked in the Bush White House, legitimate theaters will be built here to house major musicals.
 Oct 26 Economic Scene column about Vice Pres Al Gore's proposals for projected budget surplus misstated surname of executive director of Working Families Party; he is Daniel Cantor The Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday, about Vice President Al Gore's proposals for the projected budget surplus, misstated the surname of the executive director of the Working Families Party. He is Daniel Cantor, not Cohen. The Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday, about Vice President Al Gore's proposals for the projected budget surplus, misstated the surname of the executive director of the Working Families Party. He is Daniel Cantor, not Cohen.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in socially conservative western parts of Pennsylvania, important swing state, calling presidential race a matter of values; questions Vice Pres Al Gore's integrity, courage and moral character; Bush, seeking to bolster theme that he would deal better than Gore with military matters, is accompanied by Gen Colin L Powell, who echoes Republican criticism of Clinton administration's military policies; Bush is also accompanied around state by Gov Tom Ridge; photo (M) Stumping through the socially conservative western reaches of this important swing state, Gov. George W. Bush today questioned the integrity, courage and moral character of Vice President Al Gore and called the presidential race a matter of values. With thinly veiled references to the ethical travails of the Clinton administration, Mr. Bush pledged to usher in ''a responsibility era'' in which government would be smaller, less intrusive and guided by clear morals. Stumping through the socially conservative western reaches of this important swing state, Gov. George W. Bush today questioned the integrity, courage and moral character of Vice President Al Gore and called the presidential race a matter of values. With thinly veiled references to the ethical travails of the Clinton administration, Mr. Bush pledged to usher in ''a responsibility era'' in which government would be smaller, less intrusive and guided by clear morals. ''In my administration, we will ask not only what is legal but also what is right, not just what the lawyers allow but what the public deserves,'' Mr. Bush told more than 1,000 boisterous supporters at the Soldiers and Sailors Museum here in Pittsburgh. ''In my administration, we will make it clear there is the controlling legal authority of conscience.'' The Bush campaign plans to highlight the responsibility message in a television commercial that will begin running on Friday in Illinois and in California, a state that was considered in Mr. Gore's column just a few weeks ago but now seems in play. ''I believe we need to encourage personal responsibility so people are accountable for their actions,'' Mr. Bush says in the 30-second spot. ''There's a big difference in philosophy between my opponent and me. He trusts government. I trust you.'' ''One of the reasons the race in Pennsylvania has tightened is that Gore is slipping in western Pennsylvania,'' said G. Terry Madonna, a political scientist at Millersville University. Mr. Bush was accompanied today by a native of western Pennsylvania, Gov. Tom Ridge. And, to bolster his theme that he would deal better than Mr. Gore with military matters, he  brought along to the Soldiers and Sailors Museum three Medal of Honor winners and Gen. Colin L. Powell, who introduced him. ''He understands,'' General Powell said, ''that the first responsibility of a president is to serve as commander of chief of the armed forces of the United States.'' Echoing Republican criticism of the Clinton administration's military policies, the general added that Mr. Bush would make sure American troops sent to fight overseas would go with ''clear missions'' and ''be given everything they need to win, to win decisively.'' But Mr. Bush touched only briefly on military issues, focusing instead on ''responsibility,'' a word he used in some formulation at least 25 times in a speech of roughly 20 minutes. The governor, who afterward met privately with the Roman Catholic bishop of Pittsburgh, Donald W. Wuerl, set the moral tone of his address early by talking longer than usual about his wife, Laura, who was at home in Austin. ''We've got a great, great relationship,'' Mr. Bush said. ''As a matter of fact, our marriage is even stronger than it was before, after this campaign. Yeah, it was strong to begin with.'' Though he frequently criticizes Mr. Gore as a negative campaigner, Mr. Bush salted his speech with not-so-subtle digs at the vice president's  personality, which some critics describe as pedantic or overbearing. ''Lectures don't replace leadership,'' Mr. Bush said at one point. But more often the governor attacked Mr. Gore's character, asserting that he lacked the constancy or vision to be a strong leader. ''A good leader is predictable; he doesn't try to be all things to all people, or change personalities, say, for different debates,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I believe when it is all said and done, America will realize my opponent's campaign is a fitting close to the Clinton-Gore years. They are going out as they came in: their guide, the nightly polls; their goal, the morning headlines; their legacy, the fruitless search for a legacy.'' Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore candidacy, derided Mr. Bush's speech as evidence that his campaign was ''getting very, very nervous'' about what she described as his declining poll numbers, although  in fact most national polls continue to show the race too close to call. ''George Bush,'' Ms. Spell said, ''is trying to divert attention away from the fact that he lacks the experience and judgment to lead this nation.'' Mr. Bush also used the themes of trust and responsibility to try to draw stark contrasts between his policy proposals and Mr. Gore's. He would trust taxpayers to invest part of their Social Security taxes in private investment accounts, he said, while Mr. Gore would not. He would give parents the freedom to use federal education aid for private schools or tutoring, while Mr. Gore would not. He would give all workers tax cuts, while Mr. Gore would give tax relief only to the ''right'' people, as determined by bureaucrats. ''I believe government works best when it relies on the good judgment and the common sense of the people themselves,'' Mr. Bush said. ''In a responsibility era, government must trust the people. And in return, in a responsibility era, people should be able to trust their government.'' Outside the soldiers museum, the Bush motorcade was met by 20 students from the University of Pittsburgh who were chanting: ''Sexist, racist, antigay! George W., go away!'' Some of the students carried the green signs of Ralph Nader's Green Party ticket, while others waved blue Gore-Lieberman posters. ''We're trying to convince the Nader people to vote for Gore,'' said one protest organizer, Brandon Harris, vice president of the University of Pittsburgh Democrats. ''But we're all against Bush.''
 Gore Woos Progressives  Before more than 30,000 people in Madison, Wis., Ralph Nader territory, Al Gore promoted his own ''progressive values.'' Gore Woos Progressives  Before more than 30,000 people in Madison, Wis., Ralph Nader territory, Al Gore promoted his own ''progressive values.''
