 National and local Democratic officials fan out to nearly 100 cities in 28 hotly contested states, intensifying their assault on Gov George W Bush's job performance; introduce new video that savages Bush's record in Texas; new commercials by Bush campaign take softer tack; reiterate governor's thoughts and ideas about education, issue he has promoted on television since New Hampshire primary; photos (M) Intensifying their assault on Gov. George W. Bush's job performance, national and local Democratic officials fanned out to nearly 100 cities in 20 hotly contested states yesterday to introduce a new video that savages Mr. Bush's record in Texas on matters like air quality, schools, medical care and improving living conditions for the poor. The 10-minute tape, titled ''Texans: In Their Own Words,'' is the latest in a series of attacks by the Democrats on Mr. Bush's five years in office. While the party appears to be counting largely on local news outlets to convey the video's message to voters, the Democratic Party has also been running commercials in cities like Seattle, Des Moines and Tampa, Fla., to attack the governor's handling of issues of local concern. Intensifying their assault on Gov. George W. Bush's job performance, national and local Democratic officials fanned out to nearly 100 cities in 20 hotly contested states yesterday to introduce a new video that savages Mr. Bush's record in Texas on matters like air quality, schools, medical care and improving living conditions for the poor. The 10-minute tape, titled ''Texans: In Their Own Words,'' is the latest in a series of attacks by the Democrats on Mr. Bush's five years in office. While the party appears to be counting largely on local news outlets to convey the video's message to voters, the Democratic Party has also been running commercials in cities like Seattle, Des Moines and Tampa, Fla., to attack the governor's handling of issues of local concern. The latest spots by the Bush campaign and the Republican Party, meanwhile, take a much softer tack: in fact, two new Bush commercials that began running yesterday in many swing states merely reiterate the governor's thoughts and ideas about education, an issue he has promoted on television since the New Hampshire primary. ''Parents need tools to help them protect and nurture their families,'' Mr. Bush says in one of the new spots. In the other, he says, ''How come the hard things don't get done? Because they're hard. If we want to make sure no child gets left behind in America, we need the courage to do some tough things.'' The Democrats' continuing emphasis on Mr. Bush's home-state record is a reflection of a strategy of attack that has been tried in all recent elections against sitting or former governors who secure their party nomination for president. In the last 25 years, political analysts say, the tactic has succeeded only once, when then-Vice President George Bush famously disparaged Michael S. Dukakis's record in Massachusetts on pollution in Boston Harbor and shortcomings in a state prison furlough program. The sharp critiques issued by the Gore campaign and its supporters, Mr. West said, have placed the Democrats in an unconventional position. ''There's been a role reversal in this election, because typically the challenger goes on attack and the incumbent stays above the fray,'' he observed. ''And here you have Gore playing the challenger role.'' In its new video, the Democratic National Committee interviews several Texans with complaints about what they say are the Bush administration's neglectful attitudes about their problems. One segment features the destitute hamlets, or colonias, that are home to some of the poorest Texans. ''Governor Bush has never visited a colonia, so to the extent that that shows how much of a priority it is for him, may the American public decide,'' a former colonia resident comments. The Bush campaign took issue with that assertion, declaring in a statement that the governor had visited colonias ''three times'' while inspecting flood damage and being briefed on water and sewage problems. Tamara Maschino, for example, a resident of the Clear Lake area of Houston, criticizes Mr. Bush for his lack of attention to pollution problems from chemical plants near her home. ''We went to Governor Bush's office and spoke with John Howard, his top environmental aide,'' Ms. Maschino says in the video. ''We met him for over an hour. Nothing happened.'' Joe Andrew, national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said the aim of the video was to personalize the policy differences between Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore. ''The Gore campaign has been very willing to produce television spots for the purposes of a press release,'' he said, adding that it was a fairly economical tool.
 As Race Tightens, Gore Takes No State for Granted  Vice President Al Gore is devoting virtually his entire week to campaigning in smaller states that he should be able ignore -- even his home state, Tennessee -- instead of scrapping for votes in large swing states like Ohio and Michigan. With only two weeks to go until the election, Mr. Gore's schedule reflects the down-to-the-wire nature of the campaign and the way that factors as disparate as his personality and Ralph Nader's candidacy are playing havoc with the electoral map. Two daily tracking polls show that Vice President Gore has regained some of the ground he recently lost to Gov. George W. Bush. When four of the polls taken since the last debate are averaged together, Mr. Bush's support is 46 percent, Mr. Gore's 44 percent, Patrick J. Buchanan's 1 percent and Mr. Nader's 4 percent. Mr. Gore's stump speech has taken on a new urgency, focusing on what he calls ''the big choices'' -- Social Security, Medicare, health care, education and the economy. His message is that he would use the budget surplus responsibly, with discipline, while his opponent would squander it and drive the nation to ruin. Hitting Back on Social Security  Gov. George W. Bush said Vice President Al Gore's Social Security plan would create about $40 trillion in debt by the middle of the century, saddling future generations with a burden and leaving the system of financing the program unfixed. Governor Bush's campaign undertook one of the most complex and expensive political operations ever, dispatching 28 Republican governors to campaign in 13 contested states. Different Tacks on Political Ads  National and local Democratic officials fanned out to nearly 100 cities in 20 contested states to introduce a video assailing Gov. George W. Bush's record in Texas on matters like air quality, schools, medical care and the poor. The latest Republican campaign advertisements take a much softer tack, with two ads merely reiterating the governor's thoughts and ideas on education.
 Campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore takes on new urgency two weeks before presidential election, with stump speeches focused almost single-mindedly on what he calls 'big choices' needed to prolong economic prosperity; address at Martin Luther Junior High School in Philadelphia discussed; photo (M) With the clock ticking to Election Day, Vice President Al Gore's stump speech has taken on a new urgency. Gone are his leisurely strolls down memory lane; long absent is the once standard story of his father showing him slave chains in an old house in Tennessee. Gone is the fascination with suburban sprawl and traffic jams and lost luggage at airports, the focus on the hassles of daily life that threatened to turn the presidential campaign into a contest for the local zoning board. And, now that the three official debates are over and Mr. Gore has emerged in a weaker position than when he went into them, gone is his constant clamor for two or three debates a week. Gone too are the jokes, if not the humor. With the clock ticking to Election Day, Vice President Al Gore's stump speech has taken on a new urgency. Gone are his leisurely strolls down memory lane; long absent is the once standard story of his father showing him slave chains in an old house in Tennessee. Gone is the fascination with suburban sprawl and traffic jams and lost luggage at airports, the focus on the hassles of daily life that threatened to turn the presidential campaign into a contest for the local zoning board. And, now that the three official debates are over and Mr. Gore has emerged in a weaker position than when he went into them, gone is his constant clamor for two or three debates a week. Gone too are the jokes, if not the humor. Mr. Gore is now focused almost single-mindedly on what he calls ''the big choices'': Social Security, Medicare, health care, education and the economy. He has boiled his message down to its essence, a math problem, basically, that in his view has only one right answer: Mr. Gore would use the budget surplus responsibly, with discipline, while Gov. George W. Bush would squander it and drive the nation to ruin. ''Prosperity itself is on the ballot,'' Mr. Gore declares now in his most succinct argument for his candidacy. Coupled with this is a phrase that Governor Bush used against him in their first debate and that Mr. Gore has appropriated with great glee. ''Fuzzy math!'' Mr. Gore often shouts as he picks apart Mr. Bush's proposals for a tax cut and privatizing part of Social Security. ''Fuzzy math!'' To the disciplined Mr. Gore, this is a huge failing, and it seems to stick in his craw that Mr. Bush used it against him first. The new urgency was evident here on Saturday night, in a high school gymnasium so stuffy that the formal Mr. Gore rolled up his shirt sleeves and mopped his face with a white handkerchief as he delivered in a crisp 18 minutes the essentials of his message. The crowd of several hundred people was cheering most of the time and the acoustics were terrible, circumstances that forced the often wordy Mr. Gore to cut short his tendencies to overinstruct an audience and speak in run-on sentences. The larger circumstances -- Governor Bush's tiny lead in the polls, the nearness of Election Day, the demands on his dwindling time -- also forced him into a more direct message, leaving behind the desultory ramble through the high points of his parents' careers to a sharp and urgent plea for help on the eve of the closest presidential race in 40 years. This often happens over the course of a long campaign, although few have seemed as long as this one. A candidate spends the primary season introducing himself, uses his convention to define his themes and presses those themes through the fall. For Mr. Gore, this was a lengthy process that included a bitter primary battle against a left-leaning challenger, former Senator Bill Bradley, who forced the vice president to take more liberal positions than he might otherwise have. For Mr. Gore, the process has highlighted his search for both an identity and a message. His changing stump speech is a manifestation of that search. All year Mr. Gore has been trying to sort out how to take credit for the economy without bragging and without casting himself as President Clinton's eclipsed No. 2. He lays out the facts as he has all year, saying: ''We've turned the biggest deficits into the biggest surpluses. Instead of triple-dip recessions, we've seen a tripling of the stock market. Instead of high unemployment, we have the lowest African-American unemployment ever measured, the lowest Latino unemployment ever measured, 22 million new jobs and the strongest economy in the 224-year history of the United States of America.'' Mr. Gore has also dropped most references to himself. After months of ''introducing'' himself to the public, Mr. Gore is spending these final frantic weeks insisting that the race is about issues, not about personality. ''This is not about me and it's not about Governor Bush,'' he says in nearly every speech. ''It is about you and your family.'' As Mr. Gore emerged from his vice presidential shell, he was forced into a public search for a personal narrative to explain who he was and where he came from. For months, he dwelled on stories about his parents, whose up-from-the-hollers grit seemed more inspirational than the facts of Mr. Gore's own life, in which the drama was internal and the journey abstract. He talked about climbing Mount Rainier with his son, an arduous experience that he translated on the campaign trail into vague thoughts about scanning the horizon. Another staple was a line from the movie, ''Grand Canyon,'' in which a character says, ''It's not supposed to be this way.'' Mr. Gore often quoted Gandhi, saying, ''You must become the change you wish to see in the world.'' Another favorite was a line from the Spanish poet Antonio Machado: ''Traveler, there is no path. You make your path as you travel.'' These expressions were supposed to provide a glimpse into the sensitive side of Mr. Gore. But they added up to an existential question mark rather than a rationale for why he should be president. In these final urgent days, the elaborate scaffolding that Mr. Gore had constructed to help build his identity has fallen away. Now, he relates only essential biographical facts that serve a direct purpose. Distancing himself from Mr. Clinton is a subtext of Mr. Gore's speech. He almost never mentions the president's name, but evokes him nonetheless by promising: ''I won't always be the most exciting politician, but I will work hard for you every single day, and I will never let you down.'' What Mr. Gore has kept in his speech and what he has discarded is a response in part to changing political realities. In the primaries, for example, he would say that Mr. Bradley had not been a good Democrat. (Mr. Gore complained that Mr. Bradley ''quit'' the Senate after the Republicans took over and considered challenging the incumbent Democratic president, Mr. Clinton, in 1996.) Now that he is trying to win over independents and moderate Republicans, Mr. Gore tells audiences that he himself had a reputation in Congress as someone who worked across party lines. With this in mind, he has toned down the raging populism of early September. While he remains an advocate of abortion rights, he has begun to speak of seeking ''common ground'' with abortion opponents. The changing stump speech is also a reflection of what has worked and what has not. Mr. Gore has stopped branding Mr. Bush's tax-cut proposal a ''risky tax scheme,'' a phrase his top advisers concluded sounded too cliched and too harsh. He has also given up his promise for ''revolutionary change'' in education, a concept that left audiences more puzzled than energized. But he has not abandoned his assertion that ''we need to make education our No. 1 priority.'' Since ''Saturday Night Live'' made fun of him after the first debate for using the arcane word ''lockbox'' to describe where he would put the Social Security trust fund, Mr. Gore has been more self-conscious about the word. ''Use whatever word you want,'' he will say, but he will often fall back on lockbox. Topics that once loomed large have vanished altogether. He used to talk at length about gun control, pledging to make an issue of Mr. Bush's having signed a bill to allow gun owners to carry concealed weapons to church. But pro-gun commercials in hunter-heavy swing states like Pennsylvania and Michigan have forced him to scale back. Now, as he did in the debates, Mr. Gore emphasizes that he does not want to take firearms away from sportsmen.
 Major League Baseball's viewpoint was not pursued. Ed Goren, the president of Fox Sports, said that past practice dictated that top baseball officials would not comment on such an incident in the middle of the game -- or even at the end. By game's end, here was a chance to talk to Selig or Frank Robinson, baseball's disciplinarian. But Goren said he only cared to get Clemens. ''He was the story,'' he said. ''Everything else was speculation.'' There were candidates to fill time until Clemens appeared -- or until he declined to speak -- but Goren insisted, ''If we did three other interviews, I feared not getting Roger.''
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in Kansas City, Mo, ands Des Moines, Iowa, where he warns Vice Pres Al Gore's proposal for Social Security would create about $40 trillion in debt by middle of century, saddling future generations with an onerous burden and leaving system of financing program unfixed; Gore aides accuse Bush of trying to confuse voters; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush said today that Vice President Al Gore's proposal for Social Security would create about $40 trillion in debt by the middle of the century, saddling future generations with an onerous burden and leaving the system of financing the program unfixed. ''Long after Al Gore has left public office, the Gore debt will come due,'' Mr. Bush told a roaring crowd at a rally this morning in Kansas City, Mo., the first stop in a swing through crucial states in the Midwest. Gov. George W. Bush said today that Vice President Al Gore's proposal for Social Security would create about $40 trillion in debt by the middle of the century, saddling future generations with an onerous burden and leaving the system of financing the program unfixed. ''Long after Al Gore has left public office, the Gore debt will come due,'' Mr. Bush told a roaring crowd at a rally this morning in Kansas City, Mo., the first stop in a swing through crucial states in the Midwest. At that rally and one in Des Moines, Mr. Bush hammered at Mr. Gore's plan to keep Social Security solvent into the middle of the century by paying down the national debt, then funneling the savings from interest payments into Social Security. Mr. Bush's aides said the Gore plan was basically an accounting trick, a transfer of money from one place to another that would ultimately force the government to reduce spending or raise taxes. Mr. Gore's aides disputed that characterization. Mr. Bush, by contrast, has proposed allowing younger workers to invest some of their payroll taxes in private retirement accounts, saying that they would get a higher return on the money. That, presumably, would relieve pressure on the Social Security system and would create a new source of financing. But Mr. Bush has not explained how he would make this fundamental change without, at some point, having to pump extra money into Social Security or reduce benefits. Many experts have said that the cost of this transition could be formidable. Mr. Gore and other Democrats had spent much of the last week challenging Mr. Bush on that point and charging that he was endangering Social Security's ability to pay benefits to current retirees. Mr. Bush called that a scare tactic and produced the staggeringly high $40 trillion figure, guaranteed to grab headlines, to press his criticism that Mr. Gore was not reaching for bold solutions but simply reverting to an ingrained Democratic impulse to spend and spend. The governor presented the Social Security debate as an example of what he asserted was Mr. Gore's timidity, saying that the vice president was tinkering with problems that the country, in an era of prosperity, should solve once and for all. ''That's not leadership,'' Mr. Bush told workers at an ink manufacturing plant in Des Moines. ''That's not somebody who's willing to take on the tough issues and lead.'' Mr. Bush's aides said the $40 trillion figure was the amount, plus interest payments, that the government would have to transfer from the general fund into Social Security  by 2050 to keep the system solvent. The number came from a letter that the Congressional Budget Office sent last week to Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico, the Republican chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, in response to an inquiry about the president's Social Security plan. Bush aides said the vice president's plan was identical. But Gore aides questioned the arithmetic behind the number, along with the way the Bush campaign was interpreting it. They said the Bush campaign was ignoring a central fact: that the money Mr. Gore was proposing to transfer from the general fund to Social Security would be newly created savings on interest payments for the national debt. ''George W. Bush is trying to make voters as confused as he is,'' said Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign. ''This is a highly desperate attempt.'' But it illustrated how much attention Social Security was getting and how eager Mr. Bush was to frame his position as an example of the kind of innovative, fresh leadership he has pledged to take to Washington. He characterized Mr. Gore and the current administration as impediments to progress on issues like Social Security and Medicare because, Mr. Bush suggested, they were too mired in stale thinking and too addicted to partisan warfare. ''The Clinton-Gore administration has blocked reform at every turn,'' Mr. Bush said in Kansas City, Mo. The language Mr. Bush used to deride Mr. Gore was as sharp as it had ever been, reflecting the tightness of the contest and the little time  before Election Day. The fanfare with which his rallies and events were staged also reflected this. In Milwaukee, where Mr. Bush ended the day, he appeared before thousands of people in an enormous auditorium. On stage with him were most of the women -- including his wife, Laura, and Cindy McCain, the wife of Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona -- who had participated in a ''W Stands for Women'' tour in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Mr. Bush punched several themes today. He stressed that Mr. Gore did not trust Americans to make their own decisions, which is what he said people would be doing under his Social Security plan. He also contended that a Gore government would be a nonstop spending spree and, in doing so, seemed to indulge in the kind of partisan broadsides he was saying that a Bush administration would transcend. For example, he repeatedly sought to lump Mr. Gore with two liberal, failed Democratic presidential nominees, Walter F. Mondale and Michael S. Dukakis, by saying that their combined spending proposals were less than Mr. Gore's. During this campaign, Americans have seen my priorities. They have seen the issues near to my heart: better schools, fairer taxes, a stronger military, security for our seniors. These reforms are coming to Washington, D.C. In truth, in truth, we should have had them a long time ago. But something stood in the way. The Clinton-Gore administration has blocked reform at every turn. It came in  with ringing promises, and is now leaving with a sigh. For seven and a half years, the vice president has been the second biggest obstacle to reform in America. And now he wants to be the biggest. And now he wants to be the obstacle in chief.''
 The debate over when America should become involved in foreign strife surfaced again last week as a presidential campaign issue when George W. Bush's top national security aide, Condoleezza Rice, declared that a Bush administration would withdraw United States peacekeeping troops from the Balkans. Vice President Al Gore denounced such a move, saying it would deal a ''damaging blow'' to NATO. Mr. Lazio supports what he calls ''global engagement,'' but on a more limited level. He stops short of backing Mr. Bush's call for a withdrawal from Bosnia and Kosovo, but warns that Mrs. Clinton's attempt to broaden American objectives overseas is too costly and could distract the military from its principal mission.
 Florida is the biggest prize up for grabs in the presidential contest between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. (Of the three more populous states, California and New York appear to be in Mr. Gore's column, and Texas in Mr. Bush's.) As a result, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Mr. Lieberman, have treated Florida like a second home. Though Mr. Bush holds a slim lead in national surveys -- two percentage points in a New York Times/CBS News Poll poll published today -- Democratic and Republican strategists say he needs Florida's 25 electoral votes to win the presidency. Speaking to 1,000 people today at the Aventura Turnberry Jewish Center, in a Miami suburb, Mr. Lieberman took issue with Mr. Bush's call to withdraw American forces from peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia and Kosovo. Echoing statements made by Mr. Gore on Sunday, Mr. Lieberman said such a withdrawal would ''wound'' the NATO alliance. He suggested that Mr. Bush's understanding of world affairs was lacking, and drew a contrast to Mr. Gore. ''I think you've got to consider the extraordinary experience Al Gore has had in foreign policy and military matters, and it's one of the reasons to vote for him,'' he said. ''If Governor Bush thinks he's going to pull American soldiers out of peace-keeping in Europe, he hasn't learned the lessons of the two world wars we fought and the cold war.'' A spokesman for the Bush campaign, Dan Bartlett, said that in their Oct. 11 debate, Mr. Gore had agreed with Mr. Bush about withdrawing forces from the Balkans, and called the criticism ''puzzling.'' But Mr. Gore said at the debate that troops should be sent home ''as soon as the mission is complete.'' Mr. Bush is seeking a complete American withdrawal from such missions, which Mr. Gore has never supported. In that debate, Mr. Bush also seemed to blunder, saying that the European allies should ''put troops on the ground'' in the Balkans, when they already supply more than 80 percent of the peacekeepers there. On the Mideast, Mr. Lieberman, the first Jew on a major party's national ticket, told the synagogue audience that while he and Mr. Gore would pursue a peace treaty, ''we will also not forget the ties of values and strategic interests and alliance that tie the United States of America and Israel together now for 50-plus years.'' That has essentially been the American position for decades. But President Clinton has tried not to appear to take sides as he seeks to broker an Israeli-Palestinian settlement. Mr. Lieberman's remarks could play into the fears of Arab-Americans. The Arab-American Political Action Committee recently endorsed Mr. Bush, with some members concerned that Mr. Lieberman would not be impartial on the Mideast. The senator also addressed a group of 70 Cuban-American leaders, pledging that Mr. Gore would not lift the trade embargo against Cuba as long as Fidel Castro was in power.
 Daily tracking polls show Vice Pres Al Gore regaining some of ground he lost to Gov George W Bush in recent weeks; Bush maintains marginal lead, which has narrowed each day since final debate on October 17; findings of polls discussed; charts (M) Two daily tracking polls show that Vice President Al Gore has regained some of the ground he lost to Gov. George W. Bush in recent weeks. While Mr. Bush maintains a marginal lead, it has narrowed each day since the final debate last Tuesday. When four of the polls taken since the debate are averaged together, Mr. Bush's support is 46 percent, Mr. Gore's 44 percent, Patrick J. Buchanan's support is 1 percent and Ralph Nader's is 4 percent. Two daily tracking polls show that Vice President Al Gore has regained some of the ground he lost to Gov. George W. Bush in recent weeks. While Mr. Bush maintains a marginal lead, it has narrowed each day since the final debate last Tuesday. When four of the polls taken since the debate are averaged together, Mr. Bush's support is 46 percent, Mr. Gore's 44 percent, Patrick J. Buchanan's support is 1 percent and Ralph Nader's is 4 percent. The sharpest shift was in a CNN/ USA Today/Gallup tracking poll. On Sunday, the poll showed Mr. Bush holding a nine percentage-point lead based on interviews conducted Thursday through Saturday. Yesterday, the same poll showed a two-point edge for Mr. Bush based on interviews conducted Friday through Sunday. In this latest poll of 769 likely voters, Mr. Bush was the choice of 46 percent of the voters, Mr. Gore the choice of 44 percent. An ABC News tracking poll conducted Friday through Sunday gave no edge to either man, with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore each receiving the support of 47 percent of the 1,070 likely voters polled. A day earlier, the ABC poll had Mr. Bush with a two-point edge. In a New York Times/CBS News poll taken Wednesday through Saturday, the shifting pattern was clear. Mr. Bush had a six-point advantage over Mr. Gore on the first day of polling; by the last day, Mr. Gore had a two-point advantage over Mr. Bush. In that standard telephone poll of 825 likely voters, Mr. Bush was the choice of 44 percent of those polled, Mr. Gore the choice of 42 percent. Mr. Bush had a more substantial advantage in a poll for Newsweek conducted Wednesday through Saturday by Princeton Survey Research Associates. That poll of 800 likely voters found Mr. Bush's support to be 48 percent and Mr. Gore's 41 percent.
 Mrs. Clinton lent her support today to another health care proposal, one offered by Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman that would double the penalty for health maintenance organizations  that drop older Americans on Medicare. The managed care groups that withdraw such coverage now are prohibited from returning to a market for two years. Under the Gore-Lieberman proposal, that ban would be four years, Mrs. Clinton said.
 transcript of speech by Vice Pres Al Gore at Martin Luther King High School in Philadelphia (L) Following is a transcript of a speech by Vice President Al Gore on Saturday night at Martin Luther King High School in Philadelphia, as recorded by The New York Times: Following is a transcript of a speech by Vice President Al Gore on Saturday night at Martin Luther King High School in Philadelphia, as recorded by The New York Times: The choice is very clear. The contrast is very stark. We have a choice between two candidates. But it's not about me or Governor Bush. It is about you and your family and your city and your future. Prosperity is on the ballot Nov. 7. Education and health care are on the ballot. Social Security is on the ballot. The environment is on the ballot. The future of your family is on the ballot Nov. 7. Now let me tell you what the other side has proposed. They have proposed a tax cut for the very wealthy, a very big tax cut for the wealthy that gives almost half of the benefits to the top 1 percent. In the debates just concluded, the moderator, Jim Lehrer, asked Governor Bush whether or not it was true what I was saying about his massive tax cuts for the wealthy and whether or not it benefits the top 1 percent so much and Governor Bush's answer was, ''Of course it does.'' Does that represent the wrong priority for America? Of course it does! Is that the wrong choice for our future? Of course it is.
 One need not side with Al Gore or George W. Bush to show concern for the country or civic commitment.  Mr. Wolfe's limiting of partisan identification to Republican and Democrat is a lamentable testament to the very apathy and ignorance induced by the two-party system. It is largely due to mass dissatisfaction with the two parties that many voters are undecided and fickle.
 The concern about obstacles to organizing is one reason labor is supporting Vice President Al Gore in the presidential race despite differences with him over trade. In numerous appearances at union conventions, Mr. Gore has vowed to push for changes that would make it easier for unions to organize. ''Vice President Gore has been the most outspoken champion of the freedom to join a union since Franklin Delano Roosevelt,'' Mr. Sweeney said. Vice President Gore has yet to spell out how he would change labor laws to make it easier to form unions. Also looking for ways to discourage illegal firings, Ralph Nader, the Green Party presidential candidate, has proposed that improperly fired union supporters receive punitive damages and lawyers' fees. Gov. George W. Bush, who has long clashed with unions, has not called for making it easier for workers to unionize.
 Re ''We're Not Responsible,'' by Paul Krugman (column, Oct. 18): Walter F. Mondale, in his run against Ronald Reagan in 1984, tried to convey the concept of fiscal responsibility to the American people. He lost every state except one. The fact is that any politician, from Mr. Mondale to President George Bush, who advocates raising taxes on anyone for any reason stands a good chance of being defeated. Re ''We're Not Responsible,'' by Paul Krugman (column, Oct. 18): Walter F. Mondale, in his run against Ronald Reagan in 1984, tried to convey the concept of fiscal responsibility to the American people. He lost every state except one. The fact is that any politician, from Mr. Mondale to President George Bush, who advocates raising taxes on anyone for any reason stands a good chance of being defeated.
 Editorial says Pres Clinton clearly wants to campaign for Vice Pres Al Gore, and jumpy Democrats are talking about Clinton as unused campaign resource; says Gore must have discipline to stick to his convention declaration about being his own man; notes that adding series of joint appearances with Clinton now would carry whiff of panic; says Clinton should discipline his tendency to upstage and undercut Gore with speeches he makes The campaign is ticking by and the alarm meter among the Democratic faithful is ticking up. What happened to the Vice President Al Gore who made the smashing convention speech in Los Angeles and seemed ready to snatch Florida away from Gov. George W. Bush? How did the Democrats' Great Debater manage to let Mr. Bush slip-slide away with generalities about leadership and Beltway bickering? Finally, is it time to send out an S O S to the most restless lame duck in modern presidential campaign history? The campaign is ticking by and the alarm meter among the Democratic faithful is ticking up. What happened to the Vice President Al Gore who made the smashing convention speech in Los Angeles and seemed ready to snatch Florida away from Gov. George W. Bush? How did the Democrats' Great Debater manage to let Mr. Bush slip-slide away with generalities about leadership and Beltway bickering? Finally, is it time to send out an S O S to the most restless lame duck in modern presidential campaign history? Mr. Gore, for his part, faces both a generic and a specific problem. Vice presidents as different as Richard Nixon, Hubert Humphrey and George H. W. Bush have faced the general problem of stepping out of the shadow of large, and in some cases flawed, figures. Mr. Gore's special problem is that his senior partner's main achievement -- the best economic record in modern times -- ought to be a highly marketable political advantage. But when Mr. Gore dwells on Mr. Clinton's record, he plays into two main themes of the Bush campaign. Those are that Mr. Bush will bring a loftier standard of personal behavior to the Oval Office and that, in the long view, character is more important than experience. From the standpoint of the Bush campaign, the more prominence for Mr. Clinton the better. Bush strategists had hoped all along to run against the president's personal reputation rather than Mr. Gore's policies. They profess to welcome a more prominent role for Mr. Clinton and see his direct attacks on Mr. Bush as actually adding to the governor's stature by elevating him to the presidential plateau. Mr. Gore's not inconsiderable ego also played a role in the construction of the tactical box in which he finds himself. Since midway in the second term he has been hoping to run as the candidate who could deliver Clintonism without all that Arkansas-Lewinsky-Lincoln-Bedroom baggage. Now as his fellow Democrats are getting jumpy and talking about Mr. Clinton as an unused campaign resource, Mr. Gore needs to have the discipline to stick to the plan implicit in his convention declaration that ''I stand here tonight as my own man.'' But the president ought to discipline his tendency to upstage and undercut Mr. Gore with speeches in which the subtext is, ''Hey, Al, here's how you make the case.'' Although Mr. Bush is holding a small, steady lead, neither candidate has closed the deal with the swing voters. Moreover, the decisive opinion shifts could come very late. Mr. Gore's best strategy is to remain the star of his campaign, no matter how loudly Mr. Clinton clears his throat and taps his foot.
 Robert Ortner letter contends George W Bush's 'compassionate conservatism' i George W. Bush's ''compassionate conservatism'' is the same basic philosophy that Republicans previously called ''supply side'' or ''trickle down'' economics (news article, Oct. 20). Putting a happy face on the package does not improve it. George W. Bush's ''compassionate conservatism'' is the same basic philosophy that Republicans previously called ''supply side'' or ''trickle down'' economics (news article, Oct. 20). Putting a happy face on the package does not improve it. Mr. Bush's proposal to privatize part of Social Security would undermine the system while handing a windfall to Wall Street. Similarly, the Bush plan for prescription drugs would subsidize or bribe insurance companies to induce them to offer coverage to the public -- still another layer of corporate welfare. A Bush administration would be a large step in the direction of government of, by and for the rich.
 Editorial on way Bush campaign views America's proper military role in Europe, as described by Bush's foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice; says Rice's proposal for reduced American military role in Balkans is misguided; says job of securing peace in Bosnia and Kosovo is far from complete; says NATO alliance is built on concept of shared risk that is inconsistent with total withdrawal of American ground forces from Balkan peacekeeping Sharp contrasts emerged over the weekend in the way the Bush and Gore campaigns view America's proper military role in Europe. The debate began when Condoleezza Rice, one of Gov. George W. Bush's leading foreign policy advisers, told The Times's Michael Gordon that a Bush administration would ask European members of NATO to gradually take over full responsibility for providing peacekeeping forces for Bosnia and Kosovo. Vice President Gore countered that carrying out such a policy could destabilize the Balkans and jeopardize the future of NATO, America's most important military alliance. Debates over how and where United States military forces should be stationed are a healthy part of presidential contests. Ms. Rice's proposal is consistent with the Bush campaign's view that extended peacekeeping missions degrade the combat readiness of American military forces and that the Pentagon should concentrate its resources on preparing for crises where Washington alone has the might to deter, and, if necessary, combat aggression, whether in the Persian Gulf, the Korean Peninsula or a future military conflict in Europe. Sharp contrasts emerged over the weekend in the way the Bush and Gore campaigns view America's proper military role in Europe. The debate began when Condoleezza Rice, one of Gov. George W. Bush's leading foreign policy advisers, told The Times's Michael Gordon that a Bush administration would ask European members of NATO to gradually take over full responsibility for providing peacekeeping forces for Bosnia and Kosovo. Vice President Gore countered that carrying out such a policy could destabilize the Balkans and jeopardize the future of NATO, America's most important military alliance. Debates over how and where United States military forces should be stationed are a healthy part of presidential contests. Ms. Rice's proposal is consistent with the Bush campaign's view that extended peacekeeping missions degrade the combat readiness of American military forces and that the Pentagon should concentrate its resources on preparing for crises where Washington alone has the might to deter, and, if necessary, combat aggression, whether in the Persian Gulf, the Korean Peninsula or a future military conflict in Europe. Asking Europe to accept a total withdrawal of American ground forces from the Balkans needlessly challenges some of the basic assumptions of the Western military alliance. NATO was formed not just to counter Soviet bloc military threats. It was also designed to eliminate some of the historic military rivalries in Europe that led to two world wars. NATO provides a framework for European and American forces to cooperate in joint operations under a single overall commander -- traditionally an American. Europe cannot be expected to accept an alliance in which Washington exercises political and military leadership but does not subject its own forces to any of the risks of ground operations. The Bush campaign is right when it insists that the United States must be selective in where it stations ground forces. But the Balkans is not the place to cut back.
 When Al Gore invaded George W. Bush's space, everybody thought it was a great macho move, but when Mr. Lazio did it to Mrs. Clinton, he got killed. Do you think that's fair? Nothing about campaigns is fair. It isn't fair that the vice president could lose the presidency because he's cursed with a dorky demeanor. It isn't fair that women who have been in public life for decades still get letters from their constituents about their haircuts. However, to be totally comparable, you'd have had to have a debate in which Al Gore invaded the space of, say, Liddy Dole, just after one member of an all-male panel of journalists asked her a really mean question about those Viagra commercials. Who do you think it would be cooler to be on Halloween, Hillary, Gore or Bush?
 But he got both. Mr. Fenn's gold-plated client list now includes Vice President Al Gore, leaders of Congress, heads of state and deep-pocketed interest groups. He just moved into fancy new Washington offices, and he counsels students at nearby George Washington University that while he is ''not one of the folks with yachts and houses in six different places,'' political consulting can pay off intellectually -- and financially. But he got both. Mr. Fenn's gold-plated client list now includes Vice President Al Gore, leaders of Congress, heads of state and deep-pocketed interest groups. He just moved into fancy new Washington offices, and he counsels students at nearby George Washington University that while he is ''not one of the folks with yachts and houses in six different places,'' political consulting can pay off intellectually -- and financially. Technology and money have combined to create opportunities for political consultants that never existed before. For instance, Hank Sheinkopf, a pollster in the last Clinton campaign, has found that even a county commissioner candidate in Indiana can afford to hire him. And there are whole new lines of business. For instance, telemarketers, like Winning Connections, based in Washington, tap into computer data banks to call 500,000 targeted voters in three days. Or people like Michael Connell, manager of the Bush campaign Internet strategy, represent new types of consulting. In the presidential race, Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each have $67.56 million in federal campaign matching funds -- as well as $298 million total in soft dollars from the two parties. In last spring's presidential primaries the top 13 candidates spent a total of $446.4 million.
 Vice Pres Al Gore is devoting entire week to smaller states he should be able to ignore, even home state of Tennessee, rather than large swing states like Ohio and Michigan just two weeks before election; move reflects down-to-the-wire nature of campaign and way in which disparate factors are playing havoc with electoral map; he will have campaigned in 11 states at end of week; began week's campaigning in New Mexico and will end in Pennsylvania; all were won by Clinton-Gore ticket in 1992 and 1996, with comfortable margins; political analysts attribute struggle to solidify geographic base to his inability to reassure voters about his credibility and amiability, lingering tendency of some voters to associate Gore with scandal-ridden White House, demographic changes in some states and strength of Green Party Candidate Ralph Nader in some areas; photo (M) At a time when Vice President Al Gore should be scrapping for votes in large swing states like Ohio and Michigan, he is devoting virtually his entire week to campaigning in smaller states that he should be able to ignore -- even his home state, Tennessee. Mr. Gore's schedule, only two weeks before the Nov. 7 election, is the ultimate reflection of the down-to-the-wire campaign and the way factors as disparate as Mr. Gore's personality and Ralph Nader's candidacy are playing havoc with the electoral map. At a time when Vice President Al Gore should be scrapping for votes in large swing states like Ohio and Michigan, he is devoting virtually his entire week to campaigning in smaller states that he should be able to ignore -- even his home state, Tennessee. Mr. Gore's schedule, only two weeks before the Nov. 7 election, is the ultimate reflection of the down-to-the-wire campaign and the way factors as disparate as Mr. Gore's personality and Ralph Nader's candidacy are playing havoc with the electoral map. Mr. Gore, the Democratic nominee, will have campaigned in 11 states by the end of a week that began on Sunday afternoon in New Mexico and winds up on Friday in Pennsylvania. All 11 were won by President Clinton and Mr. Gore in  1992 and 1996, with the Democrats winning most by comfortable margins, often by double digits. The campaign swing includes  West Virginia, which has voted Republican only twice since 1960. And Mr. Gore will spend part of both Tuesday and Wednesday campaigning in Tennessee, where he has not  lost a race in a political career that dates to 1976. His Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, also plans to campaign in Tennessee on Tuesday. The vice president's struggle to solidify his geographic base stems from several factors, political analysts said. Some are national, like his inability to reassure voters about his credibility and amiability, and the lingering tendency of some voters to associate Mr. Gore with a scandal-ridden White House. Others are more localized, including demographic changes in some states and the strength of Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate, in places like the Pacific Northwest and Wisconsin. Mr. Gore does seem to enjoy substantial leads in California and New York, and his postconvention travel to those states has largely been limited to fund-raising and television tapings. He has also forced Mr. Bush to compete in Florida, where Mr. Bush's brother is governor. But while campaigning in closely contested Oregon and Washington in the last two days, Mr. Gore has been forced to reach out to the disaffected Democrats who form the core of Mr. Nader's base. At rallies in Portland, Ore., on Sunday night and here today, he devoted more time than usual to promoting his environmental record, a critical issue for the Green Party. ''I will fight to protect the environment with all my heart and soul,'' Mr. Gore told supporters here in an open airport hangar. In Portland last night, Mr. Gore vowed to ''protect ancient forests'' and to ''block new roads and timber sales in our roadless forests and ancient forest areas.'' Part of his strategy to reclaim Nader supporters rests on raising fears about a Bush presidency. ''My opponent in his state of Texas put a lobbyist for the chemical companies in charge of enforcing the environmental laws there,'' Mr. Gore said today. ''On his watch, Texas has sunk down to 50th out of all 50 in industrial pollution, the worst state for industrial pollution, with the smoggiest city, Houston, and over all the smoggiest state.'' Mr. Gore was even more explicit  when reporters aboard Air Force Two asked him about Mr. Nader. Mr. Gore added that it was not his task to convince Americans that a vote for Mr. Nader was a vote for Mr. Bush. ''That may be true,'' he said, ''but my task is to convince them to vote enthusiastically for me and for what I represent.'' Mr. Gore's allies in the Northwest say it is vital to win back perhaps half of Mr. Nader's supporters. Representative Jim McDermott, a Democrat who represents a Seattle district, said Mr. Gore would probably not have to campaign in Washington at this point were it not for Mr. Nader. ''Gore has to get his base out in states like this,'' Mr. McDermott said, ''and when you add in factors like Nader it throws in a few points.'' But other Democratic leaders said Mr. Gore was still not receiving credit for the prosperity enjoyed during the Clinton administration, and they attributed his troubles to personality and style. ''The vice president, in a small group, one on one, is incredibly funny, he's charming, he's knowledgeable,'' Mr. Wu said. ''We need to free Al Gore, let Al Gore be Al Gore.'' Mr. Gore was certainly in full voice today, feeling energized, aides said, by positive signs in several recent polls. He pledged to continue to speak in detail about issues until the final hours of the campaign. ''Fifteen days is a long time if your objective is to hold the ball and run out the clock,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Fifteen days is a long time if you are trying to hide behind tracking polls and not engage in the issues because the people disagree with you on the issues. That's the dilemma that my opponent faces in the next 15 days.'' Part of Mr. Gore's plan is to hold camera-friendly ''kitchen table'' discussions with citizens who can help him promote his policy proposals. He began today, sitting down for tea in Portland with Heather Howitt, 32, the  founder of Oregon Chai, a manufacturer of herbal tea. When Mr. Gore asked Ms. Howitt to discuss the impact of the economy on her business, she responded on cue: ''The economy has been awesome the last eight years.'' Mr. Gore replied, ''You don't want to let that get away, right?''
 President Clinton stumps for his wife's United States Senate bid with several stops in New York City and surrounding areas; he also broadens his efforts to bolster Vice President Al Gore's standing in an election that Clinton says will determine how lasting his legacy will be; photo (M) In a second day of sprinting around his newly adopted home state, President Clinton stumped for his wife's United States Senate bid yesterday, while also broadening his efforts to bolster Vice President Al Gore's standing in an election that the president suggested would in part determine how lasting his legacy would be. Mr. Clinton, who started his day in the Hudson River Valley before flying to New York City and then taking a motorcade last night to New Rochelle, avoided direct attacks on Mr. Gore's opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, or Representative Rick A. Lazio, Hillary Rodham Clinton's Republican rival. In a second day of sprinting around his newly adopted home state, President Clinton stumped for his wife's United States Senate bid yesterday, while also broadening his efforts to bolster Vice President Al Gore's standing in an election that the president suggested would in part determine how lasting his legacy would be. Mr. Clinton, who started his day in the Hudson River Valley before flying to New York City and then taking a motorcade last night to New Rochelle, avoided direct attacks on Mr. Gore's opponent, Gov. George W. Bush, or Representative Rick A. Lazio, Hillary Rodham Clinton's Republican rival. The president hinted at a skepticism about the ability of Mr. Bush to make good decisions. Being president ''requires a certain level of experience, a certain level of judgment, a certain instinct,'' Mr. Clinton said, referring to Mr. Gore. He generously praised Mr. Gore, but repeatedly warned that a Republican administration would roll back many of his initiatives. ''Do you want to build on the progress of the last eight years or not?'' he asked. ''If you do, we better stay with the crime program, the education program, the health care program, that have worked, that are moving this country in the right direction.''
 A MESSAGE TO NADER VOTERS -- Ralph Nader supporters who worry that they could tip the presidential election to the Republicans are being told in a new advertising campaign that a ''vote for Nader is not a vote for Bush.'' Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate, currently draws about 4 percent in national polls, and some Democrats fear he could siphon enough votes from Vice President Al Gore to give Gov. George W. Bush of Texas the edge in several states with close races. A MESSAGE TO NADER VOTERS -- Ralph Nader supporters who worry that they could tip the presidential election to the Republicans are being told in a new advertising campaign that a ''vote for Nader is not a vote for Bush.'' Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate, currently draws about 4 percent in national polls, and some Democrats fear he could siphon enough votes from Vice President Al Gore to give Gov. George W. Bush of Texas the edge in several states with close races. Full-page advertisements scheduled to run on Thursday in the national edition of The New York Times, The Village Voice, The Boston Globe, The Boston Phoenix, The Los Angeles Times, Los Angeles Weekly, The Austin American-Statesman, The Austin Chronicle, The San Francisco Chronicle, The San Francisco Examiner, The San Francisco Bay Guardian and The Boulder Camera in Colorado. ''Why Voting for a Candidate Who Can't Win Is the Smartest Thing You'll Ever Do,'' the advertisement reads, ''And Don't Worry, a Vote for Nader is Not a Vote for Bush.'' The campaign is meant to appeal to independents, former supporters of Senator John McCain's Republican candidacy and ''disgruntled Democrats'' who might otherwise sit out the election, said Greg MacArthur, whose group, Citizens for Strategic Voting, paid for the advertisements. Yesterday, an American Muslim political action committee, representing four Muslim organizations, endorsed Gov. George W. Bush, saying he had been accessible to Muslim organizations and had showed himself responsive to their concerns over sensitive issues like deportation. The PAC is a branch of the two-year-old American Muslim Political Coordinating Council, made up of the American Muslim Alliance, American Muslim Council, the Council on American-Islamic Affairs and the Muslim Public Affairs Council. Aly Abuzaakouk , the Coordinating Council's executive director, said Mr. Bush had met with American Muslim leaders last March in Austin and in general had been ''more responsive to us than the Al Gore campaign.'' EMBATTLED TEXAS OFFICIAL RESIGNS -- The Texas Commissioner of Health, Dr. William R. Archer III, whose comments on race, cultural attitudes and health insurance, have embarrassed his boss, George W. Bush, resigned yesterday. The move came less than a week after he was placed on leave after statements about race were secretly recorded by a black female employee who had been fired. She filed a discrimination complaint. Dr. Archer's tongue also got him into trouble last spring, when he played down the importance of health insurance and blamed the state's high teenage pregnancy rate on the cultural attitudes of Hispanics. Dr. Archer also had come under criticism for his management of the agency. Length of official day: Gore, 12 hours; Bush 11 hours States visited: Gore, 4; Bush, 3 Cities/towns visited: Gore, 4; (Portland, Ore.; Everett, Wash.; Spokane, Wash., and Little Rock, Ark.); Bush, 3 (Kansas City, Mo.; Des Moines and  Milwaukee) Official Events: Gore, 3; Bush 3 Plane Boardings: Gore, 3; Bush 3 Miles traveled: Gore, 1,964; Bush, 1,215 Surrogates at work: Gore, 19 Democratic senators; Bush, 7 groups of Republican governors Main message: Gore, prosperity is on the ballot; Bush, reforming and saving Social Security
 Teams of Republican governors begin three-day barnstorming tour through 25 states, stumping for Gov George W Bush; photo (M) Hundreds of Americans were tending to their business today at senior centers, in restaurants and on factory floors around the country when teams of Republican governors suddenly swept into their midst, stumping for a colleague, George W. Bush. Hundreds of Americans were tending to their business today at senior centers, in restaurants and on factory floors around the country when teams of Republican governors suddenly swept into their midst, stumping for a colleague, George W. Bush. ''I think Christie Whitman just came into our drugstore,'' she said to her husband, Cy. ''And there's Jeb Bush. But who are those other guys?'' The same scene was repeated in 13 other contested states today as the Bush presidential campaign rolled out one of the most complex and expensive political operations ever undertaken. Acting on the popularity of many governors and the perception that they are Washington outsiders, the campaign hired private jets for seven teams of them (at prices that approached $5,000 an hour per aircraft), found places for them to speak and arranged for drivers to ferry them and restaurants to feed them. In all, 28 of Mr. Bush's fellow Republican governors joined the effort; only Cecil H. Underwood of West Virginia, running hard in his own race, for re-election, did not. ''It's pretty much been day and night for weeks, setting it all up,'' said an exhausted Joyce Gates, the ''captain'' of Team 5, which included the three governors who joined Jeb Bush in Florida today and their individual security details. The division of labor was for the most part constant: Ms. Whitman talked about tax cuts, Mr. Ridge about education, and Mr. Schafer about Social Security and prescription drug plans. Jeb Bush, who accompanied the tour on only one stop, in Palm Beach, talked about his brother's learning curve. ''We've been looking for an energy policy for the last eight years from the Clinton-Gore administration, and there isn't one,'' said Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut, speaking at a gas station just outside Philadelphia, where Team 1 had been dispatched. ''In fact, I sometimes think Saddam Hussein is running the oil policy for this administration.'' Speaking at Atlas Machine, a manufacturer of air compressors in Louisville, Ky., Gov. James S. Gilmore III of Virginia accused the administration of being ''antiworker,'' because, he said, Vice President Al Gore's tax plan would not return enough money to the middle class. Many of the governors happily echoed Mr. Bush's belief that they are more respected around the country than other politicians, particularly the ones who work in Washington. In fact, an important theme of the three-day Barnstorm for Reform tour, which will reach 25 states in all, was to play up the hard-charging, problem-solving persona of the state executive. The campaign clearly hopes that this image will embrace Mr. Bush, even though the governor's office in Texas is one of the nation's least powerful. Left unsaid were many of the policy differences between factions of Republican governors. Mr. Ridge and Ms. Whitman support abortion rights, for instance, and Mr. Bush opposes it. Mr. Ridge tried a bit of Spanish, repeating the crowd's refrain of ''Clinton-Gore, adios!'' But at times he seemed a bit mystified by the intensity and single-mindedness of a group of Miamians he had traveled so far to meet.
 The Bush campaign won a coin toss to determine the order in which the candidates present their messages. As a result Mr. Gore will begin the series on Wednesday, and Mr. Bush will finish it on Nov. 3.
 Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said Vice President Al Gore's proposal for Social Security would create about $40 trillion in debt by the middle of the century. Page A25. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas said Vice President Al Gore's proposal for Social Security would create about $40 trillion in debt by the middle of the century. Page A25.
