 A confident-looking Gov. George W. Bush brought his get-out-the-vote tour into Wisconsin today, calling on more than 6,000 supporters in this small town to recruit ''open-minded Democrats and disillusioned independents'' to his cause. As billowy clouds raced across the gray sky, Mr. Bush offered his shivering but enthusiastic crowd a platform of tax cuts and smaller government, while jauntily mocking his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, as an exaggerator, a big spender and a Washington insider. A confident-looking Gov. George W. Bush brought his get-out-the-vote tour into Wisconsin today, calling on more than 6,000 supporters in this small town to recruit ''open-minded Democrats and disillusioned independents'' to his cause. As billowy clouds raced across the gray sky, Mr. Bush offered his shivering but enthusiastic crowd a platform of tax cuts and smaller government, while jauntily mocking his Democratic rival, Vice President Al Gore, as an exaggerator, a big spender and a Washington insider. ''He's so confident of his abilities, he claimed he invented the Internet,'' said Mr. Bush, who is known among his followers and his critics as Dubya. ''But if he's so smart,'' Mr. Bush said, ''how come all the Internet addresses start with w? Not only one w, but three w's.'' This was the final leg of a three-day trip that has taken Mr. Bush through five of the most closely contested states -- Michigan, Missouri, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. In each, Mr. Bush has been less concerned with sounding new messages than rallying supporters for the final push to Election Day, just 10 days off. Mr. Bush plans to take most of Sunday off, except to deliver a videotaped address to a Hispanic group in California. He travels to New Mexico and California on Monday, and to Oregon and Washington on Tuesday. At today's event, held in a minor-league baseball stadium in this town west of Green Bay, Mr. Bush was accompanied by Governor Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin and his vice-presidential running mate, Dick Cheney, who asserted that eight years of neglect by the Clinton administration had left the military dispirited, overextended, poorly equipped and unprepared. Mr. Cheney said that when he served as secretary of defense under Governor Bush's father, President George Bush, he had thanked former President Ronald Reagan for strengthening the military. ''I don't think any future secretary of defense is ever likely to call Al Gore and Bill Clinton and thank them for what they did to the U.S. military,'' he said. In his remarks, Mr. Bush accused Mr. Gore of using Halloween tactics to scare senior citizens about the Republican's plans for Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush has called for allowing taxpayers to invest part of their Social Security taxes in private accounts, and for using federal subsidies to encourage private insurers to provide Medicare coverage. Mr. Gore contends that Mr. Bush's proposals would lead to cuts in Social Security benefits and inadequate health care for the elderly. Mr. Bush also asserted that Mr. Gore had not fulfilled campaign pledges in 1992 and 1996 to fortify Medicare. ''He says you ain't seen nothing yet,'' Mr. Bush said, mimicking one of Mr. Gore's favorite lines. ''And we say, 'You bet, Mr. Vice President, we haven't seen anything yet when it comes to Medicare.' '' On several occasions, Mr. Bush mentioned President Clinton, drawing lusty choruses of boos each time. ''Make no mistake, my opponent is a formidable candidate,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He's got the president getting ready to campaign for him.'' And in what clearly seemed like a reference to Mr. Clinton's affair with a White House intern, Mr. Bush told the crowd, ''The best ally a family will have is a president who behaves responsibly in office.'' Mr. Gore has repeatedly accused Mr. Bush of representing the interests of the rich and powerful, and Mr. Bush has responded by injecting a dose of populism into his speeches, as was evident again today. The governor described himself as ''standing on the side of the working people.'' He ridiculed Mr. Gore for having lived in Washington too long and thereby losing touch with common people. And he derided Mr. Gore for saying that he would give ''targeted'' tax cuts to ''the right people'' -- a phrase Mr. Bush said demonstrated an arrogance and elitism on the part of the vice president. ''That's not our vision for America, folks,'' Mr. Bush said. ''See, we're one nation under God, indivisible. We're all the right people in America.'' In recent weeks, Mr. Bush has stopped holding news conferences and rarely walks to the back of his campaign plane for informal, off-the-record chats with reporters. Earlier this week, Mr. Bush light-heartedly traded hand signals with reporters, first flashing a ''V'' for victory sign with two fingers, then adding a third digit to form a ''W.'' Today, Mr. Bush tried the three-fingered wave on his Wisconsin crowd, eliciting chants of ''W.''
 Al Gore and George W Bush have reverted to fundamental argument over role of government in everyday life as 2000 presidential election campaign draws to conclusion, a subject of debate since the founding of the country; ironically, each candidate is trying to depict the other in stereotypical terms, while each is striving to transform traditional image of his party; photo (M) But as the campaign comes down to its last nine days, Al Gore and George W. Bush have reverted to a fundamental argument about the role of the federal government in everyday life that had Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson spitting at each other, and fueled the critics of Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson. Not surprisingly, each candidate is now trying to depict the other in stereotypical terms. The Bush campaign desperately wants to cast the vice president as a Democratic caricature: spending big, promising big, regulating big and using the tax code to interfere with your life. Meanwhile, Mr. Gore's operation wants Americans to dismiss the Texas governor as a captive of big business, who will sacrifice the middle class in the name of cutting the government. Some of this fits; much does not. Al Gore is the first Democrat in memory with the luxury or the record to run on a platform of wiping out the national debt in 12 years. George W. Bush is the first Republican to try to reach the Oval Office by talking seriously about federal education standards and new prescription drug benefits.  Each candidate, in short, is striving to transform the traditional image of his own party. Just listen to the stump speeches last week. There was Mr. Bush in Arlington Heights, Ill., on Tuesday, his hand chopping the air, explaining how he would save Social Security and Medicare -- programs that, more than a half-century ago, Republican nominees for president decried as ''creeping socialism.'' (Meanwhile, he was also telling the undecided that Mr. Gore ''wants to increase the size and scope of the federal government more than Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis combined. That's pretty big.'') Mr. Gore, stumping in states he should have in the bag, but doesn't, was straining to sound like T.R. himself. ''I certainly don't want to ever see another era of special interests who wield more power than the American people have,'' he told one Arkansas crowd. The next day he portrayed his opponent as the favorite of ''big oil companies and the chemical manufacturers and the other big polluters.'' Then there is the second kind of big government, the one that taxes and regulates, and uses those powers to reshape the nation. This is the kind Mr. Bush complains about most frequently, and what he says is music to tens of millions of ears. But it is also a dangerous game, because the goal posts keep changing. SO Mr. Gore has a problem. The populist, old Democrat side of his brain wants to rail about the evils of all those chemical companies and oil firms that have, to listen to his television ads, turned Houston into the American version of Bhopal. On the other hand, he is surrounded by advisers, from former Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin to his own running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who visibly wince when the vice president takes his corporate-bashing rhetoric too far. Mr. Gore, in short, wants it both ways. He wants to show he can be an old Democrat and a new Democrat. He has no problem bashing a few special interests one day, then talking up permanent research and development tax credits for them the next. He wants to preserve his environmental base -- that was the old Mr. Gore waxing eloquent about the dangers of global warming on Thursday -- while still reassuring the country that he won't put the environment ahead of economic growth. This explains why Mr. Gore, who a decade ago proposed high taxes on fossil fuels to conserve energy and clean the air, arranged last month to release 30 million barrels from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to lower the price at the pump. Mr. Bush, meanwhile, wants credit both as a traditional Republican and a compassionate one. So he mocks Mr. Gore's targeted tax cuts for owners of energy-saving cars, saying that under his plan, almost everyone gets a lower tax bill. BUT Mr. Bush has targeted tax breaks of his own, including one to bail out farmers from the effects of low prices for their goods, another to expand education savings accounts, and another to encourage more charitable gifts. So both men have shifted away from the traditional images of their party and -- perhaps -- the expectations of how they would govern. Mr. Bush's Republicans, as he describes them, envision themselves playing a more activist role in society. And Mr. Gore's Democrats say they want to promote entrepreneurial freedom, even while regulating the market's excesses. It's easy to imagine Teddy Roosevelt ridiculing both.
 ''A week of volatility in the public,'' Bernard Shaw of CNN concluded Thursday afternoon as George W. Bush's lead over Al Gore in the CNN-USA Today Gallup ''tracking'' poll soared to 7 percentage points. The week had begun with the poll showing Governor Bush trouncing Vice President Gore by 9 points, about the same margin Bill Clinton dispatched Bob Dole by four years ago. By 5 o'clock Monday afternoon, however, the Bush lead had slipped to a mere two points. On Tuesday and Wednesday, it was dead even, and then came that 7 points on Thursday. To cap off the week, on Friday Gallup had Mr. Bush soaring toward a 52 percent to 39 percent landslide. ''A week of volatility in the public,'' Bernard Shaw of CNN concluded Thursday afternoon as George W. Bush's lead over Al Gore in the CNN-USA Today Gallup ''tracking'' poll soared to 7 percentage points. The week had begun with the poll showing Governor Bush trouncing Vice President Gore by 9 points, about the same margin Bill Clinton dispatched Bob Dole by four years ago. By 5 o'clock Monday afternoon, however, the Bush lead had slipped to a mere two points. On Tuesday and Wednesday, it was dead even, and then came that 7 points on Thursday. To cap off the week, on Friday Gallup had Mr. Bush soaring toward a 52 percent to 39 percent landslide. This roller coaster ride is not confined to Gallup, still the polling brand name most familiar to the public. During a relatively uneventful eight days, ending Sept. 22, a 14-point Bush landslide in the first of a series of Newsweek polls melted away to 2 points at the end. And the variations on many days among the multitude of different polls -- in point spread and even in who is leading -- have become a subject of as much derision as the deceptive claims of the candidates in this year's election season. Like the candidates, the pollsters naturally hold themselves blameless. Seldom in their accounting for day-to-day and poll-to-poll disparities do you hear a word about the inherent fuzziness (to borrow a word from Governor Bush) of their own numbers. The fuzziness, they imply, is all in the heads of an insufficiently attentive and caring public, especially this year's reigning suspect as the source of all volatility: independent women. ''They bounce around,'' says Frank Newport, Gallup's executive editor, ''depending on the last thing they heard on the news.'' How can this be true and still yield the wildly swinging results we are seeing? Well, there are, of course, those flighty independent women. But, much more to the point, there is sampling error. Plus or minus 3 or 4 percentage points are the figures commonly posted for this error in an overall sample of ''likely voters.''  What the public is seldom being told in this election season is that the potential range of error applies separately to the numbers for both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. It is in the tonier, ''in-depth'' analytical reporting in the press, even more than in the down-to-earth horse-race stories about the campaign, that you get the greatest exposure to sampling error. Take the incessant breakouts on the voting intentions of men and women. Here the size of each group is half of the full sample, and the sampling error on the Bush-Gore spread grows from, say, 8 percent to 11 or 12 percent. Out of that, and perhaps some other things as well, you get such howlers as the discrepancy at the close of the Democratic convention between Gallup's figures and those of Newsweek's Princeton Survey Research. In polls a day apart, Newsweek had Mr. Gore ahead of Mr. Bush among likely male voters, while Gallup had Mr. Bush ahead by 19 points. Or consider a recent USA Today story that attributed a sudden overall shift in its Gallup tracking poll to ''independent voters, mainly women.'' The sampling error on the Bush-Gore margin in that poll's sub-sample of independent women would be in the neighborhood of 16 points.
 Maureen Dowd Liberties column envisions return of Texas fat cats and Establishment suits returning to Washington to claim their rightful places at Cabinet table in a Bush II administration (M) Happy Halloween! We could be fixin' for the big Washington premiere of ''Book of Shadows: Bush 2.'' Last week I watched Al Gore growling and fending off Bill Clinton and still struggling to lay claim to his own administration's tumescent economy. And I watched W. bristling with confidence, giving a good speech in Pittsburgh and cozying up to John McCain and Colin Powell. Given that Bush 1 (self-made Midland bidnessman, Yale grad and sports enthusiast with a bookish, plain-spoken wife whose project is literacy) was fired by voters when the economy foundered, and given that the Bush name was anathema in the G.O.P. for years, it is surreal that we may be only moments away from Bush 2 (self-made Midland bidnessman, Yale grad and sports enthusiast with a bookish, plain-spoken wife whose project is literacy). Angry white men have become fat, happy white men. And W., with his sunny emptiness and a tax plan that will protect the windfalls reaped in the Clinton-Gore years, is their guy. Now comes another antsy President Bush who reads sporadically and prefers reports to be delivered orally. It just proves the staying power of the Establishment. The insiders simply call themselves outsiders and say they disdain Washington and big government, and then gullible voters send the inside-outsiders right back here to make government bigger, their resumes longer and their private-sector contacts wider for future ''self-made'' cashing-in. We lost sight of Newt's successors, those vivacious valets of viciousness -- Trent Lott, Tom Delay and Dick Armey -- when the Bush campaign hid them in a lockbox. But now we are on the verge of welcoming these bully boys front and center again, as they resume ramming their conservative agenda down America's throat. In Bush 2, we'll get to see more of that shrinking violet, Clarence Thomas. As one of President W.'s favorite justices, and as someone touted by conservatives as a potential chief justice in a Bush regime, he will come into his own. Perhaps the Anita Hill episode won't be the thing Justice Thomas is remembered for; perhaps overturning Roe v. Wade will. And it will be so reassuring to have Charlton Heston packing heat -- trigger treat! -- doing glam drop-bys at D.C. restaurants and dinner parties, once the N.R.A. opens up that office in the Bush White House it's been bragging about.
 THE newly altered landscape is precisely what makes Republican presidential candidate George W. Bush's recent promise to pull American soldiers out of Balkan peacekeeping duties so wrongheaded, says Ivo Daalder, a Balkans expert and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. ''Kosovo was an American-led war with an American-dominated outcome, so to pull out now, when the Albanians feel under the most pressure since the end of the war, is likely to increase the overall risk to all troops there,'' he said. ''It would be viewed by the Europeans and the Albanians as a betrayal.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Sen Paul Wellstone appeal to independents and Ralph Nader supporters not to throw traditionally Democratic Minnesota to Gov George W Bush, rally, Minneapolis; photo (M) All but pleading, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Paul Wellstone appealed directly tonight to independents and Ralph Nader supporters not to throw this traditionally Democratic state to Gov. George W. Bush. ''Reform Party members, Green Party members, you are all welcome,'' Mr. Gore told a crowd estimated by the police at more than 5,000 people, who braved a 40-degree night to attend an outdoor rally downtown. ''We want a majority to take this country in the right direction.'' All but pleading, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Paul Wellstone appealed directly tonight to independents and Ralph Nader supporters not to throw this traditionally Democratic state to Gov. George W. Bush. ''Reform Party members, Green Party members, you are all welcome,'' Mr. Gore told a crowd estimated by the police at more than 5,000 people, who braved a 40-degree night to attend an outdoor rally downtown. ''We want a majority to take this country in the right direction.'' That Minnesota is considered a tossup is evidence of the roiled nature of this campaign -- this is one of several states where Mr. Nader's candidacy is hurting Mr. Gore -- and the vice president seemed almost exasperated at having to make the case here. When his descriptions of Mr. Bush's proposals drew boos, he said: ''O.K., that is a logical and rational reaction. But, hey, you've got to spread the word.'' Mr. Gore did not mention Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate, by name, but Mr. Wellstone did, in an impassioned speech that left him hoarse and red-faced. ''It would be a horrible, horrible irony if a vote for Ralph Nader meant that George W. Bush became president of the United States,'' he said. ''It is too dear a price to pay for our country.'' The star of Minnesota politics, Gov. Jesse Ventura, elected as a Reform Party candidate and now an independent, has not endorsed a presidential candidate. But Lt. Gov. Mae Shunk, who was his Reform running mate, addressed the rally tonight and endorsed Mr. Gore, comparing him to Mr. Ventura. Like the governor, she said, the vice president is ''a man of integrity, a man of honesty, a man who is a man of his word.'' Stripping off his dark suit coat in the chill, Mr. Gore, his voice roughened by a sore throat, tried to impart to his supporters his sense of urgency about persuading friends and getting out the vote. ''We have 10 days left and much is at stake,'' he said. The outcome, he said, will be determined by ''how much passion you have for the future of the United States of America. I need your hearts. I need you to mobilize.'' Earlier, Mr. Gore sidestepped a fierce struggle between gun-control advocates and the National Rifle Association, saying he would neither promote nor oppose the trend by several of the nation's cities toward suing firearms manufacturers for health costs related to gun violence. Many of Mr. Gore's strongest backers -- including Edward G. Rendell, the former mayor of Philadelphia and now the Democratic National Committee's general chairman, and Richard M. Daley, the mayor of Chicago -- have backed such suits. Last year, Gov. George W. Bush, Mr. Gore's Republican opponent, signed legislation that prohibits Texas municipalities from suing gun makers without approval of the State Legislature. Enacting such bills in all 50 states is a priority of the gun industry and the rifle association. Mr. Bush has suggested he would sign similar federal legislation. ''You can get a feel for my position by looking at what I've done in office,'' Mr. Bush told reporters in May, ''and what I did in office was sign a bill that made it very difficult for local municipalities to sue manufacturers of a legal product.'' Mr. Gore's comments, in an interview with WPVI, the ABC affiliate in Philadelphia, are in line with a general toning down of his previously aggressive antigun stance. During his third debate with Mr. Bush, in answer to a question about gun control, he emphasized his support for gun owners' rights. Last summer, Mr. Gore joined President Clinton and other Democrats who attacked House Republicans over the failure of a gun-control measure, and Mr. Bush for signing the Texas bill. And shortly after declaring his candidacy in June 1999, Mr. Gore began warning audiences that Governor Bush would sign a bill that would ''protect gun manufacturers'' and that he himself would not. This morning, Mr. Gore spoke in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., about health care, and in his speech responded to concerns by Congressional Democrats that he was not doing enough to tie Mr. Bush to Congressional Republicans. ''This week, Governor Bush's allies on Capitol Hill passed a brand-new health care bill,'' Mr. Gore said in a low-key address to a couple hundred people in a room at Wilkes University. ''But instead of H.M.O. reform, it's an H.M.O. boondoggle. This so-called reform bill that they pushed through gives H.M.O.'s $34 billion more in taxpayer money, but it doesn't have a dime's worth of patient protections. And it lets the H.M.O.'s drop seniors and leave them without coverage.'' The matter of gun control is particularly touchy in Pennsylvania, another state that remains too close to call. Two important groups of voters in the state -- moderate women in the Philadelphia suburbs who favor gun control, and conservative, blue-collar white men in the western and rural parts of the state who oppose it -- have essentially neutralized the subject for both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush has been endorsed by the National Rifle Association, which gave his campaign nearly $1 million in September and has spent millions of dollars pounding Mr. Gore in television and radio commercials and direct mail. The message, that Mr. Gore poses a dire threat to the rights of gun owners, has been aimed at states like Pennsylvania, which has the largest membership in the gun lobby after Texas, and other big states like Michigan, Missouri and Wisconsin, where the election is too close to call.
 Text of Gov George W Bush's remarks about Vice Pres Al Gore (M) GEORGE W. BUSH  Remarks yesterday about Vice President Al Gore in Columbia, Mo.: GEORGE W. BUSH  Remarks yesterday about Vice President Al Gore in Columbia, Mo.:
 The New York Times, The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Denver Post and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette backed Vice President Al Gore, while two Chicago papers, The Rocky Mountain News of Denver, The Orlando Sentinel and The Providence Journal chose Gov. George W. Bush. The New York Times, The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Denver Post and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette backed Vice President Al Gore, while two Chicago papers, The Rocky Mountain News of Denver, The Orlando Sentinel and The Providence Journal chose Gov. George W. Bush. The New York Times said in an editorial that Mr. Gore was best equipped for the White House ''by virtue of his knowledge of government, his experience at the top levels of federal and diplomatic decision-making, and his commitment to the general welfare.'' It said Mr. Gore was the preferred candidate on leadership, taxes and the economy, foreign policy, civil liberties, environmental protection and Supreme Court appointments. Mr. Bush, The Times said, was ''not without his strong points'' and Mr. Gore ''has his weaknesses.'' But it added, ''the vice president has struggled impressively and successfully to escape the shadow of the Clinton administration's ethical lapses, and we believe that he would never follow Bill Clinton's example of reckless conduct that cheapens the presidency.'' Taking a sharply different view, The Orlando Sentinel endorsed Mr. Bush. ''Coarse behavior, infantile squabbling and naked greed at the top have undermined people's trust in their government,'' it said. ''That must change. The nation needs a leader who can bring people together, who can stand firm on principle but knows the art of compromise. America needs a president who is willing to serve as a role model for all its citizens. The Orlando Sentinel trusts Gov. George W. Bush to take on those weighty responsibilities.'' The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette posed what it called the campaign's serious questions: ''Which candidate is better prepared to lead the world's only remaining superpower? And which candidate offers a vision of governing that better promotes prosperity, a strong role for America in the world and continued progress toward the goal of equal rights for all Americans? Whether the yardstick is qualifications or policies, the superior candidate is Vice President Al Gore.'' The Providence Journal endorsed Mr. Bush as more likely to strengthen national security and broaden prosperity. Governor Bush, it said, ''seems determined to rebuild America's defenses and reassert its power for peace.'' The Journal said Mr. Gore ''seems prepared to squander much of the current budget surplus on a new generation of federal programs, mandates and bureaucracies'' and asserted that he had ''jumped considerably leftward, running as the champion of bureaucracy, teachers' unions, tort lawyers and other assorted special interests.'' The Denver Post said that Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore ''may be equally matched in both strengths and defects'' in appealing to average voters or possessing the better character for the presidency. ''The election, then, should be decided on the issues,'' it said. ''And on the issues, Gore has made the better case.'' Denver's other major daily, The Rocky Mountain News, endorsed Mr. Bush, saying that he has ''a practical, principled view that the federal government's role in American life should be restrained.'' The News said Mr. Bush intended to aid the poor, guarantee the future of Social Security and, by cutting taxes, ''further liberate the American people and make the government less like a shadow that follows everyone everywhere.'' The Philadelphia Inquirer endorsed Mr. Gore ''because his vast experience and earnest intelligence outstrip what Gov. George W. Bush has to offer.'' It said that Mr. Bush's resume was ''remarkably thin for a man at the threshold of the Oval Office,'' and added: ''His likable manner should not lead voters to gloss over the shaky grasp of policy and the petulance about criticism -- indeed, the general lack of depth -- that he has shown in the campaign.'' The Chicago Sun-Times said that Mr. Bush, its choice, had ''sounded a conciliatory tone'' in his campaign, ''avoiding the ugly culture wars of recent years and promising to work across party lines for unity.'' Election of the governor ''would mean a clean slate in Washington,'' it said, and added: ''Bush is willing to abandon old ways of thinking.'' The Chicago Tribune, also endorsing Mr. Bush, said he would be ''far less patient with schools that persistently fail'' and would ''recognize that innovation is nurtured and achieved from the local level up, not dictated from Washington.'' It said that Mr. Gore would ''expand a failing Medicare system,'' while Mr. Bush ''would venture an overhaul.'' It also praised Mr. Bush for having ''not given the impression that he has the last word on every problem.''
 Enough already with Al Gore and the kissing. He seems to spend a great deal of effort either kissing his wife or exaggerating his resume. Does he have time for anything else? Enough already with Al Gore and the kissing. He seems to spend a great deal of effort either kissing his wife or exaggerating his resume. Does he have time for anything else?
 Although Mr. Bianchi mourns the dearth of political scandals and eye-catching homicide cases of the caliber that inspired the memorable O.J. Simpson and Clinton-Lewinsky enactments of previous years, he has faith in the ingenuity of his fellow New Yorkers. ''These new people, Bush and gore, are like vanilla ice cream,'' he said, ''but I think we'll get some interesting versions of the Al Gore Kiss.''
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 ''They may not have used the exact phrase, but both Wallace and Thurmond would certainly have referred to the two major parties as Republicrats, '' said Mr. Karabell, using the term Mr. Nader has repeatedly voiced in this campaign to persuade voters that there is little difference between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas (whom he has also  called ''Gush and Bore''). And Mr. Nader's construction that the major-party candidates are ''Tweedledum and Tweedledee'' is also not new in American politics. Many Democrats, of course, are furious with Mr. Nader, and Vice President Gore went so far as to depict him as a pawn, unwitting or not, of big business. In doing so, Mr. Gore was trying to cloak himself in the purer-than-thou mantle that has often been worn by the third-party candidates. ''If the big oil companies and chemical manufacturers and the other big polluters were able to communicate a message to this state, they would say vote for George Bush or, in any case, vote for Ralph Nader,'' Mr. Gore told a crowd in Wisconsin last week. ''They would say whatever you do, don't vote for Al Gore.''
 For what struck me about the dubious premise behind the AT&T breakup is that a similar premise underlies many proposals for privatizing Social Security. George W. Bush's proposal, admittedly, does not count on the stupidity of markets. Instead, he trusts the people: voters are not supposed to notice that the same pool of money is promised to two different groups of recipients.
 Karen P. Hughes, one of Gov. George W. Bush's top aides, walked into the governor's office one day in the summer of 1997 and brandished a sheet of paper. ''You're leading in the poll,'' she told Mr. Bush, who had held public office for only two years. Karen P. Hughes, one of Gov. George W. Bush's top aides, walked into the governor's office one day in the summer of 1997 and brandished a sheet of paper. ''You're leading in the poll,'' she told Mr. Bush, who had held public office for only two years. Aides recall that she explained that it was the first presidential poll for the 2000 election. Mr. Bush, who had much less experience in government than most state legislators around the country, was the front-runner among Republicans. Mr. Bush's candidacy began like a rumor, evanescent and insubstantial but growing on thousands of tongues. Partly on its own, and partly orchestrated by Mr. Bush's political strategist, Karl Rove, the bandwagon began to move: governors dropped by to pay their respects, speaking invitations poured in, policy experts and Republican gurus came by to bless the noncandidacy, and abruptly he found himself under much greater scrutiny than ever before. When a right-wing friend reproached Mr. Bush for supposedly having said ''God damn,'' Mr. Bush erupted in a string of expletives. As the friend remembers it, Mr. Bush finally cooled down and gave examples of the obscenities and vulgarities he uses, but added fiercely that he does not take God's name in vain. In his first term of office, Mr. Bush deferred discussion of a presidential run, focusing first on his re-election bid in 1998. ''His basic point was, 'go ahead, we'll do reasonable things to keep open the possibility' '' of a presidential bid, Mr. Rove recalled. As a result, Mr. Bush did some travel out of the state, worked on fund-raising, and undertook a series of tutorials to learn more about federal and foreign policy. But Mr. Rove added, ''I wasn't confident at all that he would make the decision to run. I know him too well.'' In the end, Mr. Bush walloped his opponent in 1998, winning 69 percent of the vote and becoming the first Texas governor elected to a second, consecutive four-year term. Once re-elected, Mr. Bush turned to the question of the presidency and began grappling with what friends say were his two main concerns: his family and his past. Once in 1994, when Mr. Bush was running for governor, he went to pick up his daughters from a party. But they had forbidden him to go inside, and so, as he recalled it, he obediently waited in his car for a half-hour until they emerged on their own, even as other parents wandered in and out. On another occasion, when he was already governor, Mr. Bush teased Jenna  about phone calls from a boyfriend, forgetting that a television crew was in the house filming the decoration of the governor's Christmas tree. The footage was broadcast,  and Jenna was mortified -- and furious. All this left his family wondering what a presidential bid would mean to their lives. In 1998, the Bushes invited their friends Bob and Jan Bullock to a Christmas Eve dinner, and Mr. Bullock turned to the two girls and said, ''Your dad needs to run for president, and you all got to support him in doing this.'' ''Little Jenna Bush had tears in her eyes,'' Mrs. Bullock recalled. ''And the governor, too.'' Friends say that Mr. Bush might have preferred to wait until 2004 before running for the presidency, to acquire more experience and give his daughters the chance to mature more. But he sometimes compared himself to a cork in a river, and he acknowledged that the currents were particularly auspicious for 2000 -- what with an open Republican field and a scandal-plagued Democratic administration -- and might not again give him the opportunity. One insight into Mr. Bush's reasoning comes from a seven-page memo sent to him on Nov. 2, 1998, on the eve of his re-election as governor. It was already clear that he was going to win overwhelmingly. The memo acknowledges that ''the mud will come,'' but it adds that a remarkable alignment of factors made a run uniquely favorable in 2000. These included Mr. Bush being financially secure with the sale of the Texas Rangers baseball team; his high ranking in the polls; a sense among many Republicans that they needed a new leader; and a sympathy among some journalists toward conservative candidates after disenchantment with the Clinton presidency. Friends say that one of Mr. Bush's key reservations about a presidential bid was his past: he did not want reporters prying around in it. It is unclear just why Mr. Bush is so sensitive about his background. He has admitted having been ''irresponsible'' in a way that suggests he may have used illegal drugs, serious questions remain about how he got into the National Guard and whether he fulfilled his obligations, and chunks of his life remain rather mysterious. But plenty of journalists and Democratic investigators have been digging, and nothing particularly sensational has been proved. Whatever his reason, Mr. Bush prefers to keep a veil over his past. He did not cooperate with his two principal biographers, Bill Minutaglio and Elizabeth Mitchell, even though both in the end wrote books that in many ways are quite sympathetic to him. ''He got it in his head that the Minutaglio book was going to be damaging,'' recalled a friend of Mr. Bush's who says he discussed it with him. ''All this stuff about drugs and women was out there and he thought it was going to be the focus.'' Then along came a different opportunity. Mickey Herskowitz, a Houston Chronicle sports columnist and a longtime friend of the Bushes, called to propose a ghost-written autobiography of Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush and his aides agreed, and Mr. Bush gave Mr. Herskowitz a series of interviews. But there were a series of collisions, according to a person involved in the project. The first occurred when Mr. Herskowitz suggested that the book begin with Mr. Bush's sense of a family legacy. The campaign was horrified; the last thing it wanted was to remind voters that he was the scion of a political family. The result was that in August, the campaign took over the book project from Mr. Herskowitz, and Ms. Hughes began to write the book herself. The deadline was exceptionally tight, and campaign aides say she wrote it based on Mr. Bush's speeches and her own knowledge of him. Ms. Hughes declined to comment on the book. Just a single paragraph recounts how Mr. Bush's daughter Barbara lost her stuffed dog, Spikey, while visiting her grandparents. It adds that Vice President Bush spent the night roaming the residence looking for Spikey, even though it was the middle of his presidential campaign and he had a presidential debate the next day. The paragraph relates that Grandpa Bush persisted until he found Spikey, enabling little Barbara to sleep peacefully. It is a charming story. But it also seems to be riddled with about as many errors as a paragraph could contain. According to a 1990 account of the same incident by the governor's mother, Barbara Bush, Spikey was a cat rather than a dog, Vice President Bush gave up after a fruitless search, Spikey was not found until the next day, and the incident happened in 1987 rather than 1988. President and Mrs. Bush confirmed through a spokesman that they did not recall that Spikey's disappearance occurred on the eve of a debate. Much of the ''autobiography'' is so meager and bears so few of Mr. Bush's own fingerprints that to some reviewers it simply underscored his lack of depth. As the Amazon.com review said: ''George W. has been labeled a lightweight by some; 'A Charge to Keep' will do nothing to dispel that notion.'' Mr. Bush agreed to give two interviews for this series of biographical articles. And although he is normally charming, there were times when he bristled over questions about his past. ''I'm sure it's discouraging to you,'' Mr. Bush said later in the same interview, in April. ''But it's not my favorite deal to talk about myself. So I'm sitting here trying to figure out what the heck you're going to write. And generally it's not anything I like to read, so it's kind of an awkward moment for both of us. Mr. Bush paused and added sourly: ''Not really.'' While Mr. Bush may not always impress people with his depth, he does convey a certain solidity. A list of the 533 overnight guests in the governor's mansion during Mr. Bush's administration, obtained after requests through the Texas public information law, shows that the Bushes typically had 5 to 10 overnight guests a month. But overwhelmingly they were old family friends or relatives, like Laura Bush's Southern Methodist University sorority sisters. But many were people of modest means who clearly were treasured simply for their friendship. The most frequent visitors of all were people like Jenna Welch, Governor Bush's mother-in-law; Debbie Stapleton, Mr. Bush's cousin, and her husband, Craig Stapleton; Mike and Nancy Weiss, old friends from West Texas; Pam Nelson, a sorority sister of Laura Bush's and still one of her closest friends; and Joe and Jan O'Neill, old friends in Midland who introduced George and Laura Bush to each other. Mr. Bush has been criticized for appointing buddies and financial supporters to important positions in Texas, and for going to bat on behalf of corporate tycoons who contributed to him. But while detractors argue that this is unseemly, it is not the stuff of conventional scandal. Moreover, Mr. Bush's speeches and correspondence -- obtained after requests under the Texas public information law -- suggested that Mr. Bush had core principles that went beyond political expediency. In speaking to Republican groups during the early primaries, for example, Mr. Bush routinely suggested that ''the hardest job in America'' was that of a single mother. In early 1998, there was tremendous pressure on Mr. Bush to grant a reprieve to Karla Faye Tucker, a murderer who had later married a prison chaplain and become a born-again Christian. Mrs. Tucker appeared so remorseful and so pious that conservatives who usually supported the death penalty called loudly on Mr. Bush to grant a reprieve, warning that his presidential bid would suffer if he did not. Among the correspondence obtained under the Texas law is a fax to the governor from Mr. Wead, the former aide who also wrote the memo urging Mr. Bush to run for the White House. Mr. Wead, who has been a link between Mr. Bush and evangelical Christians, began: A notation on the memo reports that Mr. Bush telephoned Mr. Wead after receiving it, but the content of the conversation is not disclosed. Meanwhile, Mr. Bush was getting similar pressure at closer quarters. A family friend says that Mr. Bush told him that two days before the scheduled execution, his daughter Jenna dropped her fork dramatically on her plate at dinner and announced that she was against the death penalty. Mr. Bush did not bend. He refused to grant a reprieve, and Mrs. Tucker was executed by lethal injection. What does Mr. Bush's biography add up to? In almost six years as Texas governor, Mr. Bush is credited by most Democrats as well as Republicans with having been an effective leader who made good appointments. But these have been six smooth years when he has been able to ride a rising Republican tide and a strong economy; he has not been tested by crisis. Some of the nostrums on both sides do not seem to stand up to scrutiny. Mr. Bush is sometimes mocked as a dimwit, but this seems flatly wrong. On the contrary, those who have spent time with him, Democrats as well as Republicans, agree that he is smart -- even brilliant -- in those areas that are important to him. The fairer question about Mr. Bush is not whether he has the intelligence to be president but whether he has the intellectual curiosity. He seems exceptionally unreflective, impatient with the world of ideas, uninterested in some of the nation's key political debates. Characteristically, he does not believe in evolution -- he says the jury is still out -- but he does not actively disbelieve in it either; as a friend puts it, ''he doesn't really care about that kind of thing.'' Mr. Bush comes across as someone with a personal rudder in life. His priority is his family, not his politics, and since entering public life he has avoided scandal and pandering. Yet for all his personal rudder, Mr. Bush seems to have much less of a policy rudder. He has instincts -- a ''healthy distrust'' for government, as he puts it, and an inclination to support business -- but he does not really display a fully formed ideology. Partly for that reason, and partly because he steers away from controversy, he remains something of an enigma, a work in progress. In his speech to the Republican convention, Mr. Bush criticized the Clinton administration for failing to address any larger purpose or great goals. Yet his question about the present administration -- ''to what end?'' -- could also be asked of his own campaign. Mr. Bush is sometimes compared to President Reagan, and there are strong parallels in their communication skills, in their detachment from details, in their optimism about America. Yet from the start it was evident that Mr. Reagan stood for something rock solid. It is much less clear just what Mr. Bush stands for. Some of Mr. Bush's friends are liberals who would normally vote Democratic but who are making an exception for him. They say they are confident that Mr. Bush's conservative positions reflect simply his Texas background and the need to get through the Republican primaries. If he were elected, they insist, Mr. Bush would appoint Supreme Court justices who would preserve the legal right to obtain an abortion. There is some evidence to support each  belief. In Texas, Mr. Bush has appointed moderates to the state supreme court, and they say he did not ask them about abortion. A friend remembers Mr. Bush ridiculing  campaigners against abortion in a conversation two years ago, and other family friends say that Laura Bush privately favors abortion rights. On the other hand, Mr. Bush has praised Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas as his models, and both support overturning the landmark Roe. v. Wade decision that led to legal abortion. Moreover, an adviser to Mr. Bush says that the governor has privately praised Senator John Ashcroft of Missouri as potentially a great Supreme Court justice. Mr. Ashcroft, a lawyer who is one of the Senate's most conservative Republicans, takes the position that ''the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed.'' Mr. Bush's correspondence offers few clues to resolve these kinds of uncertainties about his policies. Fundamentally, this is because the letters tend to reveal not so much policies as a person -- a governor who focused on setting a tone rather than puzzling through the thicket of issues. A striking proportion of the correspondence, for example, concerns exchanges of good wishes, suggested appointments and invitations to dinners or golf tournaments, and few of the letters evince any particular interest on Mr. Bush's part in policy. The letters -- indeed, Mr. Bush's entire life -- conjure an image of Mr. Bush's possible presidency as a gala celebration on a cruise ship, everyone convivial and happy and, indeed, no child left behind. But the larger uncertainty is simply in which direction this cruise ship of state would steer. Mr. Bush has always seemed focused more on bringing everyone together and raising their spirits than on navigating the ship itself. In September 1995, for example, Vice President Al Gore sent a ''Dear Governor'' letter to Mr. Bush, enclosing a report on reinventing government. Since Mr. Bush also embraced the idea of streamlining government, and since Mr. Gore was the likely Democratic nominee in the year 2000, one might have expected Mr. Bush to show at least a bit of interest. Instead, a scribbled notation by Mr. Bush's assistant reports: ''Gov tossed enclosures.'' This is the last article in a series about the life of George W. Bush.
 There is much information about the presidential candidates available to American voters, if they choose to use it. For instance, last week came news that Vice President Al Gore has a habit of chewing his fingernails to the quick. This was reported in an article in The New York Times about the vice president's health, which is quite good, except for some concern about his cholesterol level. There is much information about the presidential candidates available to American voters, if they choose to use it. For instance, last week came news that Vice President Al Gore has a habit of chewing his fingernails to the quick. This was reported in an article in The New York Times about the vice president's health, which is quite good, except for some concern about his cholesterol level. ''People who are more high-strung or high-energy benefit the most from a habit like nail-biting,'' said Dr. Susan Heitler, a clinical psychologist and the author of ''David Decides About Thumb Sucking'' (Reading Matters, 1996). ''One of Gore's assets is that he is a fairly high-energy, high-potency  person.'' Such rhythmic activities affect the body's physiological state, she said, optimizing heart rate and blood pressure. In such a state, people can think through problems more effectively, she added. ''It would be interesting to know when he does the nail-biting,'' she said of Mr. Gore. ''It could be that his nail-biting correlates to his most creative thinking.'' (He said he did it ''every once in a while'' and did not link it to nervousness.)
 Democrats and civil rights groups have begun drive of unprecedented size to increase black turnout in presidential election, with Vice Pres Al Gore's chances possibly hinging in several close states on effort's effectiveness; drive includes recorded phone calls from Pres Clinton to residents of black neighborhoods; efforts in several states have shown that black turnout can be greatly spurred by combination of effective candidates and marketing (M) On black radio stations and in newspapers, from pulpits to mailboxes to answering machines, Democrats and civil rights organizations have begun an effort of unprecedented size to increase the turnout of black voters in next month's presidential election. In several close states, Vice President Al Gore's chances may hinge on the effort's effectiveness. On black radio stations and in newspapers, from pulpits to mailboxes to answering machines, Democrats and civil rights organizations have begun an effort of unprecedented size to increase the turnout of black voters in next month's presidential election. In several close states, Vice President Al Gore's chances may hinge on the effort's effectiveness. One of the most promising tactics gets under way this week, when telephones in black neighborhoods will begin ringing with a recorded message from President Clinton, urging a vote for Mr. Gore. Similar calls by the president in 1998 on behalf of Democratic candidates in Georgia were considered an important reason black voters represented 29 percent of the total turnout, up from 19 percent in 1994. The drive has both a partisan wing, run by the Gore campaign and the Democratic Party, and an ostensibly nonpartisan wing, run by the N.A.A.C.P. in conjunction with several other civil rights organizations. But both are clearly drawing on the tradition that about 90 percent of black voters usually support Democrats, and they hope to transfer Mr. Clinton's enormous support among African-Americans to Mr. Gore. With enough money and enthusiasm, experts say they may break some records this year. To help reach that goal, the N.A.A.C.P. is spending $9 million -- from a handful of large donations -- on an enormous effort, known as Operation Big Vote, to boost black turnout in a dozen swing states, buying advertising and conducting bus tours with prominent political and entertainment figures urging people to vote. The tours are for the most part hitting the states the Gore campaign needs to win. Rural areas are not being neglected either; the nonpartisan Black Leadership Forum is distributing handbills in hundreds of barbershops and salons in small black communities. But the campaign by the N.A.A.C.P. and related groups, which is not supposed to be partisan, has at times veered toward such strong criticism of the Republican nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, that it has drawn fire for its tone. One television commercial features Renee Mullins, the daughter of James Byrd, the man who was dragged to death in Jasper, Tex., in 1998. In the commercial, Ms. Mullins says that when Mr. Bush refused to support a hate crimes law after her father was killed, ''it was like my father was killed all over again.'' (Texas does have a hate crimes law, but Mr. Bush did not support a bill increasing the penalties for crimes based on race or sexual orientation.) Representative J. C. Watts Jr. of Oklahoma, a black Republican, said the advertisement was out of bounds in suggesting an equivalency between Mr. Bush and Mr. Byrd's killers, and predicted it would backfire. Another advertisement, which the organization placed in The Atlanta Daily World and other black newspapers, urges voters to call Mr. Bush to complain that he has not sufficiently supported the prohibition of racial profiling. Andrea Pringle, communications director of the N.A.A.C.P. National Voter Fund, which was established in July, said the advertisements were not intended to promote Mr. Gore.  ''The intent is to raise the issue of hate crimes legislation, which is an important subject,'' she said. ''In examining any issue, people want to know where the candidates stand on issues, the same reason you have debates and such. This is an important time, an important election cycle where you have an opportunity to elect both a pro-civil rights president and a pro-civil rights Congress, which is very important to the N.A.A.C.P.'' But many Republicans say the group's drive is the equivalent of soft-money advertising for Mr. Gore and the Democrats. The Republican National Committee is also beginning an unusual advertising campaign on black radio stations, urging listeners to consider the party's position on education and taxes, but the attempt is not considered likely to change the overwhelming preference of African-Americans for Democratic candidates. Georgia, where Mr. Bush has consistently been several points ahead in the polls, is not considered a battleground this year, and neither candidate is running television ads here. But the techniques used here and in other states in 1998 are being used in this election's most contested states. Late last week, Mr. Clinton began recording telephone messages that make points on behalf of Mr. Gore similar to the points he had made on behalf of Democrats candidate two years ago. ''The thing that really energizes black voters is the presence of a candidate who is seen as adversely affecting their interest,'' said Mr. Holmes, a Democrat who teaches political science at the historically black college. ''This year, we don't seem to have the same sort of demon or enemy on the ballot. Bush comes across superficially as a good guy, so many people aren't bothering to look closely at his record.''
 If only everybody wore campaign buttons. More buttons are on costumes in ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man' '' than on city streets these days, it seems. Jim McManus at the McManus Democratic Club said only a dozen of his 1,500 members wore buttons to club events. Activists, he calls them. He suspects few New Yorkers today even own one. But Alan and Robert Slater are content to run the only button-making factory in the Northeast. This week, they will churn out thousands of Gore and Bush buttons, including one with Mr. Gore kissing his wife, Tipper, because they think a few people still believe in the symbolic, if not persuasive, power of the campaign button. For now, it keeps them busy. Yet the collectibles market for buttons has never been bigger. People who would never wear a Gore or Bush button will spend hundreds of dollars for a Goldwater or Eleanor Roosevelt button. On Friday, 1,132  presidential campaign buttons were up for bid on eBay, including one that promoted an Al Gore-Dianne Feinstein ticket (for $1,000).
 The diner sits on the border of two adjacent but vastly different neighborhoods: Bushwick, in Brooklyn, and Ridgewood, an interborough area that lies partly in Brooklyn but mostly in Queens. For six days, the World Series games drifted through the neighborhoods, sometimes bringing folks together, sometimes driving them apart, but always acting as a kind of athletic lens that allowed people to see a bit more clearly who they really are. The First Base Inn is a tavern in Ridgewood that sits at the edge of Bushwick's Yankees turf. Though it attracts its share of Yankees fans, it is the first bar near the borough line where a Mets fanatic can safely cheer for Al Leiter, Mike Piazza and Bobby Jones.
 But what is our response to this? We complain about the price. According to polls, the cost of medicine is one of the hottest issues in this election. Vice President Al Gore has warned of price gouging by ''powerful forces.'' In a move intended to lower drug costs at home, Congress has passed a bill that will let anyone reimport American prescription drugs sold more cheaply overseas. Both major candidates have pledged to do something to subsidize or pay for medicines under Medicare. Whoever wins the election, the federal government's bargaining power with major drug companies is almost certainly going to be ratcheted up, forcing prices -- and profits -- down.
 Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader letter responds to Oct 26 editorial; condemns both major-party rivals, George W Bush and Al Gore (M) You discredit our democracy by editorializing on Oct. 26 that the limited ground covered by the Gore and Bush candidacies should define political competition in this election. Millions of voters, when they contrast actual records to rhetoric, find the two major-party candidates similar on excessive corporate power over our government. You discredit our democracy by editorializing on Oct. 26 that the limited ground covered by the Gore and Bush candidacies should define political competition in this election. Millions of voters, when they contrast actual records to rhetoric, find the two major-party candidates similar on excessive corporate power over our government. George W. Bush has a dismal record on the environment, health care and judicial rights. Al Gore has furthered big-business control in America, letting companies decide whether we eat genetically engineered food, letting big agribusiness destroy family farms, and supporting concentration in the financial, telecommunications, cable and health care industries. Mr. Gore's actual record on many environmental issues, in one industry after another, has been one of surrender. My candidacy not only provides the sole competition on these issues, but  also prevents Mr. Gore from cornering votes on the environment simply by not being as bad as Mr. Bush.
 Drive Under Way to Raise Turnout of Black Voters  Democrats and civil rights organizations have begun a sweeping effort to increase the turnout of black voters. In several close states, Vice President Al Gore's chances may hinge on the effort's effectiveness. The candidacy of Gov. George W. Bush came into being partly on its own several years ago, at first surprising even Mr. Bush.
 Last article in series revisiting four swing states in presidential race focuses on race in Ohio; notes Democratic money has poured back into state, despite view that Vice Pres Al Gore concedes state to Gov George W Bush; Bush, who had not been in state for weeks, suddenly resumed visits; Gov Bob Taft comments, interview; photo (M) Last week, Vice President Al Gore's campaign acted as if it was conceding this state's 21 electoral votes to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. The campaign's own spending on television commercials here was cut from $500,000 to $400,000, and for the second week in a row, the Democratic National Committee spent nothing. Mr. Gore, who has not been in Ohio since Oct. 4, resisted pressure from his backers to return. But the signals were mixed. David Leland, the state Democratic chairman, whose rank-and-file organization is considered dangerously shaky by many local politicians, insisted that ''a citizens' army is in place'' to deliver the state for Mr. Gore. Tim Hagan, a former Cuyahoga County commissioner prominent in Democratic politics in Cleveland, said the Gore strategists were shifting their dollars to ''those states that they have a clean shot at winning, and I don't think Ohio is on the list.'' After Ed Rendell, general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said ''reports of the Gore campaign's demise in Ohio are greatly exaggerated,'' Chris Matthews of MSNBC quoted Todd Webster, a spokesman for Mr. Gore's national campaign, as saying, ''Bush is going to win Ohio'' -- the kind of thing that is just not said in big-time politics, even if it is true. This week, to confuse things further, Democratic money poured back into the state. According to officials in both parties, the Democrats earmarked $895,000 for advertising here, compared with the Republicans' $803,000. Much of it went for tough, negative television commercials, with Mr. Gore accusing Mr. Bush of promising the same trillion dollars to both young and old people, and Mr. Bush asking why Mr. Gore says ''one thing, when the truth is another?'' On the other side, one of Mr. Bush's top managers had expressed confidence not too many days ago that ''Ohio is a Republican lock this year,'' and Mr. Bush had not been here for weeks, either. But suddenly he shifted gears, hurriedly scheduling an appearance in northwestern Ohio, a swing region. At an airport rally in Toledo on Thursday evening, which had some of the electricity of a rock concert, he ridiculed Mr. Gore's recent assertion that he was an enemy of big government, despite proposing costly new programs. Speaking in a state where fiscal discipline is considered a cardinal virtue, Mr. Bush said of his rival, ''I know the man is prone to exaggeration, but this takes the cake.'' In an interview, Gov. Bob Taft commented, ''The Bush people are taking no chances here. No Republican has ever been elected president without carrying Ohio, and they take that seriously. He may even come back for a final visit just before Election Day.'' ''We can be competitive here, especially if Gore comes back into the state,'' said James Ruvolo, a former state Democratic chairman who is now a political consultant. ''I'm pushing that; they haven't told me yes and they haven't told me no. I'm convinced people here are taking a second look at Bush now. No question that they like him better than Gore, but they're asking, Is he smart enough for the job? ''George Bush needs Ohio a lot worse than Al Gore,'' Mr. Ruvolo said. ''If nothing else, we should spend enough money to make those other guys pay for this state.'' Mr. Gore has never moved close to the lead in the public polls here, which makes the rapid fluctuations in strategy more difficult to fathom. A Columbus Dispatch poll published on Oct. 1 gave Mr. Bush a five-point lead, 48 percent to 43 percent, with 9 percent for other candidates or undecided. A Cleveland Plain Dealer poll published on Oct. 21 put Mr. Bush ahead by four points, 45 percent to 41 percent, with 14 percent for other candidates or undecided.  And a University of Cincinnati Ohio Poll, released today, gave Mr. Bush an eight-point margin, 50 percent to 42 percent. Mr. Bush's standing improved considerably in the course of the three debates, Mr. Taft asserted, despite early expectations that they would help Mr. Gore. Eric Rademacher, who directs the Ohio Poll, said Mr. Gore's negatives had mounted after the debates. Prof. John Green, a political scientist at the University of Akron, argued that Mr. Bush was well suited to Ohio, because he reminded many people of the state's two most popular politicians, Mr. Taft and Senator George V. Voinovich. ''He's moderately conservative, and he talks about running the government efficiently without being harsh to senior citizens and others with problems,'' Professor Green said. ''You might say that he's running for governor of the United States. Gore's big problem, on the other hand, is that Ohioans aren't hostile to institutions. They're not at all in a populist mood.'' Although Bill Clinton carried Ohio twice, the state has tended toward the Republicans in recent years, at least partly because of major migrations from cities to the suburbs in a half-dozen major metropolitan areas here. Both senators are Republicans, as are all statewide officeholders and the majorities in both houses of the Legislature. That makes Mr. Gore's task harder. With few officeholders and little patronage at its disposal, the Gore campaign is relying heavily on organized labor, whose enthusiasm for the vice president appears spotty.  Government employees' unions,  teachers and the United Auto Workers seem solidly in his corner, but the Teamsters, as one senior union official remarked, ''aren't all that involved in this election.'' Branding Mr. Gore ''a coward'' and defying Democratic efforts to convince the faithful that a vote for him is a vote for Mr. Bush, Mr. Nader drew lively crowds at Cleveland State University and the City Club. A student at Cleveland State held up a placard that said, ''A vote for Gore is a vote for Bush,'' echoing Mr. Nader's contention that the major-party candidates are indistinguishable. A larger imponderable than Mr. Nader is turnout, particularly among blacks. That raises questions about Mr. Clinton: Should he come here to stump for Mr. Gore? If he did, what would be the most likely impact? One Gore strategist, specifying that he was speaking for himself and not necessarily for the campaign, said he would ''like to see Bill Clinton at 71st and Cedar in Cleveland, walking the walk and talking the talk.''  Worried about African-American turnout, Mr. Ruvolo said that he had told the White House as long as two weeks ago that the president should spend part of the last weekend of the campaign in black churches. That, he said, ''would do more to energize our base than anything.'' In the Plain Dealer poll, about a quarter of the voters said they were conflicted -- they approved of the policies of the Clinton administration but not of Mr. Clinton as a man.  About half of those said they planned to vote for Mr. Gore, and about 15 percent said they were undecided. If Mr. Clinton were to emerge as a major factor in the climactic days of the campaign, several politicians suggested, it might hurt Mr. Gore among those undecideds.
 Ralph Nader supporters crowd Iowa City, Iowa, hall to hear him speak; score charges that his candidacy aids Gov George W Bush; Nader scores Democrats, speech; holds he does not have to attack Bush because dangers of Bush presidency are more apparent, interview (M) The students and others who packed a hall at the University of Iowa on Friday night to hear Ralph Nader, the Green Party's presidential candidate, justify his campaign simply did not want to hear any more about the possibility that they would throw the election to Gov. George W. Bush. They were so upset at being confronted with the evil of two lesser candidates, they said, that they refused to vote again for the lesser of two evils. The students and others who packed a hall at the University of Iowa on Friday night to hear Ralph Nader, the Green Party's presidential candidate, justify his campaign simply did not want to hear any more about the possibility that they would throw the election to Gov. George W. Bush. They were so upset at being confronted with the evil of two lesser candidates, they said, that they refused to vote again for the lesser of two evils. ''This year the choice is between George W. Bush and a Democrat who is to the right of Bill Clinton,'' complained Ed Fallon, a Democratic state representative who introduced Mr. Nader. ''I don't begrudge my friends and constituents who plan to vote for Al Gore. I understand their fear of George W. Bush. But voting against somebody isn't enough anymore. If I had three hands maybe I could hold my nose, my gut and my mouth and vote for Al Gore. But in good conscience, I can't, I won't, and you shouldn't either.'' Mr. Nader himself was unsparing in his criticism of the Democrats, attacking them more often and more harshly than he did the Republicans. In an interview after the speech, he explained that he did not feel the need to go after Mr. Bush because the problems of a Bush presidency were more readily apparent. ''Bush is a corporation running for president disguised as a person,'' he said, ''Whereas Gore touts his environmental record, says he can match it against anyone, even me. And that's an invitation.'' Late in the evening, a woman asked Mr. Nader whether by voting for him she would be electing Mr. Bush and endangering the right to abortions. Mr. Nader told her that it would not necessarily happen, noting that conservative presidents have appointed liberal judges to the Supreme Court and vice versa.
 Gov. George W. Bush sent 28 of his fellow Republican governors in teams into the battleground states. Vice President Al Gore, seeking to reassure those who are leaning to the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader -- whose support in swing states like Oregon and Wisconsin could be decisive -- reaffirmed his commitment to the environment before a throng of 30,000 in Madison, home of the University of Wisconsin.
 Correction of Oct 25 article on Vice Pres Al Gore's health: his blood pressure is 110/68 (S)1 An article on Wednesday about the health status of Vice President Al Gore misstated his blood pressure. It is 110/68, not 140/85. An article on Wednesday about the health status of Vice President Al Gore misstated his blood pressure. It is 110/68, not 140/85.
 But other county Republicans have defended the sheriff, who at a 1988 rally for Vice President George Bush referred to the American Civil Liberties Union as ''that great organization that's against everything that is right with America.''
 In your article ''The Empty Booth'' (Oct. 1), you have the answers at your fingertips. One look at the Electoral District boundaries of the 54th Assembly District and you can see the obvious gerrymandering. Communities like Clinton Hill, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Bushwick, Highland Park and Cypress Hills have been divided among several Assembly Districts. How does this promote neighborhood empowerment and interest in the electoral process? In your article ''The Empty Booth'' (Oct. 1), you have the answers at your fingertips. One look at the Electoral District boundaries of the 54th Assembly District and you can see the obvious gerrymandering. Communities like Clinton Hill, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Bushwick, Highland Park and Cypress Hills have been divided among several Assembly Districts. How does this promote neighborhood empowerment and interest in the electoral process?
 What They Were Thinking drew spirited criticism of the picture of the Gores' display of affection in the White House Map Room, three years before their famous convention kiss -- and of our decision to print that photograph a month before the election. What They Were Thinking drew spirited criticism of the picture of the Gores' display of affection in the White House Map Room, three years before their famous convention kiss -- and of our decision to print that photograph a month before the election.
 Still, there is a range of household income, and somewhere in that, there's a middle. The following is one way of defining the nation's bourgeois, and it may be surprising to learn that this middle class, the mathematical middle, isn't quite so well-heeled as the middle class Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George Bush are romancing.
 I asked Gingrich if the shutdown had been the G.O.P.'s Waterloo, as conventional wisdom has it. ''I run this game film in my own head constantly,'' he said. ''If we had come in more reasonable, we would have been sucked into the city, we would have been negotiated into normalcy, like George Bush in 1990. You could see them gradually being absorbed into the Democrats, into 'This is reality; how can you fight reality?' ''But was the shutdown necessary? Gingrich conceded that it was a disastrous miscalculation; but it was a halfhearted concession. He added, ''It was really important to take a former minority party that did not have the habit of leading and get it really intense about taking on the president and forcing the budget and forcing him on welfare reform.'' Gingrich told me that when he related our conversation to John Kasich, head of the House Budget Committee and a key negotiator in 1995, Kasich said that he believed the president would never have signed a balanced-budget bill in 1997 if the Republicans hadn't already proved their willingness to jump off a cliff over the issue. In other words, it wasn't a mistake at all. Would a victory by George W. Bush consolidate the legacy of 1994? Bush p re was the embodiment of the anodyne country-club conservatism that Gingrich and his allies abhorred. But Gingrich insists that the son would be a worthy carrier of the ''opportunity society'' vision, and he reels off the elements of the conservative credo in George W.'s platform -- school vouchers, Social Security privatization, tax cuts, faith-based volunteerism. On the other hand, Bush avoids the use of the ideologically loaded word ''voucher,'' and his proposal for a deep tax cut has seemingly aroused no more enthusiasm than the one that the Republican right more or less forced on Bob Dole in the 1996 campaign. A Bush spokesman confirmed that Bush's campaign strategist Karl Rove has known Gingrich for many years, and ''occasionally visits with him'' to discuss matters of policy. But Bush himself never mentions Gingrich's name, and is practically running against his own party's Congressional leadership, as Clinton pretty much did in regard to the House Democrats in 1996.
 A STAR-STUDDED revival of Gore Vidal's 1960 stage comedy aobut a presidential convention opened at the Virginia Theater last month to some lovely reviews. The movie version of THE BEST MAN (1964), directed by Franklin Schaffner, has won its share of praise, too. Henry Fonda is the good guy, an intellectual liberal with integrity. Cliff Robertson is the bad guy, an ultraconservative Communist-hunting ''man of the people'' who will sink to any depth for votes and endorsements. One of these men is going to win the nomination. Mr. Vidal's screenplay is witty, literate and deadly, which is no surprise. But it is a little jolting to see how the game of politics was so completely a man's world 40 years ago. The actresses in the film (Margaret Leighton, Ann Sothern, Edie Adams) are fine, but their characters are memorable mostly for their hairstyles. A lot of French twists - Friday at 10 p.m. on TCM. A STAR-STUDDED revival of Gore Vidal's 1960 stage comedy aobut a presidential convention opened at the Virginia Theater last month to some lovely reviews. The movie version of THE BEST MAN (1964), directed by Franklin Schaffner, has won its share of praise, too. Henry Fonda is the good guy, an intellectual liberal with integrity. Cliff Robertson is the bad guy, an ultraconservative Communist-hunting ''man of the people'' who will sink to any depth for votes and endorsements. One of these men is going to win the nomination. Mr. Vidal's screenplay is witty, literate and deadly, which is no surprise. But it is a little jolting to see how the game of politics was so completely a man's world 40 years ago. The actresses in the film (Margaret Leighton, Ann Sothern, Edie Adams) are fine, but their characters are memorable mostly for their hairstyles. A lot of French twists - Friday at 10 p.m. on TCM.
 After pulling copies of the past few months' magazines off my shelf, I noted that most of the pictures in What They Were Thinking were of typical Americans caught in their daily activities -- over all, an absorbing portrait of American life in 2000. Imagine my puzzlement, then, when on Oct. 8, we were treated to a 1997 shot of Bill Clinton and several of his advisers in the Map Room. And lo, there are Al and Tipper, engaging in their now familiar conjugal kiss. Was this to ensure that no one is unaware of Al's acclaimed uxoriousness? I hope to see a similarly touching portrait of the Bushes in the coming weeks. After pulling copies of the past few months' magazines off my shelf, I noted that most of the pictures in What They Were Thinking were of typical Americans caught in their daily activities -- over all, an absorbing portrait of American life in 2000. Imagine my puzzlement, then, when on Oct. 8, we were treated to a 1997 shot of Bill Clinton and several of his advisers in the Map Room. And lo, there are Al and Tipper, engaging in their now familiar conjugal kiss. Was this to ensure that no one is unaware of Al's acclaimed uxoriousness? I hope to see a similarly touching portrait of the Bushes in the coming weeks.
 Editorial endorses Al Gore for President, deeming him better qualified than Republican rival George W Bush in terms of knowledge, experience and devotion to the general welfare Despite all the complaints about the difficulty of falling in love with either Al Gore or George W. Bush, these two very different men have delivered a clean, well-argued campaign that offers a choice between two sharply contrasting visions of the future. Even though Vice President Gore is a centrist Democrat and Governor Bush has presented himself as the most moderate Republican nominee in a generation, they have sketched very different pictures of the role of government and how actively the president should help families secure adequate education, health care and retirement. This is also the first presidential campaign in recent history centered on an argument over how best to use real, bird-in-the-hand resources to address age-old domestic problems while also defining the United States' role in a world evermore dependent on it for farsighted international leadership. Having listened to their debate, we today firmly endorse Al Gore as the man best equipped for the presidency by virtue of his knowledge of government, his experience at the top levels of federal and diplomatic decision-making, and his devotion to the general welfare. We offer this endorsement knowing that Mr. Bush is not without his strong points and that Mr. Gore has his weaknesses. But the vice president has struggled impressively and successfully to escape the shadow of the Clinton administration's ethical lapses, and we believe that he would never follow Bill Clinton's example of reckless conduct that cheapens the presidency. Like Senator John McCain, Mr. Gore has been chastened by personal experience with sleazy fund-raising. He has promised to make campaign finance reform his first legislative priority, whereas Mr. Bush is unwilling to endorse the elimination of special-interest money from American politics. Despite all the complaints about the difficulty of falling in love with either Al Gore or George W. Bush, these two very different men have delivered a clean, well-argued campaign that offers a choice between two sharply contrasting visions of the future. Even though Vice President Gore is a centrist Democrat and Governor Bush has presented himself as the most moderate Republican nominee in a generation, they have sketched very different pictures of the role of government and how actively the president should help families secure adequate education, health care and retirement. This is also the first presidential campaign in recent history centered on an argument over how best to use real, bird-in-the-hand resources to address age-old domestic problems while also defining the United States' role in a world evermore dependent on it for farsighted international leadership. Having listened to their debate, we today firmly endorse Al Gore as the man best equipped for the presidency by virtue of his knowledge of government, his experience at the top levels of federal and diplomatic decision-making, and his devotion to the general welfare. We offer this endorsement knowing that Mr. Bush is not without his strong points and that Mr. Gore has his weaknesses. But the vice president has struggled impressively and successfully to escape the shadow of the Clinton administration's ethical lapses, and we believe that he would never follow Bill Clinton's example of reckless conduct that cheapens the presidency. Like Senator John McCain, Mr. Gore has been chastened by personal experience with sleazy fund-raising. He has promised to make campaign finance reform his first legislative priority, whereas Mr. Bush is unwilling to endorse the elimination of special-interest money from American politics. We commend Mr. Bush for running a largely positive, inclusive campaign. He has not reviled government like Ronald Reagan in 1980 or played on divisive social themes as his father did in 1988. But on women's rights, guns and law-enforcement issues, he has a harsh agenda, and the centerpiece of his domestic program is a lavish tax cut for the rich that would negate the next Congress's once-in-a-century opportunity to move the country toward universal health care and stabilization of Social Security and Medicare. Mr. Bush has asked to be judged by something more than his positions. He offers himself as an experienced leader who would end the culture of bickering in Washington and use wisdom and resoluteness in dealing with domestic social problems and international crises. But his resume is too thin for the nation to bet on his growing into the kind of leader he claims already to be. He does have great personal charm. But Mr. Bush's main professional experience was running a baseball team financed by friends and serving for six years as governor in a state where the chief executive has limited budgetary and operational powers. His three debates with Mr. Gore exposed an uneasiness with foreign policy that cannot be erased by his promise to have heavyweight advisers. John F. Kennedy, as a far more seasoned new president, struggled through the Cuban missile crisis while his senior advisers offered contradictory advice on how to confront a Soviet military threat on America's doorstep. The job description is for commander in chief, not advisee in chief. The vice president has admitted to his limitations as a speaker. But Al Gore has a heart -- and a mind -- prepared for presidential-scale challenges. When it comes to the details of policy making, he will not need on-the-job training. Preserving the nation's remarkable prosperity  must be considered the thematic spine of this election. Mr. Gore helped stiffen Mr. Clinton's resolve to maintain the budgetary discipline that erased the federal deficit, stimulated productivity and invigorated the financial markets. Now, Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph Lieberman, promise to maintain fiscal rigor while using the surplus on spending programs and tax breaks for the working families that profited least from the biggest boom in American history. More specifically, Mr. Gore would seize this opportunity to improve the environment and spend more money to hire teachers and build schools. We like his capitalism with a conscience more than the trickle-down sound of Mr. Bush's compassionate conservatism. To be blunter, Mr. Bush's entire economic program is built on a stunning combination of social inequity and flawed economic theory. He would spend more than half the $2.2 trillion non-Social Security surplus on a tax cut at a time when the economy does not need that stimulus. Moreover, as Mr. Gore has said repeatedly and truthfully, over 40 percent of the money would go to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers. Mr. Bush would expand some programs for schools, but he also embraces the Republicans' ideologically driven approach of using vouchers to transfer money from public to private schools. There is nothing compassionate or conservative about blowing the surplus on windfalls for the wealthy instead of investing it in fair tax relief and well-designed social programs. The nation's biggest domestic need remains universal access to health care. Neither candidate would move as fast as we would like. But Mr. Gore has outlined steps that would start us down the road to covering the 45 million uninsured Americans. He would expand Medicare, guarantee prescription drugs for seniors and provide more opportunity for the uninsured to obtain coverage. Mr. Bush favors a bipartisan approach on these issues, but his proposals have seemed reactive rather than driven by an inner passion. Mr. Gore's commitment to Social Security is deeply rooted, too, and more responsible. His proposal to supplement the system with personal investment retirement accounts is superior to Mr. Bush's plan to privatize part of the system. The governor's scheme would siphon money out of Social Security at the very moment when both seniors and younger taxpayers want to see long-term fixes to ensure its solvency. Upon his arrival in Washington more than two decades ago, Mr. Gore set out to master the intricacies of arms control and foreign policy. He broke with his party to support the war against Iraq in 1991. He was an advocate of military force in the Balkans, and today he calls for a more muscular approach to using American forces to protect the country's security interests and prevent genocidal conflicts abroad. We have expressed concern here that Mr. Gore might sometimes be too eager to project power overseas. But it is also true that Mr. Bush's repeated objections to using troops for peacekeeping and nation-building do not add up to a mature national-security vision. Neither does his promise to rely on his running mate, former Defense Secretary Dick  Cheney, and his likely secretary of state, the retired general Colin Powell. Mr. Gore will have advisers, but he will not need a minder. He understands that in order to influence the allies an American president must lead from the front. He has already been eye to eye with the world's leaders. While Mr. Bush has a contracting definition of national security, Mr. Gore has been in the forefront of redefining it to include issues of health and environment and the containment of regional conflicts that can metastasize into threats to world peace. Mr. Gore has said that abortion rights are on the ballot in this election. So are other issues such as civil liberties, environmental protection and gun control. The next president may appoint up to five Supreme Court justices and thereby exercise a lasting impact on the daily lives of Americans. A court tilted by conservative Bush appointees could overturn Roe v. Wade and assert a doctrine of states' rights that would take environmental protection out of federal hands. Ralph Nader and his supporters are not simply being delusional when they say there is no real difference between these candidates. They are being dishonest, and dangerously so. Mr. Gore brings a lifelong record of protecting basic rights for women, minorities and gays, while  Mr. Bush has almost no record at all. The vice president has been the driving force in this administration's environmental successes, and he understands the need for federal regulation for environmental tasks like saving the Everglades and for American leadership to combat global warming. Mr. Bush is for an unrealistic regimen of negotiating with industry on air and water problems and for letting the oil companies loose in sensitive areas. Most citizens know that Mr. Gore wins any comparison with Mr. Bush on experience and knowledge. Yet many voters seem more comfortable with Mr. Bush's personality and are tempted to gamble on him. We do not dismiss this desire for someone who they feel does not talk down to them and would come to the White House free of any connection to Mr. Clinton's excesses. But it is important to remember that the nation's prosperity, its environmental progress and its guarantees of civil rights and reproductive freedom took years to build. They could be undone in a flash by a pliable and inexperienced president driven by a highly ideological Congress. Mr. Gore does have a tendency to be patronizing and to exaggerate. But he has a career of accomplishment that can stand on its own without exaggeration. Despite his uneven performance in the debates, the content of his campaign in these final days demonstrates how much he has grown in the last year. Voting for him is not a gamble on unknown potential. We support Albert Gore Jr. with the firm belief that he will go just as far in bringing ''honor and dignity'' back to the White House as Mr. Bush, and that he will bring an extra measure of talent and conviction as well. His seriousness of purpose, his commitment to American leadership in the world and his concern for those less fortunate in American society convince us that he will lead the country into a creative, productive and progressive era at the beginning of the 21st century.
 Text of Vice Pres Al Gore's remarks at campaign rally, Minneapolis (S)t My opponent, Governor Bush, likes to say that we were a whole lot better off eight years ago than we are today. He recommends that we go back to the kind of policies that we had eight years ago and get rid of the ones that we have today.
 Did you believe that your message was subtle? Yes, you documented that Al Gore has kissed his wife in public on another occasion. It's not surprising what the photo archives will uncover. It's even less surprising that Bill Clinton took full advantage of this opportunity to skewer the Republican Party, to assert his ''close personal'' relationship with a foreign leader and to tout his economic agenda. Samuel Berger fell into line, too, by suggesting that the Gores will warm our nation with their devotion. For years the news media have informed us that Bill Clinton's marital infidelity (in the office, with an employee, while on the job) was unrelated to his performance as our president. Now you want us to believe that Al Gore's loving marriage (which I admire) will be an asset to his performance as president. You can't have it both ways. Did you believe that your message was subtle? Yes, you documented that Al Gore has kissed his wife in public on another occasion. It's not surprising what the photo archives will uncover. It's even less surprising that Bill Clinton took full advantage of this opportunity to skewer the Republican Party, to assert his ''close personal'' relationship with a foreign leader and to tout his economic agenda. Samuel Berger fell into line, too, by suggesting that the Gores will warm our nation with their devotion. For years the news media have informed us that Bill Clinton's marital infidelity (in the office, with an employee, while on the job) was unrelated to his performance as our president. Now you want us to believe that Al Gore's loving marriage (which I admire) will be an asset to his performance as president. You can't have it both ways.
 Officials of the American Muslim Alliance acknowledge that some members have hard-line views against Israel, but they say the group is essentially mainstream and advocates peaceful solutions to the Mideast conflict. Its support has long been actively courted by politicians of both major parties -- notably Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who recently accepted its endorsement for president.
