 Rep Rick A Lazio denies he distances self from Republican presidential candidate Gov George W Bush, but insists Senate race in New York is about his candidacy, not other Republicans; has methodically sought to define self as more moderate than Bush; campaigns in Albany and Utica; steps up his attacks on Hillary Rodham Clinton as well-heeled outsider; Clinton's campaign releases two television ads, both with Robert Kennedy Jr endorsing her and recalling how his father, who was not native New Yorker, was elected senator from NY; photo (M) A day after barely crossing paths with Gov. George W. Bush on his New York visit, Representative Rick A. Lazio said today that he had not tried to distance himself from the Republican presidential candidate. But he also insisted that the Senate race was about his candidacy,  not about other Republicans. The two attended the annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner on Thursday night but did not appear together for even a photo opportunity. By contrast, Mr. Lazio's opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton, attended a rally with Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman while they were also in the city for the dinner. A day after barely crossing paths with Gov. George W. Bush on his New York visit, Representative Rick A. Lazio said today that he had not tried to distance himself from the Republican presidential candidate. But he also insisted that the Senate race was about his candidacy,  not about other Republicans. The two attended the annual Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner on Thursday night but did not appear together for even a photo opportunity. By contrast, Mr. Lazio's opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton, attended a rally with Vice President Al Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman while they were also in the city for the dinner. Governor Bush and Mr. Gore have spent little time campaigning in New York during the general election, given that the heavily Democratic state is expected to go for the Gore ticket. At the same time, Mr. Lazio has methodically sought to define himself as a more moderate Republican than Mr. Bush, asserting, for example, that his tax plan would cost less than Mr. Bush's. At a campaign stop here today, Mr. Lazio insisted that he was not avoiding Mr. Bush on the campaign trail. ''I'd love to campaign with him in New York,'' the four-term Republican representative said. But, he quickly added: ''This is about my record. This isn't about George Bush, Al Gore, Bill Clinton, Newt Gingrich. This is about Rick Lazio and Hillary Clinton.''
 The Republican National Committee released a new 30-second Spanish-language television commercial this week that promotes Gov. George W. Bush's promise to improve public schools and salutes his record on the issue in Texas. It is running in five states, most of them where the presidential candidates are in close races and all of them with many Hispanic voters: California, Florida, New Mexico, Nevada and Pennsylvania. The Republican National Committee released a new 30-second Spanish-language television commercial this week that promotes Gov. George W. Bush's promise to improve public schools and salutes his record on the issue in Texas. It is running in five states, most of them where the presidential candidates are in close races and all of them with many Hispanic voters: California, Florida, New Mexico, Nevada and Pennsylvania. ON THE SCREEN -- The television commercial opens with black-and-white images of an impoverished barrio: a rundown house, a sorrowful man sitting on a curb, a lonely boy walking among the weeds that have sprouted under a bridge. Then, as the subject of the spoken words changes from the neglect of Hispanic people around the country to the strides being made by Hispanic students in Texas, the images bloom into full color, focusing on the happy faces and postures of a Hispanic teacher and her Hispanic students in a classroom. Hispanic children run merrily outside a school. And then Mr. Bush, in color and in close-up, talks directly to the viewer. THE SCRIPT -- (translated from Spanish to English by the Bush campaign) -- First, an unseen announcer says, ''They say that the economy's better than ever, but in our neighborhoods, we feel forgotten. We need a better education. And that means a new commitment. In Texas, Governor Bush raised academic standards and teacher salaries. Test scores improved. Now minority children in Texas lead the country in academic improvement.'' Governor Bush, speaking Spanish, says, ''For me, education is No. 1. Because our children deserve the best.'' ACCURACY -- Under Mr. Bush's watch, Texas did raise standards and salaries, and Mr. Bush demonstrated as much interest in education as in any other issue. But some of the claims here about his education record are selective and broad. By some measures, in some grades, minority children in Texas were at or near the top in the nation for improvement; by others, they fared less well, especially in higher grades. Scores on standardized college-admission tests, for example, have not changed much. Mr. Bush, as both a governor and a presidential candidate, has spoken in a more welcoming, concerned voice about Hispanic immigrants than most other Republicans. But critics say he has not moved nearly as aggressively as he could have to make sure that poor children in Texas, Hispanic and otherwise, have health care or to improve conditions in the impoverished ''colonias'' of Hispanic immigrants near the Mexican border. SCORECARD -- In some ways, the subject matter and the claims here are less important than the language being spoken, which tells Hispanic voters that they matter. It is a message they are receiving louder and clearer this election year than ever before; in fact, this is the fourth Spanish-language commercial the Republican committee has released. The goal is for Mr. Bush to blunt Democrats' advantage with Hispanic voters, and the hope that he can do that is fueled by the demographics behind his 1998 re-election in Texas. Some surveys showed Mr. Bush receiving nearly half the Hispanic vote.
 Frank Rich Op-Ed column says Bill Clinton was winner in third and final presidential debate between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; says his shadow loomed large over almost every exchange and that Gore's persistent and ineffectual efforts to fight it rather than confronting Bush may yet determine his fate on November 7; drawing (M) The pundits' incantatory verdict on debate 3 says Al Gore won ''on points,'' but didn't much affect the tightest horse race in 40 years. That's true, but I do think there was a single clear-cut winner in this and maybe all three debates -- the elephant (albeit Democratic) in the room, Bill Clinton. Though his name has barely been mentioned -- and on Tuesday only by George W. Bush, who also applauded the president for his efforts at Sharm el Sheik -- his shadow loomed large over almost every exchange. Mr. Gore's persistently ineffectual boxing with that shadow, rather than his fisticuffs with Mr. Bush, may yet determine his fate as we slouch toward a potential record-low turnout on Nov. 7. The trick this year has been for a candidate to harness himself to the virtues of a president whose job approval rating remains high (60 percent) while staying clear of his personal failings. This should have been a lock for Mr. Gore, an impeccable family man who was, after all, a partner in a presidency that has presided over skyrocketing employment and home ownership and plummeting welfare rolls and crime rates. But the vice president is so intent on shucking the ''bad'' Clinton that he has rarely capitalized on the ''good'' Clinton. He doesn't seem to realize that the president's residual popularity is such that in a hypothetical Clinton-Bush match-up in an ABC News poll this month Mr. Bush was behind by five points. When Darrell Hammond, who also impersonates Mr. Gore, revived his Clinton-as-scamp on ''Saturday Night Live'' last weekend, the audience welcomed him back like a conquering hero. Mr. Gore and Mr. Clinton aren't buddies these days, as Melinda Henneberger and Don Van Natta Jr. chronicled in yesterday's Times. The Gore command has not only debated the value of Mr. Clinton's making a last-minute campaign blitz to mobilize the party faithful, but doesn't want the two men appearing together in any case. A far more damaging image, though, has been Mr. Gore's visible, Hamlet-like vacillation about the president during the debates. The vice president rarely trumpets his own administration's record -- lest he get caught mentioning the dread ''C'' word in prime time. This may be his way of proving that he is his ''own man,'' but it makes him look more condescending to voters than his sighs and eye-rolling ever did -- for the implication is that we're as dumb as those on-air focus groups and don't remember where he's been, for better and worse, for the past eight years. At the same time Mr. Gore has gone berserk in trying to prove that he's no Clintonesque cad (as if anyone thought he was). From the overheated disowning of a congresswoman's convention-week fund-raiser at the Playboy Mansion to the excessive use of his wife and children as props to his lofty rhetoric about ''values'' (five such vacuous sermonettes in debate 2 alone), this campaign is not only holier-than-thou but preachier than William Bennett flogging a book of virtues. Mr. Gore's incorrigible running mate, Joe Lieberman, has now taken to invoking Scripture to back up his stands on health care and environmentalism. Incredibly, Mr. Bush -- a candidate with minimal grasp of policy (his own positions often included) -- has figured this out (or at least his handlers have). When he incessantly promises, as he did on Tuesday, to ''change the tone'' in a Washington marked by ''bickering'' and ''bitterness'' and ''arguing,'' what is he attacking if not the Gingrich Congress that shut down the government and tried to run Mr. Clinton out of town? Thus does Mr. Bush ingeniously, if disingenuously, triangulate in the most shameless Clintonesque manner -- making himself look like more of a foe of such Washington Clinton-haters as Tom DeLay and Dan Burton than Mr. Gore is. Mr. Bush has also cunningly hijacked some of the Clinton rhetorical playbook that defeated his father in '92. In the debate held eight years ago at this week's site, Washington University in St. Louis, the then-Governor Clinton talked, as George W. now does, of how he wanted to ''bring this country together, not divide it,'' and of how ''Congress is hungry for someone who will work with them instead of manipulate them.'' It was also in the '92 debates that Mr. Clinton boasted of how he had worked with Republicans and Democrats in his own state to find ''common-sense'' solutions to ''the real problems of real people.'' Though Mr. Bush stops short of saying that he feels anyone's pain, he talked about the love in his heart so often on Tuesday that John Podhoretz, a Bush supporter, wrote in The New York Post that it was ''enough to make your skin crawl.'' The Texas governor also promises an administration with ''people who represent all America'' -- his modest variation on the Clinton promise of one that ''looks like America.'' It may all be hooey -- Mr. Bush's current administration doesn't even reflect the minority demographics of Texas -- but it reminds people, at least subliminably (as he might say), of what they liked (and may still like) about Mr. Clinton. The cosmetic Clintonization of Mr. Bush has been so effective that the latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll finds that voters ''who approve of Clinton's job performance but do not like him personally'' prefer Bush to Gore by 55 to 24. Only a month ago the Bush-Gore margin in this same group and poll was a narrow 42 to 37. Democrats anticipating the worst are starting to look for scapegoats. If an incumbent vice president loses at a time of peace and prosperity to an opponent with modest achievements, a wealthy scion's work ethic (9-to-5 days punctuated by long runs and photo ops, according to Texas records) and a tendency to speak in tongues, it must be Ralph Nader's fault, or Jim Lehrer's, or a press that lets Mr. Bush get away with fibs far more substantive than Mr. Gore's exaggerations. If the vice president himself is faulted by his own partisans, it's usually only for superficial failings -- mainly his grating personality makeovers. But it's not that simple. If Mr. Bush epitomizes the consistency of small minds as he offers boilerplate, banalities and evasions to almost any question put to him, Mr. Gore epitomizes the paralysis that can befall even a fertile mind that is in abject, craven fear of giving offense. In his own way the vice president can be as inarticulate as Mr. Bush -- witness his inability in the debates to clearly differentiate his position on gun control, or to use any of his digressions to challenge the single most chilling moment of the entire campaign, the governor's grinning (and, as it turned out, inaccurate) boast of how Texas would ''put to death'' all three men who murdered James Byrd. It took an ordinary citizen in the final debate to find the courage to call Mr. Bush on his inhumanity, and even then Mr. Gore never did pick up the theme. Bill Clinton's problem was never fear -- it was if anything the reverse, recklessness. A little of that may be the only antidote to Mr. Gore's troubles now.
 Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore are running neck and neck in Florida, largest state still in contention with 25 electoral votes; both are hotly pursuing retirees as small shift of votes from age group can mean difference between winning and losing; are unlikely to swing many votes with appeals to seniors on matters like Social Security and Medicare as many show little inclination to vote as bloc based on self interest; elderly voters say Bush and Gore plans for Social Security and Medicare have left them more confused than comforted; photo (M) Pauline Bracken got home last Sunday to find a long message on her answering machine that began: ''Hello, this is Barbara Bush. I'm calling to tell you about my son George W.'s plan to protect Social Security.'' Pauline Bracken got home last Sunday to find a long message on her answering machine that began: ''Hello, this is Barbara Bush. I'm calling to tell you about my son George W.'s plan to protect Social Security.'' The calls from Mrs. Bush -- tens of thousands were made last weekend to older voters across the state -- are but one example of an extravagant effort this year by both parties and the presidential campaigns to woo the votes of the elderly in Florida. The reason is clear. With 25 electoral votes, Florida is the largest state still in serious contention, and Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore are running neck and neck here. Three dozen retirees interviewed in the Tampa Bay area this weekend, for example, showed little inclination to vote as a bloc based on their self-interest, and said that the Bush and Gore plans for Social Security and Medicare left them more confused than comforted. But as much as they think and talk about it, the people interviewed cannot see much difference between Mr. Gore's proposal for prescription drug coverage and Mr. Bush's. ''It's just too complicated to understand,'' said Bill Hinver, 81, a retired machinist from Pittsburgh. ''I mean, Bush has a plan and Gore has a plan. But they're just running for election, and they'll promise you everything and give you nothing.'' On balance, Mr. Hinver, a committed Republican, said he thought Mr. Bush had a better drug proposal, but he could not explain why. Mr. Mikszenas, who worked in production control for General Electric, agreed that Mr. Bush's plan was probably better. But he added, ''It's just too complicated, and I don't pretend to understand it thoroughly.'' The fact is, there are big philosophical differences between the Gore and Bush drug plans. But it is not surprising that voters are confused, because comparing them line by line is impossible. Mr. Gore would expand the government's Medicare program so that a drug benefit would be available voluntarily to all older Americans for an additional monthly premium. Mr. Bush would try to induce competition among private insurance companies to sell drug coverage to the elderly, with the government partly subsidizing the premiums. But retirees cannot figure which plan would help them more, because Mr. Bush has left many details unspecified, including what his basic benefit would be worth, what the deductibles and co-payments would be and what would happen if the government subsidy in his plan proved to be insufficient to get companies to offer the coverage. Still, taken as a group, elderly voters do vote somewhat differently than younger ones do. In Florida, a poll this month by Mason-Dixon Polling and Research found that voters 65 and older favored Mr. Gore, 51 percent to 37 percent. Younger voters favored Mr. Bush by approximately the same margin. For example, in the 1998 election for governor here, a majority of voters 60 and older voted for the Republican candidate, Jeb Bush, who was elected, but a majority of those 65 and older voted for his Democratic opponent, Buddy MacKay.
 Her opponent in the New York race, Representative Rick A. Lazio, will not let her forget. He calls her health plan ''an unmitigated disaster.'' Likewise, Gov. George W. Bush chides Al Gore, saying the vice president joined Mrs. Clinton in fighting for ''a government-run health care system'' in 1993.
 Despite scrutiny applied to Gov George W Bush's life during current presidential election, small chapter has largely escaped attention, namely, modest summer spent in Alaska in 1974 working for Alaska International Industries, airline-and-construction business, during oil-boom days when construction on 800-mile trans-Alaska pipeline was just beginning; Bush has discussed episode with few friends but not biographers (M) Despite the scrutiny applied to George W. Bush's life this election season, one small chapter has largely escaped attention. In an episode he has discussed with a few friends but not biographers, Mr. Bush spent the summer of 1974 working for a young airline-and-construction business in Alaska, during the oil-boom days when construction on the 800-mile trans-Alaska pipeline was just beginning. Bob Heath, who would bring him here to work in the noisy, chaotic airport offices of the young company, Alaska International Industries, recalls receiving a letter from an executive at a Houston construction company asking about a summer job for Mr. Bush, then 27 and halfway through two years at Harvard Business School. Despite the scrutiny applied to George W. Bush's life this election season, one small chapter has largely escaped attention. In an episode he has discussed with a few friends but not biographers, Mr. Bush spent the summer of 1974 working for a young airline-and-construction business in Alaska, during the oil-boom days when construction on the 800-mile trans-Alaska pipeline was just beginning. Bob Heath, who would bring him here to work in the noisy, chaotic airport offices of the young company, Alaska International Industries, recalls receiving a letter from an executive at a Houston construction company asking about a summer job for Mr. Bush, then 27 and halfway through two years at Harvard Business School. Assured that Mr. Bush would, Mr. Heath replied, ''Ship him up.'' ''We had never heard of George Bush,'' Mr. Heath said recently.  ''Didn't have a clue.'' But Mr. Bush was a college graduate who had decided to pursue a business career,  ''and we could use all we could get our hands on.'' The aviation arm of Alaska International had a colorful list of clients, including the Central Intelligence Agency and the shah of Iran. But Mr. Bush knew nothing about them, says Dan Bartlett, whom the Bush presidential campaign has placed in charge of dealing with the press on biographical matters. Mr. Bush, who had been trained as a military pilot in the Texas Air National Guard before enrolling in business school, was given a desk job in the planning department of Alaska International, which was trying to cope with an avalanche of work. ''As I remember,'' Mr. Heath said,  Mr. Bush ''was a great help in trying to figure out what we were going to be when we grew up. No one understood which move to make next. We were trying to structure the company.'' What might seem puzzling about Mr. Bush's sojourn in Alaska is that it never comes up. His autobiography does not mention it. Nor do three other biographies of him published recently. Reporters on his campaign plane say they cannot recall his ever mentioning it, and many of his friends say they have never heard him refer to it. In his book, Mr. Bush recounts the summers he spent delivering mail at a law firm, working for a stockbroker, roughnecking on an offshore oil rig, helping out on a ranch and selling sporting goods. But there is no mention of Alaska. Mr. Bartlett, the Bush spokesman,  said he did not know why the summer job had not come up before in interviews with the governor. As for why Mr. Bush himself so rarely mentions it, Mr. Bartlett said it was so long ago, so brief and so uneventful that it hardly ever seemed to the governor worth mentioning. When Mr. Bush arrived in Fairbanks, Alaska International Industries was a fledgling business whose holdings included Alaska International Air, an air cargo company that was loading its giant Lockheed-382 Hercules airplanes, the civilian version of C-130's, with construction equipment and supplies and flying them to pipeline workers 24 hours a day. In the summer of 1974, however, during the period Mr. Bush worked at the company, Alaska International Air was too busy flying supplies to the pipeline to take work outside Alaska, Mr. Bergt said. He said Mr. Bush ''wouldn't have known'' about the connections between Alaska International and the C.I.A., although he ''might have heard some talk around the company.'' In 1974, Fairbanks was jammed with construction workers. Mr. Bush rented a room with kitchen privileges from Grace Danks, a widow who worked as a waitress and lived in a two-story house in a tidy neighborhood close to downtown. Sally Smith, a Democrat who is the new mayor of Juneau, was living in Fairbanks that summer and says she went out with Mr. Bush several times. They were introduced, she recalls, by Alex Miller, a Democrat who worked as a Washington lobbyist for Mr. Bergt. Betsy Brenneman, who would later work as a journalist in Alaska, sat next to Mr. Bush at the wedding of two Harvard Business School graduates in Davenport, Iowa, in October 1976. The bride, who had been her college roommate, had told her of Mr. Bush's Alaska work.
 Gov George W Bush campaigns in Maine, where he is joined by Sen John McCain, who says Bush is fully prepared to lead; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain stumped side by side today, with the senator declaring at a rollicking airport rally that the governor was ''fully prepared'' to lead. But once again things did not go quite as planned between the two former primary rivals. The high point of the campaign day was supposed to be a unity rally in New Hampshire, victor and vanquished together, with Mr. McCain appealing to independents and swing voters in the state where he defeated  Mr. Bush in the primary and forced him to fight for his nomination. Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain stumped side by side today, with the senator declaring at a rollicking airport rally that the governor was ''fully prepared'' to lead. But once again things did not go quite as planned between the two former primary rivals. The high point of the campaign day was supposed to be a unity rally in New Hampshire, victor and vanquished together, with Mr. McCain appealing to independents and swing voters in the state where he defeated  Mr. Bush in the primary and forced him to fight for his nomination. When Mr. McCain finally caught up with the Bush campaign in Maine, he showed no reservations. He and Mr. Bush shook hands with the crowd, side by side. Mr. McCain waved even more antically from the stage than Mr. Bush did, earning a roar when he was introduced by Senator Olympia J. Snowe. And Mr. McCain, the man who once declared to audiences that he was ''fully prepared to lead,'' implying that the governor wasn't, gave Mr. Bush his blessings this time. ''Who do you think won those debates?'' Mr. McCain called out, drawing a chant of ''Bush! Bush! Bush!'' from the crowd. ''You saw in Governor Bush a man who was calm,'' Mr. McCain said, ''a man who was assured, a man who was fully prepared to assume the responsibilities'' of the White House. And hammering home the idea that Vice President Al Gore gave distinctly different performances in the three presidential debates, he said, ''On the other side I saw three different people, didn't you?'' Once more he declared Mr. Bush  ''fully prepared to restore integrity and respect to the White House.'' Soon Mr. Bush was center stage, drawing sharp contrasts with Mr. Gore. ''He trusts Washington and I trust you, and that's one of the reasons I'm going to become your president.'' Mr. Bush said, ''I can't make it any more plain.'' But Mr. Bush had to go it alone in New Hampshire, where Mr. McCain not only defeated him in the Republican primary but also piled up the widest victory margin since Ronald Reagan defeated Mr. Bush's father there 20 years ago. At St. Anselm's College in Manchester, where a big green banner proclaimed ''New Hampshire Welcomes the Reformers,'' Mr. Bush took questions at the kind of town hall meeting that Mr. McCain made his trademark. ''I'm so glad to be back in New Hampshire,'' Mr. Bush said, winning  thunderous applause. ''Some folks might have assumed I wasn't coming back. But I'm a better candidate as a result of campaigning last winter in this great state. I am. This is a state that puts you through your paces.'' And though Mr. Bush had to tell the crowd that Mr. McCain ''took ill,'' he praised him and took up some of his causes as he mentioned things that Washington could do to prevent the end-of-year brinkmanship over spending bills that is taking place  now as the Congressional session ends. Saying the nation needed ''less bickering and finger-pointing and name-calling and needless partisanship,'' Mr. Bush called for federal budgeting to take place every two years instead of annually and for a ''constitutional'' line-item veto. The Texas governor was not the only one invoking Mr. McCain today. The Gore campaign said it was going on the air with a 30-second spot remembering the senator's criticism of Mr. Bush's tax cut and fiscal plan. ''George W. Bush is back in New Hampshire,'' it says. ''The question is will he come clear on Social Security. In this year's election John McCain said Bush's plan has not one new penny for Social Security.'' Mr. Bush continued to criticize Mr. Gore for his claim in the last presidential debate that he does not favor big government. ''It's one of the more amazing statements of the campaign,'' he said. ''He is of Washington, by Washington, for Washington.'' Mr. Bush criticized Mr. Gore's record at his signature project of reinventing government. 'He claimed he has significantly reduced the size of government,'' Mr. Bush said, ''but what he didn't tell you is that 87 percent of the cuts came from the Department of Defense, thousands of jobs were cut from the Department of Veterans Affairs.'' For all the talk of buried hatchets, Mr. McCain has not always been an effusive supporter of the Republican ticket. On CNN's ''Larry King Live'' recently, Mr. McCain had equal praise for Dick Cheney, Mr. Bush's running mate, and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Democratic vice-presidential candidate. And in New Hampshire earlier this week to campaign for a local candidate, Mr. McCain said he was trying to urge young people to vote, no matter who they vote for, and ''if you don't vote for Governor Bush, I understand and respect that.'' Mr. Bush won many spirited ovations in New Hampshire, but some in his crowd wished Mr. McCain were still in the race. ''I think he would have been a better president for the country,'' said John Allard. ''But George Bush has got the nomination, and I don't think he'll make a bad president. Of the choice, it's the best we have.''
 Pres Clinton and Vice Pres Al Gore exchange warm greetings at memorial service for Gov Mel Carnahan in Jefferson City, Mo, in meeting aimed at descrediting reports that relations between both men were strained; public display fails to change political reality that Gore has made conscious effort to nudge Clinton to sidelines as he seeks to follow him as president; Gore's deputy campaign manager Mark Fabiani says while Clinton will help Gore's candidacy, president will not appear at rallies with him; says president is making radio commercials for Gore and is taping telephone message that would be delivered automatically to likely voters in areas where president is popular; says Clinton will also raise money for Democratic National Committee and is planning campaign trip to California for vice president; photos (M) Air Force Two cozied up to Air Force One at an airport near here today, setting up a very public runway reunion of President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore and their wives -- a flurry of hearty handshakes and air kisses that aides said was meant to discredit reports that the relations between the men were  strained. Air Force Two cozied up to Air Force One at an airport near here today, setting up a very public runway reunion of President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore and their wives -- a flurry of hearty handshakes and air kisses that aides said was meant to discredit reports that the relations between the men were  strained. The public displays of affection did not change a political reality: Mr. Gore has made a conscious effort to nudge Mr. Clinton to the sidelines as he seeks to follow him in the presidency. Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager, said today that while Mr. Clinton would help Mr. Gore's candidacy, the president would not appear at rallies with the vice president. Mr. Fabiani said that the president was making radio commercials for Mr. Gore and taping a telephone message that would be delivered automatically to likely voters in areas where the president is popular. He said Mr. Clinton would also raise money for the Democratic National Committee and was planning a campaign trip to California for the vice president. ''Beyond that,'' Mr. Fabiani said, ''nothing has been scheduled with the president, and we anticipate that Al Gore will conclude the campaign as he has been running it -- as his own man and on his own vision.'' Mr. Gore himself hedged about the matter today, both in a television interview and as he spoke to reporters on Air Force Two. He noted that the president had a ''full-time job'' and was busy with Congress and foreign policy. And he rebuffed all efforts to be dragged into a discussion of his complex relationship with the president or respond to reports that the president was hurt that Mr. Gore had not sought his help and advice. ''I'm running as my own man,'' Mr. Gore said repeatedly. Mr. Clinton, responding to an article in The New York Times today, denied that he had been upset at Mr. Gore for not involving him more actively in the campaign. ''Not true,'' he said, jabbing his finger in the air for emphasis as he strolled toward his plane after the memorial service  with reporters in tow. ''It's categorically not true.'' And Mr. Clinton deferred to Mr. Gore on how he could best help the Gore-Lieberman ticket. ''I'll do whatever's best,'' the president said, indicating there was still time before the election for Mr. Gore to enlist his help. ''I don't know. It's too soon to say. We've got to wait until we're a little closer.'' And Mr. Siewert pointed out that the president had not exactly been sitting on his hands this campaign season. So far this year, Mr. Clinton has attended nearly 180 fund-raisers on behalf of Democratic candidates -- governors, state legislators and members of the House and Senate, as well as Mr. Gore -- and has raised some $97 million. Mr. Clinton also regularly makes the case for Mr. Gore's election, often going at Gov. George W. Bush of Texas more aggressively than the vice president himself. Mr. Siewert said it would be up to the Gore campaign to determine whether the president ought to shift his attention from late-night fund-raising events, like the ones he did tonight for Democrats around Boston, to daytime rallies. For now, it appears that Mr. Gore -- who avoided any mention of the president during the three presidential debates -- wants to go it alone. ''This is a campaign that I am running on my own,'' Mr. Gore said in an interview on the NBC program  ''Today.'' ''And as I've said on previous occasions, I am who I am. I'm running in my own right with my own vision about the future of our country.'' Asked if he was counting on help from Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore suggested that the president might be busy with other things in the closing days of his presidency. ''The Congress is still in session,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The leadership of the Congress on the Republican side has not been able to finish its business this year. A number of appropriations bills have still not been passed, weeks after the deadline. They are hard at work there. And of course, the particular challenges of foreign policy now are ones that command continuing attention.'' Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, who have not appeared together in public since a rally in Michigan in August, joined several thousand people who gathered around the Capitol steps here to bid farewell to Mr. Carnahan. A horse-drawn caisson carried the governor's coffin, draped in an American flag, to the Capitol steps.  The procession was led by Mr. Carnahan's widow, Jean, and their family. Behind them followed the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota; the House Democratic leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri; Mr. Gore and his wife, Tipper; and the president and Hillary Rodham Clinton. After the memorial service for Mr. Carnahan, the Clintons and the Gores headed back to the Columbia airport together to board their respective planes. The Clintons saw the Gores to the steps of Air Force Two. The women embraced. The men shook hands. President Clinton waved, then walked across the tarmac to Air Force One. The Gores then headed to New Orleans, for two fund-raising events and a rally.
 Gov George W Bush and wife Laura make public 1999 tax returns; reported income of $1,610,400 and paid $449,827, or 27.9 percent, in federal income taxes (S) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his wife, Laura, reported income of $1,610,400 last year and paid $449,827, or 27.9 percent of that amount, in federal income taxes, their 1999 tax return, which his campaign made public last night, showed. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his wife, Laura, reported income of $1,610,400 last year and paid $449,827, or 27.9 percent of that amount, in federal income taxes, their 1999 tax return, which his campaign made public last night, showed. The Bushes created a blind trust with Northern Trust under federal rules in anticipation of his possible election, and company officers signed the return on behalf of the couple. The Bushes also reported $546,380 in capital gains, $173 profit from the governor's oil business and a $21,174 real estate loss. Mr. Bush received $130,000 as his share of the advance for ''A Charge to Keep'' the book, published last year by William Morrow & Company, which he wrote with Karen P. Hughes, his communications director. The Bushes made a total of $210,165 in charitable donations. The salary for a Texas governor last year was $115,345, but Mr. Bush relinquished 55 days of pay because he was out of the state campaigning, lowering his state salary to $97,964, his office said last April when the couple made a $50,000 payment on their tax bill and filed for an automatic four-month extension to file their tax return. In August the Bushes asked for a second extension, to Oct. 15, because they had not received partnership reports needed to complete the return. The Bushes applied their $125,917 overpayment to taxes they would owe for the 2000 tax year.
 Politicians on both sides of the aisle are Southern Baptists, Mr. Brinkley said, from President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore to Senator Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi.
 Bush Would Reshape NATO And Recast Nations' Roles  If elected president, George W. Bush plans to tell NATO that the United States should no longer participate in peacekeeping in the Balkans, signaling a major new division of labor in the Western alliance, according to his senior national security aide, Condoleezza Rice. Peacekeeping in Bosnia and Kosovo, and possibly elsewhere, would be a European responsibility. The United States would focus on deterring and fighting wars in the Persian Gulf, Asia and other distant trouble spots. Mr. Bush and Senator John McCain, fierce rivals in the primaries, campaigned together, with the senator declaring that the governor was ''fully prepared'' to lead. Governor Bush and his wife, Laura, reported income of $1,610,400 last year and paid $449,827, or 27.9 percent, in federal income taxes. Public Display of Affection  President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and their wives exchanged a flurry of hearty handshakes and air kisses at a Missouri airport that aides said was meant to discredit reports of strained relations.
 ''Over the last eight years of the Clinton-Gore administration,'' Mr. Lieberman said, ''we have come to understand that what we can do begins with being fiscally responsible, that when government balances its books, it not only stops draining capital out of the markets because it's in hock, but it creates a sense of confidence generally, and that is one of the conditions for growth.'' ''Over the last eight years of the Clinton-Gore administration,'' Mr. Lieberman said, ''we have come to understand that what we can do begins with being fiscally responsible, that when government balances its books, it not only stops draining capital out of the markets because it's in hock, but it creates a sense of confidence generally, and that is one of the conditions for growth.'' Vice President Al Gore and Mr. Lieberman, his running mate, have signaled that they will make prosperity their core issue in the final push toward the election on Nov. 7. But Mr. Lieberman's remarks were a continuing reflection of the ticket's  publicly split personality regarding President Clinton and his legacy. Mr. Gore has tried to distance himself from his partner of the last eight years, and he and Mr. Lieberman frequently say they want to be judged more on their plans for the future than on the record of the past. But the vice president clearly wants to take credit for the good times, although without mentioning Mr. Clinton by name -- a task that more often falls to Mr. Lieberman. ''We've gone from the largest deficits in America, the federal government has, now to the largest surpluses,'' the senator said here in remarks to employees of FreeMarkets Inc., an Internet auction house for businesses. ''It started right in '93. The Clinton-Gore administration said, 'We're going to get serious about coming out of debt; here's our budget proposals that are controversial.' It passed without a single Republican vote; Al Gore had to break the tie in the Senate. And it turned the corner.'' Speaking at FreeMarkets and at a senior citizens' center here, the senator argued that while Mr. Gore's proposed tax cuts and spending plans fit comfortably within the projected government surpluses of the next decade, Gov. George W. Bush's would mean a return to deficit spending. Most independent analysts agree that Mr. Gore's plans are more likely to keep the government within its means, but many believe that both candidates' proposals run the risk of overspending the surpluses. Mr. Lieberman's visit here, and appearances he plans in the Philadelphia area on Sunday night and Monday, attest to the tightness of the race and a growing worry in the Gore camp. A month ago, polls indicated that Pennsylvania was solidly for Mr. Gore. But even as Mr. Bush has pulled slightly ahead in most national surveys, this state once again appears to be a toss-up in need of the Democrats' cultivation. As Mr. Lieberman visited an Internet company today, so did the Republican vice-presidential nominee, Dick Cheney. At Intranet Solutions Inc. of Eden Prairie, Minn., a Minneapolis suburb, Mr. Cheney told more than 100 employees that Mr. Bush's economic plans would do more to help ''the rising generation'' of 18- to 34-year-olds who work there. For a person in his 30's, Mr. Cheney said, the Bush proposal allowing workers to divert part of their Social Security taxes into private accounts  could mean an extra $150,000 by retirement. Noting that he and Mr. Bush had both held leadership posts outside government, Mr. Cheney called Mr. Gore's approach ''old school'' and said the vice president's proposals were ''diametrically opposed'' to the guiding principles of the ''new economy.'' Do we want to see the country moving forward? Do we want to keep the prosperity going -- which Al Gore and I believe we're best able to do, and not only to keep the prosperity going but do it in a way, through better education and some of the tax incentives I've talked about, to expand the winner's circle to more of America's families? Or do we want to go back?''
 Condoleezza Rice, Gov George W Bush's senior national security aide, says he will tell NATO if he is elected president that US should no longer participate in peacekeeping in Balkans, signaling major new division of labor in Western alliance; under new arrangement, peacekeeping in Bosnia and Kosovo would become European responsibility, as could peacekeeping in other conflicts; US would focus on deterring and fighting wars in Persian Gulf, Asia and other distant trouble spots; plan would represent most important revision of NATO's tasks since cold war; aides say change is long overdue and would allow US military to concentrate on traditional combat missions (M) If elected president, George W. Bush plans to tell NATO that the United States should no longer participate in peacekeeping in the Balkans, signaling a major new division of labor in the Western alliance, according to Mr. Bush's senior national security aide. If elected president, George W. Bush plans to tell NATO that the United States should no longer participate in peacekeeping in the Balkans, signaling a major new division of labor in the Western alliance, according to Mr. Bush's senior national security aide. Mr. Bush's plan would represent the most important revision of NATO tasks since the cold war. His aides say the change is long overdue and would let the American military concentrate its training and financing on traditional combat missions. In outlining the approach, Ms. Rice was providing the strategic rationale behind many of Mr. Bush's general comments in the campaign about using American military power and his repeated contentions that extended peacekeeping missions and humanitarian operations had undermined military readiness. In sharp contrast, his opponent, Vice President Al Gore, has said that if anything, Washington should take a more active role in using troops to prevent conflicts abroad. Ms. Rice acknowledged that revising NATO's military tasks was delicate. Although Mr. Bush plans to make the redivision of military tasks a major objective, if elected, he plans to consult the Europeans and is not planning ''precipitous'' actions. American policy toward the Balkans has a tortured history. When President Clinton ran for office in 1992, he complained that the Bush administration had stayed on the sidelines as the Serbs turned Bosnia into a killing ground. But in office, the Clinton administration was initially slow to act. In the campaign, Mr. Gore has taken a similar stance. For him, Balkan peacekeeping is one of NATO's primary tasks and an example of the operation that the American military needs to undertake to support American diplomacy in the post-cold-war world. In addition to deterring and fighting wars, Mr. Gore says, the armed forces should prepare for peacekeeping missions, delivering relief supplies and rebuilding institutions in war-ravaged nations, activities that the Pentagon calls nation building. To help the military carry out such a broad array of tasks, Mr. Gore says, he would earmark $80 billion of the federal surplus for military programs over 10 years. An additional $20 billion would be spent on international programs. Mr. Bush says he would spend $45 billion of the surplus on the military over 10 years. ''The linchpin of our policy is forward engagement,'' said Gordon Adams, a senior adviser to Mr. Gore on military issues and a former top Clinton administration budget official. ''We have a wide range of instruments to deal with the problems, diplomatic, economic and military. ''If you say you can use everything except the military, you have deprived yourself of one of those instruments. The Bush team has a curiously old-fashioned view. We will have a well-funded military that is designed to go nowhere and prepared do nothing, because they are only there to fight the nation's wars, and we are not having any.'' Mr. Bush has contended that the military has been run ragged by peacekeeping and humanitarian work, missions that are taking a toll on morale and readiness. Although Mr. Bush does not oppose all involvement in peacekeeping, he and his advisers say prolonged peacekeeping operations make it more difficult for the armed forces to prepare for major wars. The United States would continue to provide intelligence, help with communications, transport and do other logistical work after withdrawing its peacekeeping troops. In outlining that approach, aides to Mr. Bush have in mind East Timor, where an Australian-led peacekeeping mission received United States logistical support. Although East Timor represents one possible approach for Mr. Gore, it seems be the main model for Mr. Bush. Some also said Mr. Bush's program might give impetus to Europeans' efforts to develop their own military arrangements, perhaps more of a stimulus than Washington might like, given its goal to influence security policy in Europe.
 The police said the man confronted the detective at 11:50 a.m. in front of 371 Troutman Street, in Bushwick, about half a block from where the detective had just bought three $10 glassine envelopes of heroin. The police said the man confronted the detective at 11:50 a.m. in front of 371 Troutman Street, in Bushwick, about half a block from where the detective had just bought three $10 glassine envelopes of heroin.
 Next United States President, Bush or Gore, will put imprint on Fedreal Reserve System; each professes 'hands off' policy toward Fed, but next president will appoint at least five of central bank's seven governors and have to replace Fed chairman Alan Greenspan if he retires before his term concludes in 2004; photos (M) But whether they like it or not, either Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush will put an imprint on the central bank -- perhaps firmly. But whether they like it or not, either Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush will put an imprint on the central bank -- perhaps firmly. Reflecting Mr. Greenspan's stature as the very embodiment of prosperity -- and clearly sensitive to any suggestion that they might exert political influence on the central bank -- both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have stressed their desire for continuity at the Fed. The vice president would be ''inclined to ask Greenspan to serve again'' when his current term expires, said Doug Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign. Lawrence B. Lindsey, a former Fed governor who is Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser, said that Mr. Bush was dedicated to protecting the Fed's independence and that he had been an early proponent of reappointing Mr. Greenspan to his current term. Should Mr. Greenspan leave, a President Gore could turn to Lawrence H. Summers, the current Treasury Secretary, or to a candidate from within the central bank, like William J. McDonough, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Robert E. Rubin, the former Treasury secretary, is another possible candidate. Mr. Bush might look first to his current economic advisers, who in addition to Mr. Lindsey include Martin S. Feldstein of Harvard University, Michael Boskin of Stanford University and John B. Taylor of Stanford, one of the leading academic authorities on monetary policy. Alan Blinder, a former Fed vice chairman who is now an adviser to Mr. Gore, said there was a much greater likelihood that presidential appointments would influence regulatory policy than monetary policy. ''There's a quasi-ideological divide between people who think consumer protection legislation is a good idea, a worthwhile function of the government in general and the Fed in particular, and those who think it's not,'' Mr. Blinder said. ''A Bush presidency versus a Gore presidency could make a difference there.'' By contrast, President George Bush's administration openly criticized the Fed at times. Some of the former president's aides blame Mr. Greenspan for the elder Bush's loss to Mr. Clinton in 1992, saying the Fed did not cut rates early or aggressively enough to bring the economy out of recession starting in 1990. Mr. Lindsey said Governor Bush ''is a great believer in the political independence of the Fed.'' But Democrats are happy to suggest that Governor Bush has not yet proved that he can resist the temptation to meddle with the Fed and that his family history with the central bank cannot be ignored. Giving the Fed a wide berth ''would continue to be the policy of a Gore administration,'' Mr. Blinder said. ''I'm less confident it would be the policy of a Bush administration.''
 A SURPRISE OF THE SEASON  Minnesota, the state of Hubert H. Humphrey, Eugene J. McCarthy and Walter F. Mondale, which has gone Democratic in every presidential election since 1972, is suddenly too close to call. A poll published yesterday by The Star Tribune of Minneapolis showed Gov. George W. Bush slightly ahead of Vice President Al Gore. (''That's no misprint,'' the newspaper felt compelled to note.) The poll questioned 814 likely voters from last Saturday through Wednesday and found Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore by 44 percent to 41 percent. Although that lead was within the 3.4-percentage-point margin of sampling error, Dick Cheney, who happened to be in the Minneapolis area, seized on the news. Holding aloft the paper's banner headline, ''Bush snatches lead from Gore,'' he said he had called Bush campaign headquarters to declare: ''Check Minnesota into our column. We personally have delivered this state.'' A SURPRISE OF THE SEASON  Minnesota, the state of Hubert H. Humphrey, Eugene J. McCarthy and Walter F. Mondale, which has gone Democratic in every presidential election since 1972, is suddenly too close to call. A poll published yesterday by The Star Tribune of Minneapolis showed Gov. George W. Bush slightly ahead of Vice President Al Gore. (''That's no misprint,'' the newspaper felt compelled to note.) The poll questioned 814 likely voters from last Saturday through Wednesday and found Mr. Bush leading Mr. Gore by 44 percent to 41 percent. Although that lead was within the 3.4-percentage-point margin of sampling error, Dick Cheney, who happened to be in the Minneapolis area, seized on the news. Holding aloft the paper's banner headline, ''Bush snatches lead from Gore,'' he said he had called Bush campaign headquarters to declare: ''Check Minnesota into our column. We personally have delivered this state.'' NADER, NUDGED, SAYS NO  A dozen old Nader's Raiders are urging Ralph Nader to reassess his presidential campaign, saying he could cost Vice President Al Gore the election. Mr. Nader's support is some 3 percent to 4 percent in most national polls, causing some Democrats to fear that he could win enough votes in some close states to push them into the Bush column. ''It is now clear that you might well give the White House to Bush,'' the group wrote in an open letter to Mr. Nader yesterday. ''As a result, you would set back significantly the social progress to which you have devoted your entire, astonishing career.'' The group, Nader's Raiders for Gore, accused him of reneging on a promise to campaign only in states where his candidacy would not hurt Mr. Gore's chances.His press secretary, Laura Jones, rejected the appeal. ''There are always a few,'' she said, ''who lose their zest and will to fight for progressive ideas and settle for moderate conservatives like Al Gore.'' Vice President Al Gore, President Clinton and their wives had a warm photo-opportunity reunion on an airport runway in Missouri, while Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain hooked up at a rally in Maine. An earlier meeting between the Republican former rivals, in New Hampshire, was called off because Mr. McCain had food poisoning. The stats: Length of official day: Gore, 16 hours; Bush, 13 hours. Cities/towns visited: Gore, 3; Bush, 3. Official events: Gore, 3; Bush, 3. Main message: Gore, in distancing himself from President Clinton, proclaiming again that he is his ''own candidate''; Bush, government reform.
 Correction of October 18 article on Gov George W Bush's criticisms of Vice Pres Al Gore's economic plans during recent presidential debate An article on Wednesday about Gov. George W. Bush's criticism of Vice President Al Gore's economic plans misstated a question Mr. Bush was asked at the presidential debate on Tuesday. The moderator, Jim Lehrer, asked him to respond to Mr. Gore's criticism that the governor's proposed tax cut ''benefits the top 1 percent of the wealthiest Americans.'' Mr. Bush responded: ''Of course it does. If you pay taxes, you're going to get a benefit.'' Mr. Lehrer did not ask whether the proposal would benefit ''mainly'' that group. An article on Wednesday about Gov. George W. Bush's criticism of Vice President Al Gore's economic plans misstated a question Mr. Bush was asked at the presidential debate on Tuesday. The moderator, Jim Lehrer, asked him to respond to Mr. Gore's criticism that the governor's proposed tax cut ''benefits the top 1 percent of the wealthiest Americans.'' Mr. Bush responded: ''Of course it does. If you pay taxes, you're going to get a benefit.'' Mr. Lehrer did not ask whether the proposal would benefit ''mainly'' that group.
 Anthony Lewis Op-Ed column pays tribute to Gov George W Bush's campaigning skills that have made him formidable candidate; says key to his success became clear in three debates with Vice Pres Al Gore, in which demonstrated masterful technique of bobbing and weaving around issues that are difficult for him using 'fuzzy rhetoric' (M) By the ordinary logic of politics, the vice president of an administration that has given us the greatest prosperity in history should be way ahead in this election. That he is not is a tribute to the campaigning skill of George W. Bush. No one can doubt any longer that Mr. Bush is a formidable candidate. One key to his success became clear in the three debates with Al Gore. All politicians bob and weave around issues that are difficult for them. Governor Bush is a master of the technique. By the ordinary logic of politics, the vice president of an administration that has given us the greatest prosperity in history should be way ahead in this election. That he is not is a tribute to the campaigning skill of George W. Bush. No one can doubt any longer that Mr. Bush is a formidable candidate. One key to his success became clear in the three debates with Al Gore. All politicians bob and weave around issues that are difficult for them. Governor Bush is a master of the technique. When they were debating a patients' bill of rights, for example, and Governor Bush was asked the difference between the candidates, he answered, ''Well, the difference is that I can get it done.'' That ducked the real issue of what the ''it'' was -- what such legislation should include -- and obscured the fact that he did not support the meaningful bill pending in Congress. Asked whether he would support a law barring job discrimination against gays and lesbians, Governor Bush replied, ''I don't hire or fire somebody based upon their sexual orientation.'' That is no doubt true, admirable -- and irrelevant to the question of legislation. As to that, he said gays and lesbians should not have ''special rights'': code words used by those who oppose equal rights legislation. His reason for avoiding questions of that kind is plain. Governor Bush's slogan is that he is a ''compassionate conservative,'' so he does not want to look unsympathetic to people who face discrimination or who are treated unfairly by medical insurance companies. But he also does not want to offend the Christian right or the insurance companies. Another facet of Governor Bush became evident in the debates. Once he has taken a position designed to fend off criticism, he sticks to it no matter how thoroughly it has been exploded. A questioner in the third debate said Governor Bush ''seemed to overly enjoy'' the fact that Texas led the nation in executions. Mr. Bush said his job in the execution process was ''to ask two questions, sir. Is the person guilty of the crime? And did the person have full access to the courts of law? And I can tell you, looking at you right now, in all cases those questions were answered in the affirmative.'' That is the position that Governor Bush has consistently taken. It just happens to be untrue. The way Texas provides lawyers for capital defendants is notoriously unfair. People have been convicted and sentenced to death after trials in which their lawyers were drunk or asleep -- and the courts of Texas have found no error in that outrage. When faced in the debates with particular facts about problems like Social Security or taxes, Governor Bush scorned them as ''Washington fuzzy math.'' But he is the master of fuzzy rhetoric.
 Al Gore's proposals are a step in the right direction, but stop short of endorsing a full solution. George W. Bush's plan is economic nonsense -- his proposed tax cut is inconsistent with his plan to move workers, through individual investment accounts, to a funded basis.
 Ryan Brenton letter comments on October 16 article on political career of Gov George W Bush ''A Master of Bipartisanship With No Taste for Details'' (front page, Oct. 16) explained how Gov. George W. Bush was able to get a lot done in Texas while not always having to pay close attention to details. ''A Master of Bipartisanship With No Taste for Details'' (front page, Oct. 16) explained how Gov. George W. Bush was able to get a lot done in Texas while not always having to pay close attention to details. As a political science student, I've been taught that in government, details can be very important. The article mentioned the ''unusually well-qualified people'' Mr. Bush has appointed. It must be those people who pay attention to all the details. The article also mentioned how Mr. Bush's visiting with lawmakers helped to pass a great deal of legislation. Mr. Bush's personality has taken him very far. I hope that on Election Day people realize that we need a president who will work hard and pay attention to details, not one who relies on others to do this work for him.
