 Text of remarks by Vice Pres Al Gore at dedication of Pentecostal megachurch in Dallas (S)
 Pres Clinton plunges into presidential campaign, forcefully rebutting Gov George W Bush's attacks on his administration and giving extensive listing of his accomplishments in fund-raising swing through upstate New York for wife Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is candidate for US Senate; devotes good portion of speeches defending his policies and urging that they be continued; photo (M) President Clinton plunged into the presidential race today, forcefully rebutting Gov. George W. Bush's attacks on his administration and giving an extensive listing of his accomplishments in a fund-raising swing through upstate New York. It was almost as if he were campaigning for himself. And, though his remarks today were full of praise for Vice President Al Gore, the president hinted at an afternoon rally here that Mr. Gore had not tried hard enough to emphasize the differences between his philosophies and Mr. Bush's. Mr. Clinton has privately said as much to friends and aides, complaining that Mr. Gore was not effectively arguing the Democrats' case. President Clinton plunged into the presidential race today, forcefully rebutting Gov. George W. Bush's attacks on his administration and giving an extensive listing of his accomplishments in a fund-raising swing through upstate New York. It was almost as if he were campaigning for himself. And, though his remarks today were full of praise for Vice President Al Gore, the president hinted at an afternoon rally here that Mr. Gore had not tried hard enough to emphasize the differences between his philosophies and Mr. Bush's. Mr. Clinton has privately said as much to friends and aides, complaining that Mr. Gore was not effectively arguing the Democrats' case. Although he never mentioned the Republican presidential candidate by name, Mr. Clinton referred to several criticisms that Mr. Bush has made throughout his campaign, especially in recent debates with Mr. Gore. And he energetically praised Mr.  Gore's proposals, despite the vice president's continuing efforts to distance himself from Mr. Clinton. But Mr. Clinton also suggested that Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, could be selling those proposals better. At another rally for Mrs. Clinton in Johnson City, in New York's Southern Tier, the president challenged Mr. Bush's frequent claim that a vote for Mr. Gore would be a vote for the status quo. Referring to another of Mr. Bush's favorite campaign themes, Mr. Clinton said the presidential election was not about ''whether the Democrats should be rejected because of the partisanship in Washington.'' He tried to cast doubt on Mr. Bush's claim that he is the only presidential candidate who could work well with both major parties, pointing to several of his own initiatives that received bipartisan support.  ''The Democrats favor bipartisanship and our record is that,'' he said to applause. Mr. Clinton has not appeared at campaign rallies with Mr. Gore, and Gore aides say that will not change. Indeed, the men have appeared together in public only once since the Democratic National Convention: at a brief airport encounter in Missouri, where they were attending a memorial service for Gov. Mel Carnahan, who died last week. After that service, Mr. Clinton denied a report in The New York Times that he had been upset at Mr. Gore for not involving him more actively in the campaign. And he promised to ''do whatever's best'' to help the Gore-Lieberman ticket, deferring the specifics to Mr. Gore. Nonetheless, Mr. Clinton has stepped up his attacks on Mr. Bush in recent days, and he did so again with gusto yesterday. In another swipe, the president scoffed at Mr. Bush's contention that Mr. Gore wants to protect ''big government.'' Mr. Clinton boasted that the federal government had 300,000 fewer workers than when he took office in 1993, and that he had eliminated 16,000 pages of federal regulations. He also said that Mr. Bush's tax cut plan was fiscally foolish, and that Mr. Gore's proposed tax cut was rightly smaller because ''we've got to have some money to invest in education, in health care, in the future of the country.''
 Twenty-eight Republican governors rally in Austin, Tex, with Gov George W Bush in orchestrated display of party muscle, vowing to wage relentless fight to propel him into White House; will barnstorm across 25 battleground states over next three days as part of campaign effort; photo (M) At a midafternoon rally for Gov. George W. Bush that kicked off three days of barnstorming across 25 battleground states, the 28 governors stood on a three-tiered stage, laughing as they found their assigned places marked on the floor with tape. It was a gathering intended to reinforce Mr. Bush's theme that he represented a more pragmatic style of leadership distinct from the partisanship of Washington. At a midafternoon rally for Gov. George W. Bush that kicked off three days of barnstorming across 25 battleground states, the 28 governors stood on a three-tiered stage, laughing as they found their assigned places marked on the floor with tape. It was a gathering intended to reinforce Mr. Bush's theme that he represented a more pragmatic style of leadership distinct from the partisanship of Washington. ''Some campaigns tend to send out spokespeople,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I'm sending out examples; examples of people who know how to lead; examples of people who have solved problems; examples of people who have made public education the No. 1 priority in their states.'' Mr. Bush said the governors would carry ''the collective message that the Clinton-Gore administration has been the chief obstacle to reform in America.'' ''How is it that all of us from our own diverse upbringing, states and backgrounds have traveled here today?'' Mr. Ridge asked in introducing Mr. Bush and his running mate, Dick Cheney. ''How is it that today we set aside every singular agenda of our own to offer our individual and collective energies and efforts in support of your journey to become the next president of the United States?'' Mr. Ridge said the governors believed that Mr. Bush ''would provide a more honorable and more effective kind of leadership,'' adding that they would fight for him ''to the last minute, to the last hour, to the last day of this campaign.'' While Mr. Bush reveled in the support of the governors, he has studiously avoided any such display with members of Congress, whom he has associated with the gridlock and partisanship in Washington. In contrast, he called the governors pragmatic problem-solvers and said they would reinforce the message that he is a Washington outsider who can reach across party lines to get things done. The Bush campaign was counting on a media bonanza from the governors who were divided into seven teams and would be campaigning in 48 cities in 25 states, 23 of which were in President Clinton's column in 1996. As soon as the rally ended, the governors were descended upon by reporters, and they had scheduled an additional 40 interviews by satellite in crucial states. The governors signed an advertisement in support of Mr. Bush, which is to run in USA Today on Monday. The one Republican governor not at the rally was Cecil H. Underwood of West Virginia, who is in a tough re-election fight. The scene marked the ascendancy of the gubernatorial wing of the Republican Party, which began battling for more sway after the midterm election of 1998 when more than a dozen Republican governors were re-elected, including Mr. Bush. At the same time Republicans in Congress suffered defeat by pinning their hopes on impeachment; it was the first time since 1934 that the president's party had gained seats in the House in midterm elections. Mr. Bush called the governors ''can-do conservatives'' who would carry the message that the Clinton administration had been an obstacle on issues ranging from education to welfare to the environment to health care. The Gore campaign countered that the Clinton administration had helped states, and cited legislation that had provided money for more police officers and more teachers, and for children's health insurance. ''It's a mystery why these governors would endorse Bush's plan to squander the surplus on a tax cut for the wealthy and neglect issues that affect people in their states,'' said Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for Mr. Gore. ''Why would they want Bush to do to America what he has done to Texas?'' ''If you look at so much of America's prosperity today, this is the real prosperity tour right here: the Republican governors,'' Gov. John Engler of Michigan said. ''They've followed interesting strategies at the state level that are very similar to what Governor Bush talks about at the federal level. We've cut taxes. We've emphasized education. We've strengthened the fundamentals. We've strengthened our state's budgets, reformed the process of doing the budget in many of our states.'' Governor Whitman offered her support to Mr. Bush, even though the two differ on abortion. In words that might resonate with suburban women, she said that despite Mr. Bush's opposition to abortion, she did not believe the governor or his possible appointees to the Supreme Court would jeopardize abortion rights. ''I have talked to Governor Bush about this and I believe him when he tells me this is not a litmus test for him,'' she said, referring to whom he would pick for the Supreme Court. ''All you have to do is look at the appointments he has made to the Texas court and you will see those are not extremists.'' Several governors from swing states were optimistic that Mr. Bush, who has small leads in several national polls, would prevail. ''I think its doable,'' said Gov. George Ryan of Illinois, citing a recent poll showing Mr. Gore clinging to a small lead in Illinois. Asked if Governor Bush could do well in Michigan, the original home to many Reagan Democrats, Mr. Engler said he saw parallels to Ronald Reagan. ''Before the debates in '80, just as in 2000, there was this attack levied against Ronald Reagan that all he'd ever been was this two-term governor of California,'' Mr. Engler said. ''Well, that's what they said about George Bush: Gee, he's only a two-term governor of Texas running against this very experienced individual, the incumbent, the vice president. Bush, I think, by doing so well in the debates and by being such an  engaging personality, people have said, 'Not only do I think he's able to do the job, I really like him.' ''
 Editorial notes that at beginning of final phase of presidential race, Gov George W Bush has narrow lead in polls; says his standing is tribute to his effectiveness at debates, where he held his own against more experienced, knowledgeable and aggressive opponent; says if Vice Pres Al Gore is to win, he will have to build on his own assets, talk more about Democrats' economic record and somehow sharpen his attack on Bush without alienating voters At the beginning of the final phase of the presidential race, Gov. George W. Bush is clinging to the narrow lead in the polls that he has held the last two weeks. Vice President Al Gore is even sounding like an underdog, with his combative promises to ''fight for you,'' while Mr. Bush has returned to the safety of his early theme of wanting to unite Americans. The governor's standing is a tribute to his effectiveness at the debates, where he held his own against a more experienced, knowledgeable and aggressive opponent. If Mr. Gore is to win, he will have to build on his own assets, talk more about the Democrats' economic record and somehow sharpen his attack on Mr. Bush without alienating voters. Poll results, even those two weeks before an election, are not necessarily indicative of how the vote will turn out. Since the 1960's, the trends have often shifted in the closing weeks. There were last-minute surges by underdogs in 1960 (Richard Nixon), 1968 (Hubert Humphrey), 1976 (President Gerald Ford) and 1992 (President George Bush), although none of them won. But in 1980, Ronald Reagan pulled ahead of Jimmy Carter only a few days before the election, largely on the basis of his debate performance and a last-minute collapse of a possible deal to free the hostages in Iran. At the beginning of the final phase of the presidential race, Gov. George W. Bush is clinging to the narrow lead in the polls that he has held the last two weeks. Vice President Al Gore is even sounding like an underdog, with his combative promises to ''fight for you,'' while Mr. Bush has returned to the safety of his early theme of wanting to unite Americans. The governor's standing is a tribute to his effectiveness at the debates, where he held his own against a more experienced, knowledgeable and aggressive opponent. If Mr. Gore is to win, he will have to build on his own assets, talk more about the Democrats' economic record and somehow sharpen his attack on Mr. Bush without alienating voters. Poll results, even those two weeks before an election, are not necessarily indicative of how the vote will turn out. Since the 1960's, the trends have often shifted in the closing weeks. There were last-minute surges by underdogs in 1960 (Richard Nixon), 1968 (Hubert Humphrey), 1976 (President Gerald Ford) and 1992 (President George Bush), although none of them won. But in 1980, Ronald Reagan pulled ahead of Jimmy Carter only a few days before the election, largely on the basis of his debate performance and a last-minute collapse of a possible deal to free the hostages in Iran. According to the historian Michael Beschloss, the candidate judged by the electorate to have won the debate or debates has almost always won. This year, that predictive element is confused. Mr. Gore was widely judged to have won the first and third debates, but the public appears to have come away thinking that Mr. Bush passed a threshold of acceptability as a presidential candidate. As the latest Times/CBS News survey suggests, voters may be more comfortable with Mr. Bush's lack of experience than they are with what they take to be Mr. Gore's condescending manner. In the end, Mr. Gore has little choice but to emphasize the issues and hope for the best because, as the Times survey shows, those issues are his greatest strength. In sketching their different leadership styles, each candidate claims his approach will bring faster results. Mr. Gore sees the presidency as a place where a leader must fight against special interests. Mr. Bush sees leadership as the art of bringing people together to find a reasonable solution. The final weeks of a campaign are also a time when voters take one last measure of the competence and readiness of the candidates. In 1976 and 1992, last-minute doubts about Mr. Carter and Mr. Clinton almost persuaded voters to stick with the person they knew could handle the job. Over the weekend, Mr. Gore began trying to stir similar feelings in the electorate by questioning whether the governor understood the dangerous repercussions that could come from his proposal to withdraw American troops from their peacekeeping missions in the Balkans. At the same time, Mr. Gore is struggling to maintain his identity as ''my own man'' by keeping President Clinton's involvement in the campaign to a minimum. Each candidate advocates the brand of leadership that fits his personality. Does Mr. Bush lack details on policies? He makes a virtue of it by saying that the details on prescription drug policies are less important than the fact that he, and not Mr. Gore, will be able to get some kind of bill enacted. Mr. Gore's embrace of specific proposals on an array of issues, from education to health to tax cuts, may not bring the love and affection of the voters. But his declared willingness to ''fight'' on the big issues, contrasted with Mr. Bush's conservative agenda and advocacy of amorphous bipartisanship, lays out a dramatic choice in the final two weeks. Voters could be wrestling with it until the very end.
 Photo of Gov George W Bush in Austin, Tex, following rally with 28 Republican governors, who will campaign for him in 25 states over next three days
 Gov George W Bush, who trailed by as much as eight percentage points in Michigan three weeks ago, appears to have pulled even with Vice Pres Al Gore, and surrogates are rushing in to help him; few politicians are venturing prediction as to who will win in most hotly contested big swing state of 2000 campaign; photos (M) Eight points behind in the widely followed Epic-MRA poll a mere three weeks ago, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has caught up with Vice President Al Gore, and few politicians here will venture a prediction as to who will win this most hotly contested of the big swing states in the 2000 campaign. The poll, taken after the final presidential debate and published in The Detroit Free Press, showed Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore with 43 percent each and Ralph Nader with 4 percent, with 10 percent of those surveyed either undecided or backing other candidates. Eight points behind in the widely followed Epic-MRA poll a mere three weeks ago, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has caught up with Vice President Al Gore, and few politicians here will venture a prediction as to who will win this most hotly contested of the big swing states in the 2000 campaign. The poll, taken after the final presidential debate and published in The Detroit Free Press, showed Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore with 43 percent each and Ralph Nader with 4 percent, with 10 percent of those surveyed either undecided or backing other candidates. The Democrats are pressing hard.  Their trade union allies are working flat out, with multiple mailings and elaborate phone banks, to deliver the votes of up to 70 percent of their members. One Gore surrogate or another visits Michigan every day. On Wednesday, less than 24 hours after the debate, Mr. Gore himself rolled into downtown Flint, a hard-pressed old car town. Now is the time ''to keep creating jobs and make sure no one is left behind,'' the vice president told a crowd of 5,000; many knew from experience what he was talking about. Governor Bush, Mr. Gore warned them, is a dire threat to the well-being of workers. Yet one prominent Democrat is missing: President Clinton. Several Michigan Democratic leaders said this week that Mr. Clinton was badly needed to help boost turnout among blacks and union members. But so far the vice president has not asked him to campaign here; Mr. Clinton is scheduled to appear in California, where the race is much less close, but not in this pivotal state. Apparently Mr. Gore fears being overshadowed, or casting new light on old White House scandals, or both. Mr. Bush is also holding one weapon back: Senator John McCain of Arizona, his former rival for the Republican nomination. Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, and his mother, Barbara, kicked off their ''W Stands for Women'' drive here, crossing the state by bus on Wednesday, in an effort to cut into Mr. Gore's lead among women. Mr. Bush's father, former President George Bush, is scheduled to stump in Holland, Grand Rapids and Detroit on Monday. The candidate himself campaigned Friday at a factory in Macomb County, the mostly blue-collar suburban sprawl north of Detroit that has been hard-fought in every election for three decades. Using some of the most pointed language of his campaign, the Texan sought to deny Mr. Gore any credit for the nation's current prosperity.  The New Economy, he said in a mocking tone, ''was not created in a Senate subcommittee or vice presidential commission.'' But Michigan's referendum on school vouchers has complicated things. The voucher question has prompted Roman Catholic parishes, which support vouchers because they could bring state aid to parochial schools, to press their members to turn out to vote. Because many Catholics vote Democratic, this could be to Mr. Gore's advantage. And the voucher issue has apparently kept Mr. McCain from campaigning with Mr. Bush in this state. Mr. McCain won the Michigan Republican primary on Feb. 22 and remains more popular here than either Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush. He supports vouchers. Gov. John Engler, at least the nominal leader of the Bush campaign in Michigan, opposes them. Mr. Bush, fearful of exacerbating the split in Republican ranks that Mr. Engler's stance has opened, has soft-pedaled his own backing for vouchers, describing them as a matter for state decisions. The Bush strategists have been leery of close ties with Mr. McCain here. The senator has made commercials for the voucher proposal, but not for Mr. Bush. He signed up to campaign with Mr. Bush's running mate, Dick Cheney, in Michigan this week, and with Mr. Bush in Maine, but not in Michigan, though the 650,000 primary voters who backed Mr. McCain could decide who ends up with the state's 18 electoral votes. Prof. David Rohde of Michigan State University said the McCain voters' intentions were a puzzle.  Those who voted for him on personality grounds, he theorized, might find Mr. Bush more appealing; those who voted for him because of his backing for campaign finance reform might prefer Mr. Gore, who has promised to back the legislation that Mr. McCain is co-sponsoring. This year, no group is too small to be courted. In the second debate, Mr. Bush said pointedly that the United States should be receptive to Arab nations' views in framing its policies in the Middle East, and he also mentioned Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan, a prominent Lebanese-American. The Arab-American Political Action Committee and the Arab-American and Chaldean Leadership Council swiftly issued endorsements. Metropolitan Detroit has the nation's largest concentration of Arab-Americans, centered in Dearborn. So the surrogates keep coming: not only family members but also the Rev. Jesse Jackson for Mr. Gore, hoping to fire up black voters; Energy Secretary Bill Richardson, also for Mr. Gore; Lee A. Iacocca, the former chairman of Chrysler (now DaimlerChrysler), hoping to convince auto workers that Mr. Gore, a foe of the internal combustion engine, is their foe, too; and Charlton Heston, president of the National Rifle Association, for Mr. Bush. Hurrying to work at a charity resale shop, Roseanne Zielinski paused to tell a visitor that she was for Mr. Gore because she sensed that ''he's for the smaller person like me.'' But William Murchison, who retired as a social studies teacher at Warren Mott High School after 31 years, described the choice in less black-and-white terms. He was concerned, he said, about the possible return of big government if Mr. Gore were elected; ''like inflation,'' he added, ''you have to fight it all the time, and Gore seems to have a half-dozen programs for every problem.'' On the other hand, Mr. Murchison said, ''I'm concerned that Bush may have a vacancy at the center -- he may just not be quite up to the job.'' In the end, he said, he would probably vote for Mr. Bush, but not with any enthusiasm. Pauline Jordan, who was out shopping, said she was a Bush backer as well, because of his personality. ''I like Mr. Bush because he's down to earth and human,'' she said.  ''Mr. Gore is too obnoxious.'' Ed Sarpolus of the Epic-MRA polling group said that polling detail showed strong crosscurrents. About 3 percent of Republicans who previously seemed likely to sit out the election appear to have been newly energized, he said. The most reliably Democratic voters, African-Americans, seem slightly less motivated to back Mr. Gore than they were to back most Democratic presidential nominees, he said, but Catholic Democrats seem likely to vote in considerable numbers.
 Text of remarks by Gov George W Bush at rally in Austin with 28 Republican governors, who will campaign for him in 25 states (S) One of our messages, the collective message of all of us on this stage, is that the Clinton-Gore administration has been the chief obstacle to reform in America. They block education reform at every turn. There's been no innovation, no flexibility to states and local jurisdictions, no accountability. They're locked into the failed ideas of the past.''
 Editorial says Sen Robert Byrd is pushing protectionist trade provision into spending bill and Pres Clinton is unlikely to veto bill for fear of alienating steel industry and potential supporters of Vice Pres Al Gore; provision would change administration of antidumping law, giving complaining domestic industry tariff revenue rather than putting it in Treasury for benefit of taxpayers Senator Robert Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, has single-handedly pushed a protectionist trade provision into an agriculture spending bill that now goes to President Clinton. Mr. Clinton opposes the provision. But, just weeks before an election, he is unlikely to veto the bill for fear of alienating the steel industry and other potential supporters of Vice President Al Gore. So a measure that is likely to harm consumers and antagonize trading partners will become law without benefit of debate on the floor of either chamber. Senator Robert Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, has single-handedly pushed a protectionist trade provision into an agriculture spending bill that now goes to President Clinton. Mr. Clinton opposes the provision. But, just weeks before an election, he is unlikely to veto the bill for fear of alienating the steel industry and other potential supporters of Vice President Al Gore. So a measure that is likely to harm consumers and antagonize trading partners will become law without benefit of debate on the floor of either chamber.
 Two recent polls of presidential preferences of information technology professionals find geeks prefer Vice Pres Al Gore, but geeks' bosses prefer Gov George W Bush; graph (S) Geeks prefer Al Gore, according to the latest weekly results at www.metricnet.com, an information technology research site created by Howard Rubin, a consultant in Pound Ridge, N.Y. Geeks prefer Al Gore, according to the latest weekly results at www.metricnet.com, an information technology research site created by Howard Rubin, a consultant in Pound Ridge, N.Y. But people more likely to be the geeks' bosses seem to prefer the Bush ticket, according to a survey by CIO magazine. (CIO's name is the abbreviation for chief information officer.) Metricnet's registered audience consists mostly of information technology managers and high-level programmers, Mr. Rubin said. Among the 14,500 of them voting in the survey in the last week, the Vice President was favored over Gov. George W. Bush by a 50 percent to 38 percent margin. And, in contrast to national polls of the general public which show Mr. Bush inching past Mr. Gore, the margin for Mr. Gore has been widening this month in the Metricnet poll. But it appears to be a case of same universe, different planet for information technology executives who attended a recent symposium sponsored by CIO magazine. CIO found that 48 percent of the 210 executives at its gathering last week in Phoenix said they intended to vote for the Bush-Cheney ticket compared to just 37 percent for Gore-Lieberman. The CIO group favors Mr. Bush by a wide margin, but they gave a slight edge -- 41 percent to 38 percent -- to the Gore team as ''best suited to lead the new economy,'' said Karen Fogerty, spokeswoman for CXO Media, the unit of International Data Group that publishes CIO. Mr. Rubin said that Mr. Gore has led in the Metricnet poll ever since it began in March, although his lead narrowed to a few points in August before widening again. About 217,000 votes have been recorded. However, because each is irrevocable, the trend lines reflect only new votes, and make no provision for people who might have changed their minds.
 In 1990, he defied many Republicans, including President George Bush, when he and Ronald V. Dellums of California, a left-wing Democrat, teamed to try to kill the B-2 bomber. They succeeded in part, when the Pentagon's plans were scaled back, and through the years he kept up the fight to try to eliminate what he considered wasteful military spending. He is close to Gov. George W. Bush, but said he would not join a Bush administration.
 At St. Barbara's Church in Bushwick, Brooklyn, Sunday services, in addition to their customary comforts and rituals, offered another chance to worship at the altar of the Subway Series and talk a little baseball trash. The clamor over the Subway Series has helped the people of St. Barbara's forget some of Bushwick's pains. While the crack trade and violent crime have subsided in the neighborhood, Bushwick still has the highest number of children on public assistance than any other section of Brooklyn does. The graduation rate at Bushwick High School is 35 percent, compared with 61 percent for the borough as a whole.
 Latest New York Times/CBS News Poll finds that even after absorbing three debates and months of campaigning, American voters are thoroughly ambivalent about their choices for president, still vexed by doubts about Vice Pres Al Gore's sincerity and Gov George W Bush's preparedness; voters view Gore as more caring, closer to them on issues and generally more capable than Bush, but they do not fully embrace him; many perceive Gore as too smart for his own good and believe that in debate spent too much time showing off his knowledge and not enough talking about his personal side; Bush helped his candidacy in debates, but nearly half of those surveyed voice particular doubts about his ability to navigate international crises; neither candidate has established appreciable edge 15 days before election, in what has become closest presidential race since 1980; among likely voters, Bush draws 44 percent, with 42 percent for Gore; Ralph Nader is supported by 4 percent of likely voters and Patrick J Buchanan 1 percent; charts (M) Even after absorbing three debates and months of campaigning, American voters are thoroughly ambivalent about their choices for president, still vexed by doubts about Vice President Al Gore's sincerity and Gov. George W. Bush's preparedness for the White House, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. While the survey found that voters viewed Mr. Gore as more caring, closer to them on issues and generally more capable than Mr. Bush, they did not fully embrace him. Many perceive that Mr. Gore is too smart for his own good and that in the debates he spent too much time showing off his knowledge and not enough talking about his personal side. Even after absorbing three debates and months of campaigning, American voters are thoroughly ambivalent about their choices for president, still vexed by doubts about Vice President Al Gore's sincerity and Gov. George W. Bush's preparedness for the White House, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. While the survey found that voters viewed Mr. Gore as more caring, closer to them on issues and generally more capable than Mr. Bush, they did not fully embrace him. Many perceive that Mr. Gore is too smart for his own good and that in the debates he spent too much time showing off his knowledge and not enough talking about his personal side. Mr. Bush helped his candidacy in the debates, the poll shows, but still inspires discomfort. Nearly half of those surveyed said he was ill prepared for the presidency, and they voiced particular doubts about his ability to navigate international crises like the one in the Middle East. Most respondents said Mr. Bush would hand off responsibilities of such crises to his advisers, while Mr. Gore would be personally involved. Perhaps because of these lingering reservations, neither candidate has established an appreciable edge 15 days before the election in what has become the closest presidential contest since 1980, and 1960 before that. Among likely voters, Mr. Bush draws 44 percent, with 42 percent for Mr. Gore. Ralph Nader is supported by 4 percent of the likely voters, and Patrick J. Buchanan just 1 percent. The nationwide telephone poll of 1,010 registered voters was conducted Oct. 18 to Oct. 21. It has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points, leaving Mr. Bush's edge statistically insignificant. The gap between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore has narrowed day by day. The more time that passed from the final debate, which was last Tuesday, the more people seemed to like Mr. Gore. Mr. Bush's widest margin was on Wednesday, the first day of the poll. By the last two days of the four-day poll, Mr. Gore had a bare edge over Mr. Bush. That movement is another manifestation of how the support for both candidates is fluid -- and how extraordinarily competitive the race is. Even with the slight day-to-day upticks for Mr. Gore, there are several signs that Mr. Bush benefited more from the televised debates. Voters surveyed were slightly more likely to say the debates made them feel better about a Bush presidency than a Gore presidency. Before the first debate, voters said they expected Mr. Gore to win the election. Now, by a slight margin, they expect Mr. Bush to win. More than half of the respondents said Mr. Bush was spending more time explaining what he would do as president than attacking Mr. Gore. Before the first debate, fewer than half said that of the governor. Although Mr. Ryan is a Democrat who plans to vote for Mr. Gore, he groused: ''Gore looks like somebody molded out of clay. He's not warm or genuine. Bush might be a friendlier guy and easier to be with, but he either runs out of thoughts or runs out of ways to express them when he's asked a question.'' Richard Koch, 83, a part-time accountant in Milwaukee, said he was voting for Mr. Bush. But he, too, is not satisfied with the choices. ''My uneasiness comes mostly from the fact that he is not world-wise politically,'' Mr. Koch said of Mr. Bush. ''This includes foreign policy and basic economics, among other things. He doesn't have the background in these things and hasn't indicated that he really knows what he's talking about. The reason I would vote for him is that I don't think much of Gore. He changes his positions to temper the moment.'' Indeed, a thread throughout the poll is that support for Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore seems halfhearted, with 4 in 10 of each man's own supporters saying they had reservations about their candidate. More of Mr. Bush's backers expressed enthusiasm than did Mr. Gore's; about half for Mr. Bush and about 4 in 10 for the vice president. Voters who were polled said there were significant differences between the men, and that they had more to do with issues than personality. Those who said the principal differences were about personality were three times more likely to say they would vote for Mr. Bush. Those who cited issues were slightly more likely to say they supported Mr. Gore. Forty-eight percent of those questioned said Mr. Bush had more honesty and integrity than most people in public life, compared with 42 percent who said the same of Mr. Gore. As the two nominees fight for an edge, Mr. Bush still holds an advantage among men, while Mr. Gore has one among women. Voters whose household income is less than $50,000 a year prefer Mr. Gore, while those with higher incomes favor Mr. Bush, according to the poll. The candidates are splitting support from centrist voters. Mr. Bush does significantly better among independent voters than Mr. Gore, but the vice president does much better among moderates. Voters who live in the suburbs are closely divided, though Mr. Gore holds a slight edge. The findings made clear that voters are uneasy about Mr. Gore as a person. More than half the voters questioned said that in general, Mr. Gore tells people what he thinks they want to hear rather than what he really believes. But Mr. Gore's weaknesses were seen by voters as Mr. Bush's greatest strengths. Voters surveyed said that Mr. Bush is more of a straight talker than Mr. Gore, and that the governor usually says what he really believes. But voters do not see Mr. Bush to be as caring for the average person as Mr. Gore.. And the governor continues to be dogged by the fact that voters see him as far less ready to handle domestic and international matters. ''My uneasiness comes from Al Gore being in the shadows of Bill Clinton,'' said Renita Pearson, 40, a nurse from Birmingham, Ala., who planned to vote for Mr. Gore anyway. ''I just have this feeling that he won't be able to be as charismatic in foreign negotiations as Clinton. When I hear him speak, I kind of get a condescending feel regarding us as Americans. He rarely uses the words 'our' or 'we' when he speaks, to indicate inclusiveness with those he is addressing.'' Echoing many other respondents, Melvin Greene, 42, a physical therapist from Brunswick, Ga., said: ''I'm planning on voting for Al Gore because basically I think he is the lesser of two evils. George Bush seems to cater to the wealthy.'' Victoria Saulia, 78, a retired insurance clerk from Brooklyn, N.Y., was not enthusiastic about her candidate, Mr. Bush. ''I don't know if Bush has enough experience for the job,'' she said. ''Just because he's the former president's son doesn't make him a good candidate. I watched the first two debates and I didn't get a magnetic, visionary feeling from him.'' She added: ''I have to vote and I'm a registered Republican. So right now, that's the only reason I'm voting for him.''
 But this is silly, George W. Bush and Albert Gore are not going to talk about the A train, BART or the Loop. So we move on to a few more unmentionables, because what we are really getting at -- shamelessly using the Subway Series as a hook -- is the silence of both candidates on matters of particular importance to urban America. But the idea that no borders separate cities from suburbs has somehow not been applied to other issues. If it had, we might have heard a Gore-Bush exchange about federal housing vouchers for low-income people, or how to encourage the decline in the number of out-of-wedlock births among teenage girls, or how to reduce urban traffic and the waste of energy with tolls, night deliveries or, yes, mass transit.
 Pres Clinton flies into New York to lend his assistance to Senate campaign of Hillary Rodham Clinton as well as Presidential campaign of Al Gore; Clinton, traveling from one end of state to other, denounces Republicans and declares that his wife and Vice President would assure continuance of his policies once he leaves office in January; photo (M) President Clinton flew into New York today to lend his assistance to the Senate campaign of Hillary Rodham Clinton -- and the presidential campaign of Al Gore -- traveling from one end of the state to the other as he denounced Republicans and declared that his wife and the vice president would assure the continuance of his policies once he leaves office in January. President Clinton flew into New York today to lend his assistance to the Senate campaign of Hillary Rodham Clinton -- and the presidential campaign of Al Gore -- traveling from one end of the state to the other as he denounced Republicans and declared that his wife and the vice president would assure the continuance of his policies once he leaves office in January. Although the purpose of Mr. Clinton's visit was to help his wife, there were times when he seemed equally preoccupied with the fate of Mr. Gore, who polls suggest is in a tougher fight against George W. Bush than his wife is against Mr. Lazio. At times tonight, Mr. Clinton sounded as if he were on stage with Mr. Bush during one of the presidential debates. He offered attacks on Mr. Bush that Mr. Gore had not offered during the actual debates. He said that Republicans had distorted Mr. Gore's position by asserting that he was in favor of confiscating guns from hunters, and he mocked the suggestion that voters should turn to Mr. Bush to end partisan wrangling in Washington.''In other words they would like to be rewarded for the problem they created,'' he said.
 Letter from Tom Miller says Gov George W Bush said in third presidential debate that he opposes using food as 'diplomatic weapon,' then next day he voiced opposition to Senate vote easing food embargo against Cuba George W. Bush said in the third presidential debate that he opposed using food as a ''diplomatic weapon'' -- and the next day he voiced opposition to the Senate vote easing the food embargo against Cuba (front page, Oct. 19). While politicians,  in their efforts to please all sides, rely on short voter memory, 24 hours is cutting it a little short. George W. Bush said in the third presidential debate that he opposed using food as a ''diplomatic weapon'' -- and the next day he voiced opposition to the Senate vote easing the food embargo against Cuba (front page, Oct. 19). While politicians,  in their efforts to please all sides, rely on short voter memory, 24 hours is cutting it a little short.
 Vice Pres Al Gore takes Sabbath rest from his relentless focus on fiscal policy by dedicating Pentecostal megachurch in Dallas, Tex, where he preaches that America must match its economic success with prosperity of spirit; photo (M) Taking a Sabbath rest from his relentless focus on fiscal policy, Vice President Al Gore preached today that America must match its economic successes with a ''prosperity of the spirit'' that can only be nurtured through a renewed commitment to families and values. In a speech laden with Scriptural references and delivered at the dedication of a Pentecostal megachurch in Dallas, Mr. Gore repeatedly emphasized that ''the center of my life is faith and family.'' While he proposed few specific remedies, the vice president spoke of a ''cultural pollution'' that has despoiled the country's moral life and of ''toxic entertainment that too often passes on the wrong values.'' Taking a Sabbath rest from his relentless focus on fiscal policy, Vice President Al Gore preached today that America must match its economic successes with a ''prosperity of the spirit'' that can only be nurtured through a renewed commitment to families and values. In a speech laden with Scriptural references and delivered at the dedication of a Pentecostal megachurch in Dallas, Mr. Gore repeatedly emphasized that ''the center of my life is faith and family.'' While he proposed few specific remedies, the vice president spoke of a ''cultural pollution'' that has despoiled the country's moral life and of ''toxic entertainment that too often passes on the wrong values.'' Though Mr. Gore has occasionally used such phrases before, his unabashed moralizing made for a striking departure from his campaign's recent focus on Social Security, tax cuts and economic growth. It continued the delicate blending of political messages and religious themes that has become a hallmark of the campaign by Mr. Gore and his running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. ''I believe that the purpose of life is to glorify God,'' Mr. Gore said in discussing environmental protection, ''and we cannot fulfill that purpose if we are heaping contempt upon God's creation.'' Adopting evangelical language, Mr. Gore, a Southern Baptist who considers himself born again, said the thriving economy provided the country with its greatest chance ''to bring good news to the poor.'' Mr. Jakes is an African-American, as were most of his congregants today. He has an increasingly influential worldwide ministry, with many white followers as well, and his church's dedication was celebrated today with written messages from President Clinton and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and with a speech by Coretta Scott King, the widow of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Many of Mr. Jakes's followers -- black and white -- are culturally conservative, and the bishop spoke at this year's Republican National Convention. But Mr. Gore, while not delivering an explicitly political speech, made it clear that he was not ceding those voters to Mr. Bush. While there may have been little audience for Mr. Gore's message in Texas, a state that Mr. Bush is heavily favored to win as a native son, today's service will eventually be seen by millions nationwide when it is broadcast on cable television. Mr. Gore's speech in Dallas was the first stop on a 17-hour bicoastal journey that took him 3,000 miles, from Philadelphia to Dallas to Albuquerque and then on to Portland, Ore. He spoke briefly here at the opening of a national Hispanic cultural center. In his address to Mr. Jakes's church, Mr. Gore began by asserting that strong family life is ''something more basic than all of our budget debates but somehow harder to achieve.'' Mr. Gore won applause for recognizing that Americans are working longer hours even in the midst of the current prosperity, and that they have too little time to instill their children with ''the right values with a right heart and a right spirit.'' Mr. Gore embraced the concept of the social gospel, pledging that Americans ''will not turn our backs on those who are suffering, whether they be in the Balkans or in south Dallas.'' For much of the remainder of this exceedingly tight campaign, Mr. Gore is likely to keep breakneck schedules like today's, his strategists said. Among the notable stops this week are two in Mr. Gore's home state of Tennessee, where some polls show that Mr. Bush is competitive, and in the traditional Democratic strongholds of West Virginia and Wisconsin. Clearly, the Gore camp would have liked to have put those states in their column by now. Mr. Gore's strategists said today that internal polls suggest the race has been virtually static since Mr. Gore's poll ratings dipped after the first of the three presidential debates. After that debate, said Stanley Greenberg, Mr. Gore's pollster, the vice president lost support among women for stylistic reasons: ''He was obviously very strong and aggressive in the first debate.'' Mr. Gore's press secretary, Chris Lehane, said the Democratic nominee would keep the focus on issues by delivering speeches on major themes like the role of government, education, the Internet economy, energy and the environment, tax cuts, and health care. In keeping with the campaign's frequent use of ''real people,'' Mr. Gore also will lead a series of kitchen-table discussions with parents, students and workers in their homes, Mr. Lehane said. As is frequently the case for Democratic office-seekers, the pulpits of black churches will be regular stops for Mr. Gore and his surrogates. Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman have held weekly conference calls with black ministers in the last four weeks, said Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore's campaign manager. While the Gore campaign will use African-American mayors and members of Congress to tape radio advertisements and telephone messages, it has no plans to use President Clinton to do so despite his popularity in the black community, Ms. Brazile said. ''I believe in the end that African-American voters, like all voters in the country, want to hear from Al Gore,'' she said.
 Poll Finds Nagging Doubts About Both Bush and Gore  American voters are ambivalent about the two main presidential candidates, expressing nagging doubts about Vice President Al Gore's sincerity and Gov. George W. Bush's preparedness for the White House, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. Among likely voters, Mr. Bush draws 44 percent, with 42 percent for Mr. Gore. Ralph Nader is supported by 4 percent of the likely voters, and Patrick J. Buchanan 1 percent. President Clinton plunged into the presidential race, forcefully rebutting Mr. Bush's attacks on his administration and hinting that Mr. Gore had not sufficiently explained how his proposals differed from Mr. Bush's. All but one of the nation's Republican governors traveled to Texas and promised to help propel Mr. Bush into the White House. They will make a three-day campaign trip across 25 hotly contested states carrying the message that Mr. Bush represents a pragmatic style of leadership distinct from the partisanship of Washington. Mr. Gore, preaching at a Dallas church, said America must match its economic successes with a ''prosperity of the spirit'' that can only be nurtured through a renewed commitment to families and values. President Lends a Hand To His Wife's Campaign  President Clinton flew into New York to lend his assistance to the Senate campaign of Hillary Rodham Clinton -- and the presidential campaign of Al Gore -- traveling from one end of the state to the other as he denounced Republicans and declared that his wife and the vice president would ensure the continuance of his policies after he leaves office.
