 Vice Pres Al Gore's presidential campaign seizes on news that grand jury probes whether Brown & Root, unit of Halliburton Co, which Republican vice presidential candidate Dick Cheney led, overcharged government for its work decommissioning Fort Ord in California; Cheney campaign suggests probe is politically motivated (M) As the Gore campaign seized on the news that a grand jury was investigating whether a subsidiary of a company that Dick Cheney led until this summer billed the federal government too much, the Cheney campaign countered today with the suggestion that the investigation had been politically motivated. As the Gore campaign seized on the news that a grand jury was investigating whether a subsidiary of a company that Dick Cheney led until this summer billed the federal government too much, the Cheney campaign countered today with the suggestion that the investigation had been politically motivated. The Gore campaign called on Mr. Cheney to provide a full reckoning of the matter. ''He owes the American people an honest answer whether, under his watch, his company defrauded taxpayers,'' said Kym Spell, a Gore campaign spokeswoman.
 The M & M/Mars unit of Mars Inc. has a commercial for Snickers candy bars poking fun at the battle of one-upmanship between Al Gore and George W. Bush. The Energizer bunny interrupts a mock political ad in which the surprised candidate -- pontificating, with a playground as a backdrop --is accidentally knocked over by a child on a swing. The Seagram Company is running Captain Morgan -- of Captain Morgan Original Spiced Rum -- for president and features the political consultant James Carville in a hot tub with two blondes in a commercial themed ''putting the party into politics.'' And Wisk laundry detergent, made by Unilever, has a ''Wisk Away the Mud'' Internet promotion that lets viewers clean off muddied Bush and Gore cartoon characters who pop up out of washing machines like jack-in-the-boxes. All the talk of voter indecision this year fit perfectly with BBDO's long-running campaign for Snickers, which depicts the candy bar as a filling snack to hold you over when you have to wait, said Mr. Miesmer. In the spot, an animated Republican elephant symbol and a Democratic donkey appear on a voter's shoulder as he stands in a voting booth trying to make up his mind. ''My father was president,'' says the elephant, representing Mr. Bush. ''Well, I invented the Internet,'' says the donkey, an unveiled reference to the vice president's gaffe about the Web.
 European diplomats, officials and analysts are concerned about Gov George W Bush's pledge to negotiate removal of American troops from peacekeeping duties in Balkans and leave such work to Europeans if elected president; warn stand could split NATO, undermine current European effort to increase its military capacity and call into question postwar rationale for NATO's existence; Bush's idea comes as Kosovo, patrolled by NATO-led troops, faces difficult period; United States troops make up no more than 20 percent of total in Bosnia and Kosovo (M) A promise by George W. Bush that, if elected president, he would negotiate the removal of American troops from peacekeeping duties in the Balkans and leave such work to the Europeans has provoked a collective sigh of anxiety and even weariness among European diplomats, officials and analysts. These officials said the proposal, as expressed in the Republican platform, enunciated by Mr. Bush during a presidential debate and elaborated upon by Mr. Bush's foreign-policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, in an interview with The New York Times, could divide the NATO alliance, undermine the current European effort to increase its military capacity and question the postwar rationale for NATO's existence, which has revolved around the Balkans. A promise by George W. Bush that, if elected president, he would negotiate the removal of American troops from peacekeeping duties in the Balkans and leave such work to the Europeans has provoked a collective sigh of anxiety and even weariness among European diplomats, officials and analysts. These officials said the proposal, as expressed in the Republican platform, enunciated by Mr. Bush during a presidential debate and elaborated upon by Mr. Bush's foreign-policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, in an interview with The New York Times, could divide the NATO alliance, undermine the current European effort to increase its military capacity and question the postwar rationale for NATO's existence, which has revolved around the Balkans. Mr. Bush's idea comes at a time when Kosovo, which is run by the United Nations but patrolled by NATO-led troops, is facing a difficult and even explosive period with the fall from power of the Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic. Kosovo Albanians' desires for independence seem farther away than before, and yet they trust Washington and American troops more than the Europeans, whom they see as pro-Serb. ''Dividing NATO into 'real soldiers' and 'escorts' who walk children to school is the first way to divide the alliance itself,'' said a senior NATO-country official. ''President Bush decided he liked allies fighting alongside the Americans in the gulf war -- the American people certainly did.'' When questioned, no NATO government -- including the British, French and Italians -- would provide any official reaction, given the prominence Ms. Rice's comments have been given in the endgame of the American presidential campaign. The Democratic candidate, Al Gore, supported by Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, moved quickly to use the Rice comments to try to cast doubt on the fitness of Mr. Bush to be president. Still, the Bush-Rice proposal is not new, but an extension of a doctrine put forth by Gen. Colin L. Powell under the last Republican president, Mr. Bush's father. General Powell's belief was that American troops would essentially be reserved for a real crisis where overwhelming force could be brought to bear, to ensure victory and limit casualties. Lord Robertson, the NATO secretary general, has regularly told visiting American congressmen that the Bush proposal could undermine the whole idea of ''risk sharing, which is precisely the glue that holds the alliance together,'' one NATO official said. ''That's where we went wrong in Bosnia, and having corrected that error, it would be tragic to go back.'' In this sense, there is an opening for the Bush desire to hand over peace maintenance duties to the Europeans. Already, in Bosnia and Kosovo, American troops are no more than 20 percent of the total, and under 15 percent in Kosovo alone. American aid represents no more than 20 percent of what is being provided in Bosnia and Kosovo. In Yugoslavia itself, Predrag Simic, an adviser on foreign affairs to the Serbian Renewal Movement, said that Mr. Bush's proposal is ''another indication of American capriciousness in foreign affairs'' and will only give the Kosovar Albanians a ''new pretext to push for independence as soon as possible.'' One NATO-country diplomat said that the Bush argument for a better division of labor is a strong one, pointing to the Australian peacekeepers in East Timor, for example. ''But it is simply not realistic in the Balkans. The Americans have national interests in Europe and they play a deterrent role that is irreplaceable. NATO is not in Kosovo for the Kosovars, but for ourselves.''
 Richard Lowry and Ramesh Ponnuru Op-Ed article holds compasionate conservatism fails as political strategy for Gov George W Bush, who jettisons theme when sharply challenged; notes conservatives fear effort to express compassion through state is likely to backfire; holds Americans want energetic conservative leaders who serve middle class values and interests; drawing (M) For George W. Bush, compassionate conservatism has been a fair-weather campaign theme. When he was dominating the Republican field in 1999, or maintaining a sizable lead over Al Gore most of this summer, Mr. Bush could afford to spend all his time talking about his innovative programs for the poor and what they said about his heart. But Mr. Bush has twice jettisoned compassionate conservatism when sharply challenged. After John McCain defeated him in New Hampshire, he came back as an unmodified conservative, suspicious of federal campaign-finance regulations, disdainful of Washington and eager to cut taxes. He has fought Mr. Gore similarly, running as a reformist outsider against a big-government Democrat. For George W. Bush, compassionate conservatism has been a fair-weather campaign theme. When he was dominating the Republican field in 1999, or maintaining a sizable lead over Al Gore most of this summer, Mr. Bush could afford to spend all his time talking about his innovative programs for the poor and what they said about his heart. But Mr. Bush has twice jettisoned compassionate conservatism when sharply challenged. After John McCain defeated him in New Hampshire, he came back as an unmodified conservative, suspicious of federal campaign-finance regulations, disdainful of Washington and eager to cut taxes. He has fought Mr. Gore similarly, running as a reformist outsider against a big-government Democrat. The danger of a candidate's describing himself as compassionate is that it enables his opponents to portray him as self-involved, morally vain and softheaded. Senator McCain attracted many voters because he appeared to be a tough, plainspoken leader. And Mr. Bush, as long as he was promising to be a uniter, not a divider, and to touch every willing heart, didn't have that appearance. Nor could he refute Mr. Gore's contention that he was running on a warm and fuzzy personality rather than on ideas that would benefit the public. Of course Mr. Bush all along presented his political philosophy, and not just himself, as compassionate. But that didn't work, either. Conservatism practically begins with the fear that the attempt to express compassion through the state is likely to backfire. It insists instead on the importance of judgment in moral matters and self-reliance in economic ones. Both virtues are in tension with compassion, and even more with the sentimentality that often mistakes itself for compassion. People sense all this instinctively, and recent surveys show that the public considers Mr. Bush no more compassionate than any other Republican and thinks he ''cares'' less about people than Mr. Gore does. Compassionate conservatism fails, finally, as a political strategy. It might have worked if the public were so eager to leave the Clinton years behind that it would vote for any reasonably competent Republican who showed that he didn't have fangs. There was no shortage of would-be strategists who believed that the weariness with President Clinton did go that far. But especially after Mr. Gore established himself as his own man at the Democratic Convention, it became necessary for Mr. Bush to advance a more compelling argument. Since Labor Day, he has been doing that. He has not stopped claiming that as president he would govern with the interests of all Americans, including minorities and the poor, in mind; nor should he. But he has also made the argument, much more clearly than in the past, that he would serve the values and interests of the middle class better than Mr. Gore would. And those values and interests point toward a smaller federal government. So do those of the successful Americans Mr. Gore denigrates as the wealthy. In the national elections in 1998, Republicans lost crucial ground among people in households making more than $75,000 a year -- a quarter of the electorate that year. Now, according to at least one poll, Mr. Bush is winning their votes by 23 points. If Mr. Bush is elected, it will not be primarily because of his personality, compassionate or otherwise. It will be because America remains, in crucial respects, a conservative country that wants energetic conservative leaders. Mr. Bush would be wise to remember that, should he move to the White House. After a tumultuous year, he surely appreciates a bedrock truth of conservatism: It's not always fair weather.
 ''This state is the key to this election,'' Vice President Al Gore declared at a rally in Orlando earlier this month, ''and Central Florida is the key to this state.'' On Wednesday morning, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his brother Jeb, the governor of Florida, and Senator John McCain of Arizona are to attend a rally in Daytona Beach, then board a bus to campaign the length of the I-4 corridor, stopping at midday near Orlando to appear on television there, and finishing up with an evening appearance at the state fairgrounds outside Tampa. North Florida, from Jacksonville across the Panhandle to Pensacola, is almost indistinguishable in its politics from Alabama and South Georgia. A recent Democratic poll showed Mr. Bush winning the region by better than 2 to 1, according to Buddy Dyer, Democratic leader of the Florida Senate. In 1992, Ross Perot won more than 25 percent of the vote for president in some counties in the area. No one has tabulated who won along the corridor in the last two presidential elections, because there is no consensus on exactly which communities to count and which to exclude. But the best guess, the authorities say, is that President George Bush probably won a narrow plurality in 1992 and that Bill Clinton may have won a majority in 1996. Al Cardenas, the state Republican Party chairman, agreed with that assessment and said that was the reason the Bush campaign was placing so much emphasis here.
 New RAND Corp study questioning validity of rising student test scores in Texas roils presidential race; Gov George W Bush aides seek to discredit findings that Texas students showed greater improvement on state's own test than on leading national tests; Vice Pres Al Gore and other Democrats use findings to attack Bush on education, his signature issue (M) A new study questioning the validity of rising student test scores in Texas roiled the presidential race today as aides to Gov. George W. Bush sought to discredit the findings while the campaign of Vice President Al Gore and other Democrats used them to attack Mr. Bush on his signature issue,  education. A new study questioning the validity of rising student test scores in Texas roiled the presidential race today as aides to Gov. George W. Bush sought to discredit the findings while the campaign of Vice President Al Gore and other Democrats used them to attack Mr. Bush on his signature issue,  education. Mr. Bush has made education a centerpiece of his campaign, regularly boasting about the rising test scores in his state, including among black and Hispanic students, as he portrays Texas as a national leader. Outside a suburban Chicago middle school where Mr. Bush campaigned today, Karen P. Hughes, the campaign communications director, called the new findings biased and ''dead wrong.'' Ms. Hughes noted that other studies, including a larger July report by RAND, have portrayed Texas students in a good light, particularly in math. Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, said the RAND study showed that Mr. Bush had  overstated the progress made by Texas students during his tenure. In an unusual step, RAND's president and chief executive, James A. Thomson, citing the ''intense controversy, as we expected,'' issued a statement endorsing the findings in the study released today and the July report cited by the Bush campaign. In doing so, he rebutted Ms. Hughes's claim that the July report officially carried the RAND imprimatur but not today's smaller study, which is technically called an Issue Paper. The study found that in many categories, Texas students ranked high nationally, particularly in fourth-grade math. In fact, black fourth graders in Texas made bigger gains than their peers in every state on the math portion of the national test in 1996, according to the Grissmer study. The Bush campaign immediately embraced the findings. Laura Bush even mentioned the study in her address to the Republican National Convention. The Gore campaign said the second RAND report was more significant because it included scores from the middle of Mr. Bush's tenure in 1998. Mr. Bush took office in 1995. In Washington, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House Democratic leader, and Senator Tom Daschle, the minority leader,  pounced on the study and questioned whether Mr. Bush had exaggerated his record, as his campaign aides have accused Mr. Gore of doing. ''What Governor Bush has run his whole campaign on is now found to be an exaggeration,'' Mr. Gephardt said outside the White House. ''The students in Texas did not have better scores on the tests than other students around the country.''
 Off-duty New York City Police Officer Hailoon Wang fatally shoots Carmen Valentine after she and her mother attacked him with baseball bat and pool cue; shooting took place in first-floor hallway of apartment building in Bushwick section of Brooklyn where both Valentine and Wang families lived and feuded (M) The shooting took place in the first-floor hallway of an apartment building at 1185 DeKalb Avenue in the Bushwick section, where the woman, Carmen Valentine, lived with her family on the fourth floor, the police said. Relatives of the officer, Hailoon Wang, live on the first floor, and the two families have feuded for about a year and a half, the police said. The shooting took place in the first-floor hallway of an apartment building at 1185 DeKalb Avenue in the Bushwick section, where the woman, Carmen Valentine, lived with her family on the fourth floor, the police said. Relatives of the officer, Hailoon Wang, live on the first floor, and the two families have feuded for about a year and a half, the police said.
 For a president eager to do what he can to help Democrats triumph in November, this budget fight has been a bust. Major clashes have been minimal. Even the many skirmishes ending in White House victories do not seem to provide an appreciable lift to the Gore campaign. White House aides lament that nobody seems to be watching as the president tries one last round of legislative brinkmanship. This year, much to the frustration of the White House, the Republican presidential candidate, Gov. George W. Bush, successfully distanced himself from the wrangling on Capitol Hill. And despite White House efforts to use the annual budget standoff to frame the issues in the campaign, the negotiations have so far resulted in little more than a yawn. Still, major disagreements loom and Mr. Clinton has not given up his efforts to paint all Republicans -- from Mr. Bush on down -- as conservative extremists.
 Congressional Republicans, seeking to avoid pre-election confrontation with Pres Clinton, agree to remove provisions barring private international family planning groups that get federal funds from spending own money to provide abortions or promote abortion rights abroad; agree to raise aid to such groups to up to $425 million, from current $385 million, but make sure money cannot be used before next president takes office; abortion opponents hope Gov George W Bush will reinstate ban if he wins presidency; accord comes in House-Senate talks on $14.9 million spending bill that covers foreign aid (M) Abortion opponents are hoping that if Gov. George W. Bush wins the presidency, he will reinstate the restrictions. Abortion-rights advocates anticipate that should Vice President Al Gore win, he will do nothing, letting stand today's action removing the limitations. ''It also points up how critical this election is,'' Ms. Lowey said. ''For those who support family planning, it is absolutely essential that we elect Al Gore. And for those who would destroy family planning, then George Bush should be their person.'' Ray Sullivan, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, would not speculate on whether Mr. Bush would reinstate the restrictions if he is elected. But as a matter of principle, Mr. Sullivan added, ''Governor Bush does not favor using federal funds for abortion or abortion-related counseling at home or abroad.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore and his doctor, Richard J Tubb, in their first full interviews about his health, say Gore is in excellent health and has not taken sick day in eight years as Vice President; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore is in excellent health and has not taken a sick day in eight years in the White House, Mr. Gore and his doctor said in their first full interviews about Mr. Gore's health. Mr. Gore is ''fit for duty,'' Dr. Richard J. Tubb, a White House physician and Mr. Gore's personal doctor since mid-1995, said of his patient on a flight on Air Force Two from Milwaukee to Washington on Oct. 11. The Democratic presidential nominee has put off a physical exam. ''I have been begging Dr. Tubb to schedule it,'' he said drily. Speaking of checkups, Mr. Gore went on: ''I love them! Doesn't everybody?'' Vice President Al Gore is in excellent health and has not taken a sick day in eight years in the White House, Mr. Gore and his doctor said in their first full interviews about Mr. Gore's health. Mr. Gore is ''fit for duty,'' Dr. Richard J. Tubb, a White House physician and Mr. Gore's personal doctor since mid-1995, said of his patient on a flight on Air Force Two from Milwaukee to Washington on Oct. 11. The Democratic presidential nominee has put off a physical exam. ''I have been begging Dr. Tubb to schedule it,'' he said drily. Speaking of checkups, Mr. Gore went on: ''I love them! Doesn't everybody?'' Turning serious, Mr. Gore said he and Dr. Tubb had discussed the recommended intervals for routine checkups. Mr. Gore's last two checkups were about 18 months apart, on May 7, 1999, and Dec. 23, 1997. Dr. Tubb said he followed general medical guidelines that in recent years have focused more on the timeliness of performing certain screening tests like measuring blood pressure and detecting early colon cancer than on general physical exam. ''I opted to go close to the outer boundary because I am involved in a national campaign where every day and every half-day means a lot,'' Mr. Gore said. ''So I don't feel I am sacrificing anything by maximizing all the hours I have between now and Nov. 7.'' Mr. Gore, who has never suffered a serious illness, looks younger than his 52 years. He attributed his current good health to a vigorous daily exercise program that has included running a marathon in 1997 and climbing Mount Rainier in Washington State in 1999. Vitamins are the only medicines he takes regularly, he said as he sat on a couch in his cabin with this reporter, who is a physician. Also present were Dr. Tubb and Chris Lehane, a press aide. To relieve stress, Mr. Gore said, he exercises, listens to music, prays and meditates. ''If I've got a negotiating session or I have got a meeting that has a very high stakes outcome,'' Mr. Gore said, ''instead of using the last four or five minutes to cram more details into my head, I will just relax and just slow down.'' Mr. Gore said he smoked a pack a day as a senior at Harvard and quit five years later because ''I realized that it was just awful for me, quite some time before I finally stopped.'' He is also a nail-biter. In the interview his nails were bitten to ragged edges. Asked if this was a lifetime habit, Mr. Gore said he did it ''every once in a while'' and did not link it to nervousness or anything else. In May 1999 Mr. Gore's blood pressure was a normal 140/85 and a treadmill test showed his heart function was excellent. Dr. Tubb said he would check Mr. Gore's cholesterol and other blood lipids at his next exam because his cholesterol and one blood lipid had been in the borderline high region. Mr. Gore's total cholesterol of 231 was higher than the ideal of less than 200, and his L.D.L. (low density lipoprotein, or bad cholesterol) was an unfavorable 157, higher than the ideal of 130 or less. His H.D.L. (high density lipoprotein, or good cholesterol) was a favorable 55, above the ideal of 35. Dr. Tubb said he had not prescribed a cholesterol-lowering drug because Mr. Gore had no other risk factors for heart disease and did not meet criteria in national guidelines for such therapy. Mr. Gore's running mate, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, has also agreed, through his aides, to an interview with The Times about his health. Yesterday, after months of requests, a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, said Mr. Bush would permit his doctor to be interviewed by The Times. But the governor has so far declined to be interviewed. His running mate, Dick Cheney, has released doctors' letters summarizing his health but has not responded to repeated requests for interviews with him and his doctors. Every other day, Mr. Gore said, he does a strength workout. ''I do 150 push-ups and 100 sit-ups'' and other exercises, including lifting weights. ''Then,'' he went on, ''I run or sometimes Stairmaster five to six days a week.'' Mr. Gore said he was bad at downhill skiing and mountain climbing, but climbed because it is ''something my son and I can do together.'' Asked whether a president should take the risks of mountain climbing, he said he would not take any that were unreasonable. Climbing can be  ''perfectly reasonable,'' depending on the experience and skill of the climbing party, the mountain, routes taken and weather, Mr. Gore said. Mr. Gore and his family went through a terrifying ordeal in 1989 when his 6-year-old son, Albert, was struck by a car and suffered a serious head injury. At the time, they participated in family counseling on the advice of doctors at Johns Hopkins Hospital ''because the great stress associated with an incident like that is something that sometimes can affect the entire family,'' Mr. Gore said. Referring to his wife, Mr. Gore went on: Mr. Gore said he did not remember the specific details but thought that a psychologist had led the talk. ''It wasn't a psychiatrist,'' but ''it would have been fine if it was,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I am glad that we did it.'' Dr. Tubb said Mr. Gore had not sought care from a psychiatrist, psychologist or counselor other than after his son's accident. In discussing Mr. Gore's family medical history, Dr. Tubb said he had not examined Mr. Gore's father, Albert Sr., but he believed that his death at age 90 in 1998 was from complications of Alzheimer's disease. Asked about the possibility his father had Alzheimer's, Mr. Gore rose forward on the couch and expressed surprise, saying, ''He did?'' Speaking of his father, a former senator from Tennessee, Mr. Gore said, ''There is no doubt that he had some form of dementia before he died, but I really do not know exactly what kind it was.'' He said he attributed his father's dementia, which he said was present for a year or two before his death, to a severe head injury his father suffered in his late 80's. A bull was acting up and the senior Mr. Gore whacked it on the nose. ''The bull upended him and my father landed on his head,'' Mr. Gore said. Mr. Gore said no other blood relatives had suffered dementia. Even if Mr. Gore's father also did have Alzheimer's, the son's chances of developing the disease in the next decade are less than 1 percent, about the same as any other individual the same age, Alzheimer experts said. Mr. Gore's schedule influences how long he sleeps. He works best when he sleeps eight hours, but he usually gets only seven, he said. He catches up by sleeping longer the next night or taking a catnap, and envies others who can take a nap at will. ''I can't,'' Mr. Gore said. At his last physical, Mr. Gore stood 6 feet one inch and weighed 195 pounds -- a pound less than when he entered Congress in 1977 and 15 pounds less than his heaviest weight, 210 pounds, in January 1994. Aides said they could not provide a more recent weight. Dr. Tubb, a nutritionist and a physiologist jointly recommended that Mr. Gore eat a diet of high complex carbohydrates, low saturated fats and high fiber to control his cholesterol. Mr. Gore said he ''very rarely'' drank alcohol and usually chose his menus. Referring to the salad and baklava that were served on the flight, Mr. Gore said he ate ''only 3 pieces of baklava today instead of the five I wanted.'' Mr. Gore, who began using contact lenses for distance last year, said he ''can go perfectly well without them, but if I want to make sure that I can pick up details at a distance, like when I go to my son's football game, I will put two contacts in.'' Mr. Gore tested negative for H.I.V., the AIDS virus, as part of applying for a life insurance policy in 1997, Dr. Tubb said. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE FITNESS REPORT  Correction:  October 29, 2000, Sunday  An article on Wednesday about the health status of Vice President Al Gore misstated his blood pressure. It is 110/68, not 140/85. An article on Wednesday about the health status of Vice President Al Gore misstated his blood pressure. It is 110/68, not 140/85.
 Vice Pres Al Gore lays claim to being candidate of limited government today, pledging not to increase number of federal employees, speech, Little Rock; suggests Bush would be 'pliant president' who would mold public policy to please special interests funding his campaign; did not invite Pres Clinton to join him in city, Clinton's former home; administration officials say Clinton weighs campaigning for Gore, but not with him, in Arkansas and Louisiana; excerpt from Gore's remarks; photo (M) Vice President Al Gore laid claim to being the candidate of limited government today, rebutting Gov. George W. Bush's labeling of him as a big spender by promising that he would not increase the number of federal employees while he was in office. He also toughened his critique of Mr. Bush by suggesting that his Republican rival would be ''a pliant president'' who would mold public policy to please the special interests that have underwritten his campaign. Vice President Al Gore laid claim to being the candidate of limited government today, rebutting Gov. George W. Bush's labeling of him as a big spender by promising that he would not increase the number of federal employees while he was in office. He also toughened his critique of Mr. Bush by suggesting that his Republican rival would be ''a pliant president'' who would mold public policy to please the special interests that have underwritten his campaign. Two weeks before Election Day, Mr. Gore explained his views on government in an address in Little Rock, Ark., the former home of the man who asked him to join his ticket eight years ago. But now fearful of standing beside a tarnished Bill Clinton, Mr. Gore did not invite the president to join him in Little Rock, and he mentioned his name only in passing today. Administration officials said today that Mr. Clinton was considering campaigning for Mr. Gore, but not with Mr. Gore, in Arkansas and Louisiana sometime next week. The rally at River Market Square in Little Rock was two blocks from the planned site of Mr. Clinton's presidential library. But with national network cameras trained his way, Mr. Gore repeatedly passed up opportunities to pay homage to Mr. Clinton before the home folks, though he did praise other Arkansas politicians in attendance, like former Senator Dale Bumpers and current Senator Blanche Lincoln. And yet, Mr. Clinton's spirit and legacy pervaded Mr. Gore's speech, the first of a set of issue-oriented addresses the vice president plans to deliver between now and Nov. 7. ''I don't ever want to see another era of big government,'' declared Mr. Gore, the Democratic nominee, echoing Mr. Clinton's 1996 declaration that ''the era of big government is over.'' Mr. Gore added, ''But I certainly don't want to ever see another era of special interests who wield more power than the American people have.'' Mr. Gore bookended his day with appearances in Mr. Clinton's home state and his own, greeting workers at his national headquarters in Nashville this evening and then attending  fund-raisers here. In between, he held a rally on a steamy airport tarmac in Shreveport, La. Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore carried all three states he visited today in 1992 and 1996. The vice president hopes to spend the rest of the campaign making the policy distinctions between himself and Mr. Bush as stark as possible, and he began that task with today's address. His goal, he made clear, was to undercut the Republican depiction of him as ''a mythical big-spending, big-government candidate, a cartoon image from campaigns past.'' ''I'm opposed to big government,'' Mr. Gore declared, speaking to a crowd of invited guests in a convention center meeting room. ''I'm for a smaller, smarter government, one that serves people better, but offers real change and gives more choices to our families.'' Told of Mr. Gore's remarks tonight, Mr. Bush responded, ''He's the biggest spender we've ever had in the history of politics.'' Following in Mr. Clinton's ideological footsteps, Mr. Gore said he was the only candidate who believed in limited government. ''I have believed in it long before it was fashionable to do so in the Democratic Party,'' he said. ''I don't believe there's a government solution to every problem. I don't believe any government program can replace the responsibility of parents, the hard work of families or the innovation of industry.'' To drive home the point, Mr. Gore equated the consequences of government expansion with those of Mr. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion income tax cut, which Mr. Gore has derided as foolhardy fiscal policy. ''A return to big government,'' Mr. Gore said, ''would be as wrong for our economy as a return to big tax cuts for the wealthy.'' To that end, Mr. Gore vowed: ''I will not add to the number of people doing work for the federal government, not by even one position, and there will be more who leave those ranks than the ones who are replaced.'' He also said he would shrink the federal government to its smallest share of the economy in 50 years and would begin a second phase of the ''reinventing government'' initiative that he had directed for Mr. Clinton. That round of consolidations and agency reductions cut the number of federal jobs by more than 300,000, Mr. Gore said. Dan Bartlett, a Bush spokesman, said it ''strains credibility'' for Mr. Gore to take credit for job cuts because the vast majority of those resulted from the post-cold-war retrenchment in the armed forces. ''Empowering people means giving them the power to shape their own lives. Because he gives most of the tax breaks and all the power to powerful interests, Governor Bush will leave millions of families powerless and broke, left to the tender mercies of big impersonal interests and institutions. Now, let's be clear about one thing. The more than $100 million raised by Governor Bush before the campaign really got into its homestretch came in significant part from a new generation of special-interest power brokers, who would like nothing better than a pliant president who would bend public policy to suit their purposes and profits, a president who would turn the decisions over to them. They know that I would fight for you, no matter what. . . .
 In the presidential campaign, Vice President Al Gore has hammered at Gov. George W. Bush's problems with the uninsured in Texas. In the second debate, Mr. Bush said: ''We've spent $4.7 billion a year in the state of Texas for uninsured people. And they get health care. Now, it's not the most efficient way to get people health care,'' likely an allusion to the emergency rooms.
 A RUMBLING IN CALIFORNIA -- The presidential race is tightening in California, the nation's biggest trove of electoral votes. In a newly released poll, Vice President Al Gore's once-formidable lead over Gov. George W. Bush has shrunk to just five percentage points. The survey, by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California, conducted in the period spanning the second and third debates, found Mr. Gore leading 44 percent to 39 percent among likely voters, down from a nine-point lead in September. Mr. Gore's support slipped away to the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, who polled at 6 percent, and to other third-party candidates. But Mr. Bush's support stayed level, showing that he still faces an uphill battle in the Golden State. A RUMBLING IN CALIFORNIA -- The presidential race is tightening in California, the nation's biggest trove of electoral votes. In a newly released poll, Vice President Al Gore's once-formidable lead over Gov. George W. Bush has shrunk to just five percentage points. The survey, by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California, conducted in the period spanning the second and third debates, found Mr. Gore leading 44 percent to 39 percent among likely voters, down from a nine-point lead in September. Mr. Gore's support slipped away to the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, who polled at 6 percent, and to other third-party candidates. But Mr. Bush's support stayed level, showing that he still faces an uphill battle in the Golden State. The poll numbers were enough to prompt one Nader supporter, Greg MacArthur of the group Citizens for Strategic Voting, to drop plans to run full-page ads in California newspapers claiming that a ''vote for Nader is not a vote for Bush.'' The group wants to run the ads only in states not in play, in hopes of winning enough total votes for Mr. Nader to reach the 5 percent national threshold needed to qualify the party for matching federal campaign funds in 2004. FLIP-FLOP IN WISCONSIN -- In another new poll, this one from Wisconsin, long considered a hotly contested state, Gov. George W. Bush has taken a nine-point lead over Vice President Al Gore after trailing him by five points in a survey a month ago. The new poll, conducted last week by Harris Interactive  of Rochester, N.Y., put support for Ralph Nader at 5 percent, up a point from the poll released a month earlier. THE CLINTON SHADOW -- Should President Clinton campaign with Vice President Al Gore? ''No'' was the resounding answer Monday night from most of a dozen people at a focus group in Marlton, N.J. Even voters who were Democrats and had favorable opinions of Mr. Clinton told the focus-group pollster, Peter Hart, that the president should steer clear of the Gore campaign. A Gallup Poll released yesterday affirmed this view. Voters were asked if they would be more likely or less likely to vote for Mr. Gore if Mr. Clinton campaigned with him. Forty percent said ''less likely,'' while only 17 percent said ''more likely.'' Gov. George W. Bush seems to relish the idea of Mr. Clinton appearing with Mr. Gore. ''If he can't help himself and starts getting out there and campaigns against me, the shadow returns,'' Mr. Bush said. QUESTIONS ABOUT ARMS DEAL -- Four former secretaries of state and seven other former high level officials, most but not all veterans of Republican administrations, said yesterday that Vice President Al Gore agreed in 1995 to Russia's sale of ''highly threatening'' military equipment to Iran without fully informing Congress of the deal. All worked for Republicans except Mr. Brzezinski and Mr. Woolsey. Mr. Schlesinger served in both Republican and Democratic administrations. A footnote said the signers included supporters both of Gov. George W. Bush and Mr. Gore but did not identify who favored which candidate. A Gore spokesman, Jim Kennedy, said the 1995 agreement helped safeguard American security, that it was publicly announced and that Congress was briefed on it. ''Inaccurate complaints about it, only now, 14 days before the election, speaks for itself,'' he added. Here are the stats for Tuesday:  Length of official day: Gore, 13 hours; Bush 14 1/2 hours  Official Events: Gore, 4; Bush 3  Cities/towns visited: Gore, 3 (Little Rock, Ark.; Shreveport, La.; Nashville, Tenn.) Bush, 4 (Milwaukee; Arlington Heights, Ill.; Knoxville, Tenn.; Jacksonville, Fla.)  Planes Boarded: Gore, 3; Bush 3  Miles traveled: Gore, 651; Bush, 1,122  Surrogates campaigning: Gore, 19 Democratic senators; Bush, 7 groups of Republican governors  Main message: Gore, the economy; Bush, taxes
 Public Lives column profiles career of Leticia Remauro, head of Republican George Bush's Presidential campaign in New York State; photo (M) WHEN Gov. George W. Bush of Texas made a rare visit to Manhattan last week, he did not make time for Leticia Remauro. No hurt feelings. Mrs. Remauro, who heads the Bush campaign in New York, knows that she is promoting a candidacy without a candidate. ''George Bush is concentrating on states that are considered swing states,'' Mrs. Remauro said. ''You have to keep your eye on the prize and the prize is the presidency.'' WHEN Gov. George W. Bush of Texas made a rare visit to Manhattan last week, he did not make time for Leticia Remauro. No hurt feelings. Mrs. Remauro, who heads the Bush campaign in New York, knows that she is promoting a candidacy without a candidate. ''George Bush is concentrating on states that are considered swing states,'' Mrs. Remauro said. ''You have to keep your eye on the prize and the prize is the presidency.'' Mr. Bush is trailing Vice President Al Gore by a wide margin in New York, according to the polls. Mrs. Remauro is too careful with her words to say so, but the governor has essentially given up on the state. Her job is to soften the defeat (12 points would be much nicer than 20) and worry about the scores of local races that Republicans could win. It has been that way since July, when Mrs. Remauro, 37, gave up a job as assistant to the president at Battery Park City to become executive director of New York Victory 2000, the statewide election effort for Mr. Bush and the other Republican candidates. Since then, she has not spoken with him at all. Indeed, the only time she has ever spoken with him, and then only for a few moments, was before the March primary, while waiting to be photographed at a fund-raiser. They also hugged, which made a far greater impression on Mrs. Remauro than the chitchat. Mr. Bush embraced her, Mrs. Remauro said, because he saw Gov. George E. Pataki do the same and thought it would be funny. ''Governor Bush said: 'Leticia! I want one of those hugs!' '' she recalled, laughing about it all over again. ''He showed me his sense of humor and his warm side right there. We had hysterical smirks on our faces when the photograph was taken.'' (It now hangs on the wall of her Republican chairwoman's office in Staten Island, which she visits in the evening after finishing work at the New York Victory 2000 headquarters on Park Avenue in Manhattan.) Mrs. Remauro is not slighted by Mr. Bush's apparent lack of attention to her work. Indeed, she goes out of her way not to get in his way. She has made no effort to appear on his schedule and sent others on her staff to cheer him on at the ''Late Show With David Letterman'' last week. The only time Mrs. Remauro ran for public office, for State Assembly in the 60th District, she took a thrashing. She considers her proudest political accomplishment having managed a victory for Mr. Bush in Staten Island in the March primary despite Borough President Guy V. Molinari's support for Senator John McCain. Mrs. Remauro, no matter how capable (or huggable), might not be Mr. Bush's point person in New York if New York were one of those swing states she talks about. But that does not bother her. She works as if New York is a battleground. When she was hired for the job, which pays $1,730 a week, Mr. Bush was nearly 30 points behind Mr. Gore in some polls. Mrs. Remauro could have resigned herself to a yawner. And then there's the abuse that comes with being a political maven: She was recently pelted with popcorn at a restaurant when she asked that one of the televisions be switched from a Yankees game to a Bush-Gore debate. Without a presidential contender on hand, delivering the votes for Mr. Bush has meant worrying about a lot of little things. Her outer office in Manhattan is piled high with wooden stakes for lawn signs. The problem is that she is out of signs. She also has requests for Bush-Cheney campaign buttons, but she has run out of them as well. Except for a button on her bulletin board, Mrs. Remauro does not have a picture of Mr. Bush at her Park Avenue office. Instead, when she needs inspiration, she opens a toy coffin on the windowsill. Inside are newspaper clippings showing Mr. Gore, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
 A billboard the agency produced, which gained national publicity, depicted a photograph of George W. Bush but carried the logo for Al Gore. The billboard was changed to reveal that it was an ad for 123Hire.com; the headline read, ''Today's job opening: proofreader.'' Computer users may vote to decide what Mr. Boone and Mr. Oakley will name the agency, by visiting either www.booneoakley.com or www.oakleyboone.com.
 The issue has resonated on the campaign trail. Vice President Al Gore, whose campaign depends heavily on labor support, has said that any future trade deals he negotiates as president will address workers and the environment. Gov. George W. Bush has said that he considers such issues impediments to free trade.
 Then there is the evidence that, in the presidential campaign, both national parties have already awarded New Jersey to the Democrat, Vice President Al Gore, leaving the state without a good race at the top of the ticket to spill over to the Senate race.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column compares raging hormones of World Series with elaborately staged gender moments, some meant to appeal to women and some to men, that marked campaigns of Al Gore, George W Bush and Rick Lazio (M) All year Al Gore, W. and Rick Lazio have been contriving, on the advice of consultants and focus groups, to elaborately stage gender moments, some meant to appeal to women, some to men -- a lot of estrogen for the Oprah-Rosie-soccer-mom crowd, a lot of testosterone for all the voters who want to choose the top gladiator: A rooster-chested Al Gore, making up for his prissy sighs by trying to bear down in an intimidating way on W. and the audience at the final  debate; a squeaky Little Ricky, attempting to escape his soft good looks and Gingrich-lapdog image by getting in Hillary Rodham Clinton's face in their first debate. Being wimps, being flighty, being uncompetitive, being pegged as Eastern effete elite -- this has long been the bete noir of the Bush dynasty. The Texas migration of the Connecticut clan was an attempt to prove mesquite manliness in the face of pampered Greenwich values. The Bush team has tried to make the most of Al Gore's Mike Piazza moments. It has delighted at the hopeless attempt of Mr. Gore to escape the Clinton shadow, even as the Shadow second-guesses and critiques from the sidelines, making it humiliatingly clear that the president does not think his vice president is cutting the mustard. And W. is still milking the flap over Naomi Wolf's alpha-male advice to Mr. Gore, the spectacle of a woman instructing a man how to be a man. At the Al Smith dinner, Mr. Bush joked that he had run into a woman coming off the elevator at the Waldorf, ''I think her name is Naomi or something like that,'' who had suggested that he wear more earth tones, less white tie.
 William S Shogren letter contends Gov George W Bush's avowed aim to pull military out of Balkans is ignorant (Oct 21 article) George W. Bush's avowed aim to pull the military out of the Balkans and to reduce peacekeeping and nation-building efforts elsewhere so that the troops are ready for a major war is ignorant (front page, Oct. 21). George W. Bush's avowed aim to pull the military out of the Balkans and to reduce peacekeeping and nation-building efforts elsewhere so that the troops are ready for a major war is ignorant (front page, Oct. 21).
 Letter from Lt Dnaiel P Mauro, US Army officer based in Kosovo, contends his brigade in Kosovo will have gone for a year without having trained for combat (Oct 21 article on Gov Bush's statements on Balkan policy) Re ''Bush Would Stop U.S. Peacekeeping in Balkan Fights'' (front page, Oct. 21): Re ''Bush Would Stop U.S. Peacekeeping in Balkan Fights'' (front page, Oct. 21): Condoleezza Rice, a senior adviser to George W. Bush, has unveiled a policy that would withdraw United States troops from use in the Balkans and hold them ready for wars in other regions. According to this scheme, humanitarian involvement apparently does not conform to national interest; potentially, this is a global death sentence. What should our allies make of this announcement, so clearly geared to this election campaign? They may as well take it as an early warning that a Bush administration would practice unilateralism in a way it has never been practiced before.
 Business is business, he explained apologetically, especially in an upstate town still waiting for signs of the Clinton-Gore economic boom. Mr. Graham makes a lot of his upstate credentials -- he and Mr. Dunau are the only candidates not from New York City or its suburbs -- and the inability of either major party to achieve much there.
 Gov George W Bush, campaigning in Chicago suburb and in Knoxville, Tenn, mocks Vice Pres Al Gore's tax cutting proposal and touts his own as better; begins day in Milwaukee, Wis, and ends it in Jacksonville, Fla; excerpt from remarks; photo (M) Gov. George W. Bush of Texas sought today to make a mockery of his Democratic opponent's proposal for tax cuts, portraying it as a loopy marvel of convolution and asserting that his own, vastly more expensive plan was better. In remarks in Knoxville, Tenn., this afternoon and in a suburb of Chicago this morning, Mr. Bush said the conditions and qualifications layered into Vice President Al Gore's ''targeted'' tax cuts would exclude too many taxpayers and give the government too much control over people's lives. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas sought today to make a mockery of his Democratic opponent's proposal for tax cuts, portraying it as a loopy marvel of convolution and asserting that his own, vastly more expensive plan was better. In remarks in Knoxville, Tenn., this afternoon and in a suburb of Chicago this morning, Mr. Bush said the conditions and qualifications layered into Vice President Al Gore's ''targeted'' tax cuts would exclude too many taxpayers and give the government too much control over people's lives. ''Let me ask you a question,'' Mr. Bush said to several hundred people  inside a school in Arlington Heights, Ill. ''How many of you own hybrid electric-gasoline engine vehicles?'' His question was met by laughter. ''That's one of the criterion necessary to receive tax relief,'' he added, referring to an element of Mr. Gore's environment and energy plan that proposes to reward people who buy such vehicles with one-time tax credits of $1,000 to $6,000. ''How many of you own a rooftop photo-voltaic system?'' Mr. Bush then asked, ridiculing Mr. Gore's suggested tax credit for people who put solar panels on the roofs of their houses or businesses. ''If you had one, you'd get tax relief.'' Mr. Bush was selectively homing in on some of the more obscure tax cuts that Mr. Gore has proposed, and he seemed to revel mischievously in doing so. His frisky mood also spilled over into a warning that he issued to President Clinton about getting involved in the campaign. Mr. Bush stumbled over his next phrases and time references. ''That's a chapter -- the last chapter -- of the 20th, 20th, the 21st century that most of us would rather forget,'' he continued, then corrected himself. During a long day that began in Milwaukee and ended here in Jacksonville, Mr. Bush's itinerary reflected both the significant successes and nagging worries of his campaign. In Wisconsin and Tennessee, he was campaigning in states that were expected to tilt Democratic but have not done so. But Mr. Bush has not built the kind of lead in Florida that many political analysts envisioned, and a rally in Jacksonville tonight was to be followed on Wednesday by a bus trip through the state. President Clinton, who defeated Mr. Bush's father, former President Bush, in 1992, also seemed to hover over the Jacksonville event. In introducing Mr. Bush, his brother, Gov. Jeb Bush of the Florida, talked of the need to elect ''someone of integrity, someone of honor and decency.'' And then the Texas governor said he and his brother ''were raised right.'' He added, ''We were raised by two parents who taught us to tell the truth.'' With that statement he may have been tying together and tweaking Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, and he went on to deride Mr. Gore as ''a man prone to exaggeration.'' In an interview tonight on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' Mr. Bush said he would welcome -- and could capitalize on -- a decision by Mr. Gore to use Mr. Clinton in his campaign. ''It would remind people that my opponent was not standing on his own,'' Mr. Bush said. ''There must be something amiss, if after having stiff-armed a president so to speak, all of a sudden they urge him to come back in the waning days of the campaign.'' All day, Mr. Bush, who is grappling with Mr. Gore for undecided swing voters, invited ''open-minded Democrats'' and independents to support him, and in Arlington Heights, he cast himself as a practical centrist in  answers to questions about abortion and gun control. Although Mr. Bush opposes abortion in most cases, he said, ''This is an issue where good people can disagree and still be allies.'' But Mr. Bush's chosen focus was on taxes. He is proposing a sweeping cut of an estimated $1.3 trillion over 10 years, and it reduces the rates for taxpayers in every bracket. The largest savings, in raw dollar terms, go to the wealthiest Americans. Mr. Gore is proposing a cut of $500 billion that principally applies to people in households with annual incomes under $100,000 and is largely delivered through tax credits and deductions for certain spending. Mr. Bush said the proposal was too selective and intricate. But Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, said, ''Maybe a $500 billion tax cut for average working families is too complicated for George W. Bush, but most Americans understand it.''
 Fritz Stern letter scores Gov Bush's proposed policy in Balkans, as outlined by his adviser Condoleezza Rice, that would withdraw US troops from Balkans (Oct 21 article) Re ''Bush Would Stop U.S. Peacekeeping in Balkan Fights'' (front page, Oct. 21): Re ''Bush Would Stop U.S. Peacekeeping in Balkan Fights'' (front page, Oct. 21):
 Democratic Party and its allies in labor, environmental and women's movements, concerned Ralph Nader has become major threat to Vice Pres Al Gore's ability to win presidential race, are mounting aggressive campaigns in swing states to dissuade liberal voters from backing Green Party candidate; array of prominent liberals are stumping for Gore in Nader strongholds, lauding Nader but warning strong Nader showing will help Gov George W Bush; Nader welcomes attention, interview; photo (M) Concerned that Ralph Nader has become a major threat to Vice President Al Gore's ability to win the presidency, the Democratic Party and its allies in the labor, environmental and women's movements are mounting aggressive campaigns in swing states across the country to dissuade liberal voters from supporting Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate. In the Pacific Northwest, the League of Conservation Voters is preparing to run radio advertisements asserting that voting for Mr. Nader would be tantamount to voting for Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican. In Ohio, the state Democratic Party has begun flooding college campuses with leaflets urging students not to waste their ballots on the Green Party. In Wisconsin, the Service Employees International Union has dispatched hundreds of organizers to implore its 12,000 state members to vote Democratic, not Green. Concerned that Ralph Nader has become a major threat to Vice President Al Gore's ability to win the presidency, the Democratic Party and its allies in the labor, environmental and women's movements are mounting aggressive campaigns in swing states across the country to dissuade liberal voters from supporting Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate. In the Pacific Northwest, the League of Conservation Voters is preparing to run radio advertisements asserting that voting for Mr. Nader would be tantamount to voting for Gov. George W. Bush, the Republican. In Ohio, the state Democratic Party has begun flooding college campuses with leaflets urging students not to waste their ballots on the Green Party. In Wisconsin, the Service Employees International Union has dispatched hundreds of organizers to implore its 12,000 state members to vote Democratic, not Green. And the Democratic National Committee has organized an array of prominent liberals, including Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Gloria Steinem and Robert Redford to stump for Mr. Gore in Nader strongholds like Eugene, Ore., Madison, Wis., and Seattle. Not wanting to offend Mr. Nader or his supporters, those surrogates have been paying homage to his long record of fighting for a cleaner environment, consumer protection and labor rights. But they warn that a strong Nader showing can only help Mr. Bush -- with potentially dire consequences for the very causes liberals hold most dear. ''Mr. Nader is a good man, he's raised important issues,'' said Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager. ''But he himself admits that he can't win. What could be lost in this election is a woman's right to choose, what could be lost are tough environmental protections.'' Indeed, the sudden mobilization against Mr. Nader comes after Gore campaign officials had for months dismissed him as inconsequential. But Mr. Nader has stubbornly continued to hover around 5 percent in polls taken in half a dozen tightly contested states where a shift of just a percentage point or two could determine the winner, including Oregon, Washington, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota and New Mexico. A poll released today even shows Mr. Nader cutting into Mr. Gore's once-substantial lead in California. Now, with just two weeks left in one of the closest presidential campaigns in decades, Democrats say the last thing Mr. Gore needs is to be forced into a two-front war against both Mr. Bush and Mr. Nader. And while Gore campaign officials continue to express confidence in public that Mr. Nader's support will dwindle by Election Day, they are telling their surrogates in private that they are worried the Green Party candidate has become a real danger. ''Bill Daley is well aware that it's extremely important to deal with Nader voters,'' Mr. Wellstone said, referring to Mr. Gore's campaign chairman. ''He understands this could be the margin of defeat or victory in the battleground states.'' Mr. Gore himself has begun addressing Mr. Nader's challenge head on, telling voters in Washington on Monday that his environmental record was as strong as Mr. Nader's. ''I don't want to use the argument that a vote for him is a vote for Bush -- that may be true,'' Mr. Gore told a reporter for KIRO-TV in Seattle. ''I prefer to say, 'Look, I want you to look at my record and my agenda and my passion for doing the right thing.' And I'll match that against anybody.'' But Democratic strategists say they want Mr. Gore to avoid mentioning Mr. Nader, arguing that doing so only elevates the insurgent's profile and draws attention from their real target, Mr. Bush. For that reason, the Democrats are trying to shift the burden of wooing Nader voters to a stable of well-known liberal politicians and advocates. Their roadshow is scheduled to visit Oregon, Wisconsin and New Mexico next week. ''Whatever value Nader brings to the public discourse,'' Ms. Birch said in an interview today, ''it pales compared to handing the federal government and Supreme Court over to George Bush. We will do everything we can to peel votes away from Nader and give them back to Gore.'' Mr. Nader has tried to argue that he is not likely to hurt Mr. Gore, asserting that many of his supporters are non-Democrats who probably would not vote if he dropped out of the race. Democrats dispute that. He has also said in recent weeks that he would focus his final campaigning on states where either Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore holds a substantial lead. But his tentative schedule includes stops in closely contested states like Wisconsin, Minnesota and Michigan. The Democrats have asked Brent Blackwelder, president of Friends of the Earth, to campaign for Mr. Gore in the Pacific Northwest. And the Sierra Club will begin running television spots next week in five states where Mr. Nader is polling well that carry the message: ''Think there's no difference between the candidates? Think again.'' Former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Mr. Gore's rival in the Democratic primaries, is being dispatched later this week to campaign in Oregon and Washington, where Democratic strategists are counting on him to woo liberal white men for Mr. Gore. Mr. Jackson has been sent to colleges where Mr. Nader is considered popular, including the University of Wisconsin at Madison. Because Mr. Nader could also win  votes from union members who are angry with Mr. Gore for supporting global trade, the Democrats have organized a list of heavyweight labor leaders to help. Earlier this week, John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., toured the Northwest with other labor officials urging labor activists to stick with Mr. Gore. Andrew L. Stern, head of the service employees union, said in an interview that he had been telling crowds in the Northwest: ''If you can wake up the next morning and live with George Bush as the next president, then I guess you can vote for Nader. This is not a low-risk protest vote.'' The Democratic Party has also been asking Gore supporters to flood the Nader campaign with e-mail messages urging him to drop out of the race. It has also been promoting a Web site created by a group of former colleagues of Mr. Nader's called nadersraidersforgore.com. Yet for all those efforts, some Democrats say they think the Gore campaign was slow to respond. Gary Sellers of Nader's Raiders for Gore, said of Mr. Gore's campaign: ''I think they are not taking him as seriously as they should. The Nader people are true believers. It's going to take some time to convince them to vote against him.''
 No law requires officials or candidates to make their tax returns public, but Mr. Bush has provided The New York Times with copies of his complete returns since 1994. Vice President Al Gore has disclosed his complete return each year since 1991 and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, after he was nominated by the Democrats for vice president in August, released his complete tax returns back to 1990.
 Bush Pledge Alarms Europeans  European diplomats, officials and analysts expressed disfavor for a promise by George W. Bush that if elected president he will negotiate removal of American troops from Balkan peacekeeping duties and leave such work to Europeans. G.O.P. Averts Standoff Over Family Planning Limits  Congressional Republicans agreed to remove restrictions -- on Feb. 15, 2001 -- that bar private family planning groups that get federal funds from spending any money to provide abortions or promote abortion rights in other countries. The move is both a gamble that Gov. George W. Bush will win the presidency and reverse much of what Congress just did and an effort to avoid a high-profile pre-election confrontation with President Clinton, who promised a veto if the restrictions remained. Effort to Counter Nader Effect  The Democratic Party and its allies in the labor, environmental and women's movements, concerned that Ralph Nader has become a major threat to Vice President Al Gore's ability to win the presidency, are mounting aggressive campaigns in swing states to dissuade liberal voters from supporting Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate. Texas Test Scores Challenged  A RAND Corporation study questioned the validity of rising student test scores in Texas. Aides to Gov. George W. Bush sought to discredit the findings; the Gore campaign and its supporters seized on them to attack Governor Bush on his signature issue, education. Doctor Declares Gore Fit  Vice President Al Gore is in excellent health and has not taken a sick day in the last eight years, Mr. Gore and his doctor said in their first full interviews about Mr. Gore's health. The Bush campaign said Gov. George W. Bush would allow his doctor to be interviewed, but the governor himself has so far declined to be interviewed. Bush Pledge Alarms Europeans  European diplomats, officials and analysts expressed disfavor for a promise by George W. Bush that if elected president he will negotiate removal of American troops from Balkan peacekeeping duties and leave such work to Europeans. G.O.P. Averts Standoff Over Family Planning Limits  Congressional Republicans agreed to remove restrictions -- on Feb. 15, 2001 -- that bar private family planning groups that get federal funds from spending any money to provide abortions or promote abortion rights in other countries. The move is both a gamble that Gov. George W. Bush will win the presidency and reverse much of what Congress just did and an effort to avoid a high-profile pre-election confrontation with President Clinton, who promised a veto if the restrictions remained. Effort to Counter Nader Effect  The Democratic Party and its allies in the labor, environmental and women's movements, concerned that Ralph Nader has become a major threat to Vice President Al Gore's ability to win the presidency, are mounting aggressive campaigns in swing states to dissuade liberal voters from supporting Mr. Nader, the Green Party candidate. Texas Test Scores Challenged  A RAND Corporation study questioned the validity of rising student test scores in Texas. Aides to Gov. George W. Bush sought to discredit the findings; the Gore campaign and its supporters seized on them to attack Governor Bush on his signature issue, education. Doctor Declares Gore Fit  Vice President Al Gore is in excellent health and has not taken a sick day in the last eight years, Mr. Gore and his doctor said in their first full interviews about Mr. Gore's health. The Bush campaign said Gov. George W. Bush would allow his doctor to be interviewed, but the governor himself has so far declined to be interviewed.
 In addition, some liberals across the state who have pressed for an appointive system for decades have been unenthusiastic about the measure this year because it would give Gov. Jeb Bush and his Republican allies added control over the judiciary.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column sees Gov George W Bush's advisers trying to blame Vice Pres Al Gore for entire future liabilities of Social Security system in bid to temporarily confuse voters; holds Social Security will need huge transfers from general revenue unless benefits are cut (M) Did you know that if Al Gore is elected president, and his economic plan is put into effect, 2.3 million Americans will die next year? Supercilious Washington insiders may try to confuse you by pointing out that even if Mr. Gore isn't elected, 2.3 million Americans will die -- that next year's mortality rate has nothing to do with who wins the election. But you can deal with that by chanting ''No fuzzy math!'' until the election is over. Did you know that if Al Gore is elected president, and his economic plan is put into effect, 2.3 million Americans will die next year? Supercilious Washington insiders may try to confuse you by pointing out that even if Mr. Gore isn't elected, 2.3 million Americans will die -- that next year's mortality rate has nothing to do with who wins the election. But you can deal with that by chanting ''No fuzzy math!'' until the election is over. No, George W. Bush hasn't blamed Mr. Gore for American mortality. But he's done something comparable. Mr. Gore has been pointing out, correctly, that Mr. Bush has promised $1 trillion in Social Security taxes to two different groups of people -- telling young workers that he will allow them to invest the money in personal accounts, while assuring older workers that it will be available to pay for their retirement. So Mr. Bush has responded by charging that Mr. Gore's Social Security plan will add no less than $40 trillion to the national debt. The really amazing thing, however, is that the number has nothing to do with Mr. Gore. It's true that Social Security will need transfers from general revenue if Mr. Gore's plan is put into effect. But it will need just as much money if Mr. Gore's plan isn't put into effect. The only way to reduce the required aid would be to reduce the benefits promised to retirees. Meanwhile, Mr. Bush has said nothing about reducing benefits. So his plan for Social Security would cost just as much as his opponent's -- or rather considerably more, because to honor those contradictory promises he has to find another pot of money somewhere. Maybe blaming Mr. Gore for future mortality wouldn't have worked; but Mr. Bush's advisers seem to think that blaming him for the entire future liabilities of the Social Security system will, or at least can serve temporarily to confuse voters who might otherwise have started to think too clearly about the subject. Only two weeks to go until the election, and we can clean up the mess later, right? Mr. Bush's plans -- and, to a lesser extent, Mr. Gore's plans -- are based on projections that assume there will be no increase in federal discretionary spending over the next 10 years. But over the last few months, while you weren't looking, Congress went on a bipartisan spending spree -- with a cost estimated by both Democratic and Republican analysts at more than $800 billion over the next decade. How will the next president deal with this bad news? Mr. Gore has a bit of slack in his budget, and has proclaimed that protecting the surplus is his highest priority; maybe he would decide to jettison his unloved and unlovely targeted tax cuts. But Mr. Bush's budget even now adds up thanks only to creative accounting, and he has made it clear that he cannot conceive of anything that would make him renege on his tax-cutting promises. (Did someone say ''Read my lips''?)
