 Questions about gun control were raised again in the final presidential debate, and again they were not answered (news article, Oct. 18). Vice President Al Gore did not even use his full two minutes to address the issue. Questions about gun control were raised again in the final presidential debate, and again they were not answered (news article, Oct. 18). Vice President Al Gore did not even use his full two minutes to address the issue. George W. Bush endorsed ''instant background checks at gun shows.'' But the bill he supports allows gun show sales to be completed within 24 hours even if the purchaser has not been cleared; alternative legislation allows up to three days to complete the check. The difference is significant. While 95 percent of background checks are completed in 24 hours, in the 5 percent of checks that take more than a day, the buyers are 20 times more likely to be a felon or other prohibited buyer.
 Bono, Pat Robertson, George W. Bush and the Pope make a formidable lobbying quartet. The rock star, religious leaders and Republican presidential candidate joined forces to pressure Congress to finance the United States' share of debt relief for 41 poor nations. Bono, Pat Robertson, George W. Bush and the Pope make a formidable lobbying quartet. The rock star, religious leaders and Republican presidential candidate joined forces to pressure Congress to finance the United States' share of debt relief for 41 poor nations.
 Vice Pres Al Gore and Sec of State Madeleine K Albright say proposal by Condoleezza Rice, Gov George W Bush's security adviser, to withdraw US ground forces from their peacekeeping missions in the Balkans is risky and misguided and could lead to instability in the region and even, over time, to the possible dissolution of NATO; Rice says a Bush administration would not redeploy the 11,400 ground troops in Bosnia and Kosovo without consultation with America's NATO allies; her comments are perhaps the boldest remarks about international affairs in a presidential campaign noticeably devoid of them (M) Vice President Al Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright today denounced a proposal by Governor George W. Bush to withdraw United States ground forces from their peacekeeping mission in the Balkans. In remarks by Mr. Gore during and after a campaign event in Washington, and in an unusual interview by Dr. Albright on a major political dispute between the presidential candidates, they painted the idea as risky and misguided and said it could lead to instability in the region and even, over time, to the possible dissolution of NATO. Vice President Al Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright today denounced a proposal by Governor George W. Bush to withdraw United States ground forces from their peacekeeping mission in the Balkans. In remarks by Mr. Gore during and after a campaign event in Washington, and in an unusual interview by Dr. Albright on a major political dispute between the presidential candidates, they painted the idea as risky and misguided and said it could lead to instability in the region and even, over time, to the possible dissolution of NATO. ''Governor Bush's proposal would be more than a major untested shift in America's foreign policy for the last half-century,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech at a union rally here. ''It would be one that could jeopardize fragile alliances. It would be a damaging blow to NATO.'' Both Mr. Gore and Dr. Albright were denouncing a proposal put forth by Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's security adviser, that the United States should provide intelligence and logistics support for NATO peacekeepers in places like Kosovo and Bosnia, but should not keep troops there indefinitely. Indeed, Ms. Rice, in interviews with The New York Times that were published today, said a Bush administration would work to redeploy the 11,400 ground troops -- about one-fifth of the 65,000 NATO peacekeeping troops in the region -- out of the Balkans. Ms. Rice's comments, which the Bush campaign reiterated today, are perhaps the boldest remarks about international affairs in a campaign noticeably devoid of them. The remarks fleshed out Mr. Bush's repeated statements that American troops should not be used in peacekeeping missions and should instead concentrate their efforts on preparing to fight wars in places like the Persian Gulf and the Korean peninsula. Even as the Gore campaign and Clinton administration officials denigrated the Bush position, the Republican candidate's camp restated his support of Ms. Rice's idea. ''One hundred percent,'' Ari Fleischer, spokesman for the Bush campaign, said when asked if Mr. Bush stood by his security adviser's remarks. ''The role of the United States military is not to be all things to all people. Governor Bush does not support an open-ended commitment to keep our troops as peacekeepers in the Balkans.'' In a statement released by the Bush campaign today, Ms. Rice said: ''Vice President Gore seems to have a vision of an indefinite U.S. military deployment in the Balkans. He proved today that if he is elected, America's military will continue to be overdeployed, harming morale and re-enlistment rates, weakening our military's core mission.'' The criticisms from Mr. Gore and the administration were determined and coordinated. Mr. Gore inserted the issue into his pre-arranged schedule, beginning his speech at the labor union rally with remarks about foreign affairs and following up with an interview with The New York Times. Mrs. Albright's staff arranged for her to call reporters, and Mr. Gore's chief foreign policy advisor, Leon Fuerth, scheduled a conference call for news organizations to rebut Ms. Rice's views. Gore campaign officials clearly believe that Ms. Rice's remarks provide them with an opening in the final weeks of the campaign to paint Mr. Bush as naive and inexperienced in foreign affairs and to argue that his policies would harm American interests abroad. ''I believe it demonstrates a lack of judgment and a complete misunderstanding of history to think that America can simply walk away from security challenges on the European Continent, which is, after all, a core American interest in the world,'' Mr. Gore said of the Bush campaign proposal. In the interview after his speech, Mr. Gore said that withdrawing from the peacekeeping operation in the Balkans could cause a questioning of American leadership of NATO and that the lack of American leadership over time ''would lead to the collapse of NATO and eventually threaten the peace in Europe.'' But while Mr. Gore seemed more focused on the future and the long-term implications on NATO of an American withdraw from the Balkans peacekeeping force, Dr. Albright concentrated on how floating what she called an ill-conceived idea would affect diplomatic affairs in the shorter term.
 Production of the F-14 ended in 1992 when then Defense Secretary Dick Cheney persuaded President George Bush to drop the Tomcat from his budget. More than 5,000 Grumman employees were put out of work. Two years later the company was bought by California-based Northrop, and its Long Island operations shriveled. But the Navy still has about 120 Tomcats in its inventory.
 But Mr. Lazio's critics see a political motive: the House leadership wanted to defeat the bill, which was being promoted strongly by Vice President Al Gore and other Democrats, so that the Republicans could enact their own alternative in time for the 2000 elections.
 Five people are slain in separate incidents in New York City in the course of three hours; Wallace McDuffie is found dead in his apartment in University Heights section of the Bronx with gunshot wound to back of head; Paul Bagnall is stabbed in chest inside his home in St Albans, Queens; his wife, Vanessa Bagnell, is arrested and charged with second-degree murder and criminal possession of weapon; William Carlson is stabbed in chest inside his apartment in Washington Heights section of Manhattan; Kenia Belez, who lived with Carlson, is charged with second-degree murder; man is found dead in ground-floor apartment in Bushwick section of Brooklyn; he had been shot in neck; Arvil Cordova is shot and killed in lobby of building in Tremont section of the Bronx (M) Few details were available in the fourth case, but the police said a man was found dead in a ground-floor apartment on Bushwick Avenue in Bushwick, Brooklyn, at 11:47 p.m. He had been shot in the neck, the police said.
 Andrew Sullivan, in his review of Gore Vidal's ''Golden Age'' (Oct. 1), comes away ''outraged'' by Vidal's historical fiction. Twice Sullivan dismisses as ''silly'' Vidal's assertion that Harry Truman's use of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima was unnecessary because Japan had been trying for some months to surrender. Andrew Sullivan, in his review of Gore Vidal's ''Golden Age'' (Oct. 1), comes away ''outraged'' by Vidal's historical fiction. Twice Sullivan dismisses as ''silly'' Vidal's assertion that Harry Truman's use of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima was unnecessary because Japan had been trying for some months to surrender.
 GORELICK-Shirley. On Thursday, October 19, 2000, of Chevy Chase, MD. Beloved wife of Leonard Gorelick. Mother of Jamie Gorelick and Steven Gorelick. Motherin-law of Richard Waldhorn. Grandmother of Alyssa Gorelick, Daniel and Dana Waldhorn. Memorial contributions may be made to the Shirley Gorelick Fund for the Arts at Georgetown Day School, Washington, DC, or the National Museum of Women in the Arts. GORELICK-Shirley. On Thursday, October 19, 2000, of Chevy Chase, MD. Beloved wife of Leonard Gorelick. Mother of Jamie Gorelick and Steven Gorelick. Motherin-law of Richard Waldhorn. Grandmother of Alyssa Gorelick, Daniel and Dana Waldhorn. Memorial contributions may be made to the Shirley Gorelick Fund for the Arts at Georgetown Day School, Washington, DC, or the National Museum of Women in the Arts.
 Maureen Dowd Op-Ed column warns Al Gore's campaign it will have to let Bill Clinton out of his box to campaign against George W Bush as only 'the big dog' can (M) Sure, they hate Bill Clinton in the swing states and they can't abide him in the rural counties, but nobody's perfect. In the Gore campaign, the president is known as ''the ice on our wings.'' Sure, they hate Bill Clinton in the swing states and they can't abide him in the rural counties, but nobody's perfect. In the Gore campaign, the president is known as ''the ice on our wings.'' When Mr. Clinton is asked about  his role in the campaign of his vice president, who refuses to campaign with him, he says, ''I just want to do whatever is best.'' But you can see the pop-up bubble: ''Give me a shot at Bush. I can take him.'' On the whole, the president has been patient about Al Gore casting him as Lord Voldemort, the Harry Potter villain who inspires such fear no one dares speak his name. But think how awful it has been for the poor president, pacing around his Oval Cage as Al Gore frittered away this huge, amazing gift that had been bestowed on him: the best economy in the history of mankind, a burgeoning surplus, a declining crime rate, minuscule unemployment and inflation, vertiginous approval ratings. Mr. Gore is willing to campaign with any big-name Democrat except the man who may be the most popular and articulate leader in the world. The president is, his pals say, furious. After all, he beat a Bush who knew a lot and had already been president. Al may lose to a Bush who doesn't know a lot and concedes that his serious life began only at 40. For a year, Mr. Gore didn't even make the case that it would be insane to switch Ferraris in midstream. In a compelling piece in The Times on Friday, Melinda Henneberger and Don Van Natta Jr. reported on the estrangement of the two men, noting that Mr. Clinton feels that the Washington hired guns have taken the fight out of Al, who has now picked up the wimp factor that once clung to the Bush family. Mr. Clinton's mind must have  reeled when the Texas governor managed to turn a liability into a selling point this week, joking about his shaky hold on current affairs. As W. told David Letterman about the debate, ''Expectations were so low all I had to do was say, 'Hi, I'm George W. Bush.' '' And at the Al Smith dinner at the Waldorf, he kidded: ''I'm especially pleased that Mr. Milosevic has stepped down. It's one less polysyllabic name for me to remember.'' After Al and Bill, the awkward pair,  appeared together at Mel Carnahan's funeral, Mr. Gore finished the week by sending out his spokesman, Mark Fabiani, to say that the president and vice president would not be appearing at any campaign rallies.
 Mr. Carnahan was trying to unseat Senator John Ashcroft, a first-term Republican. Many Democrats say they are also concerned that the death of Governor Carnahan, one of the state's most popular politicians, will dampen Democratic turnout, hurting Vice President Al Gore. Consequently, some party leaders are calling on the governor's widow, Jean, to take his place on the ballot to rally the party faithful.
 And how do you feel about Al Gore and Joe Lieberman imploring Hollywood to limit the sex and violence in movies, video games, the Internet and television? Or will that reveal just what percentage of Hollywood Goldman Sachs actually owns?
 Vice President Al Gore has long been a Southern Baptist, but those roots are only one part of an intricate and eclectic spiritual life. Gore Attacks Bush on Balkans  Mr. Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright denounced a proposal by Gov. George W. Bush to withdraw United States ground forces from their peacekeeping mission in the Balkans.
 Al Gore has made time in campaign schedule to attend all of this season's football games at Sidwell Friends high school in Washington, where his son Albert is team co-captain; photo (S) That is why some strategists in Vice President Al Gore's campaign struggle to understand why their candidate has spent part of many Saturdays this fall, including yesterday, off the trail. The answer is simple: Quakers football. That is why some strategists in Vice President Al Gore's campaign struggle to understand why their candidate has spent part of many Saturdays this fall, including yesterday, off the trail. The answer is simple: Quakers football. Mr. Gore is a devoted fan of the Sidwell Friends Quakers (5 and 2), the private Washington high school team on which his only son, Albert III, is the co-captain. Despite his grueling campaign schedule, Mr. Gore has attended all seven of the team's games this fall, home and away, and plans to take in the final two, including one 72 hours before Election Day. On Oct. 12, he flew to Washington from Milwaukee to play host for the team's weekly spaghetti supper, this one at the vice president's official residence. Highlight films were shown. That was the day of the attack on the U.S.S. Cole in Yemen, and Mr. Gore first stopped by the White House for briefings and meetings. But he still made the dinner. While Mr. Gore's aides may be befuddled from a purely political standpoint, they find his devotion to his children's extracurricular activities to be one of his most endearing traits. Throughout his tenure as vice president, days have been blocked out on his calendar for his daughters' lacrosse and soccer games and their first days at college. ''They're pretty inviolate,'' one Gore aide said. Mr. Gore declined to be interviewed for this article. But friends have speculated that one reason for his dedication is a stinging memory: his late father, Senator Albert Gore Sr., never managed to make it to Mr. Gore's high school football games. And Mr. Gore has frequently spoken about how he shifted his priorities and rededicated himself to his family after his son was hit by a car in 1989. ''He's just devoted to his children, and it means a lot to him to be able to attend,'' said Frank W. Hunger, Mr. Gore's brother-in-law. ''Not only is he showing his support for Albert, but it's relaxation for him. He enjoys the games, knows all the players and their numbers.'' Two weeks ago, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, William M. Daley, summoned the courage to suggest to his candidate that he might want to skip the next game. Mr. Gore was planning to fly from Detroit to Washington and then back to St. Louis for debate preparation. Mr. Gore is not always reticent about putting his family on political display. He has spoken in convention speeches of his son's accident and his sister's death from cancer. He took Albert to climb Mount Rainier last year, and then used film of the trip in a campaign advertisement. But Mr. Gore has studiously avoided public discussion of Albert's football games, and his public schedules never mention them. Sometimes politics intrudes. In the Oct. 7 game at Mercersburg Academy in Mercersburg, Pa., several opposing players taunted the Quakers by wearing wrist tape with ''Bush-Cheney'' in black ink. It can be a different matter at away games, like the one at Mercersburg, where autograph seekers hounded Mr. Gore at halftime. The home team's announcer did not help much. ''If you want to debate fiscal policy,'' he broadcast, ''there's a man in the visitors' bleachers.''
 Mrs. Clinton's plan is like those proposed by her husband and by Vice President Al Gore in his presidential campaign. ''It's classic Democratic social policy,'' said Edmund J. McMahon, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute. ''There's a heavy tilt toward low-income working poor and the lower end of the middle class, helping people with particular needs, larger social needs.'' Mr. Lazio's proposals, though similar to those backed by other Republicans in Congress, are quite different from the policy of George W. Bush, who advocates a general rollback of income tax rates. (The top rate, for example, would go to 33 percent from 39.6 percent.) Retirement plans are another area in which the candidates clearly differ. Mrs. Clinton has recently endorsed a plan, modeled on Mr. Gore's, that would give tax credits to people who make less than $100,000 a year and put money away in special retirement savings accounts. Her plan limits the amount of money individuals can invest to $1,000 a year, rather than Mr. Gore's $2,000, and would cost about $120 billion over a decade, according to her campaign.
 ''For North Korea, the president's visit is itself the prize,'' said Arnold Kanter, a former under secretary of state in the Bush administration. ''The question is what the United States is getting in return that meets our needs to reduce the threat posed by North Korea.''
 Vice presidential nominee Dick Cheney seems to be shoring up support for George W Bush among men, attending lots of football games, talking about matters like military procurement and his hobby, fly-fishing (S) Dick Cheney has not kissed Oprah, chatted up Regis or schmoozed with Rosie O'Donnell. In the great tradition of vice-presidential candidates, who have long been used to rally their party's political bases, Mr. Cheney seems to be shoring up the support of one of Gov. George W. Bush's most vital voting blocs: men. Mr. Cheney goes to football games. A lot. He talks on the stump about serious things like military procurement, and when he does engage in frivolous small talk, it is usually about his hobby, fly-fishing. Photo opportunities are staged in factories filled with heavy machinery. At a rally this morning in Plymouth, Mich., he posed for a picture with a group of men in leather motorcycle jackets and chaps, who brought signs reading ''Bikers for Bush-Cheney.'' This is a macho campaign. Dick Cheney has not kissed Oprah, chatted up Regis or schmoozed with Rosie O'Donnell. In the great tradition of vice-presidential candidates, who have long been used to rally their party's political bases, Mr. Cheney seems to be shoring up the support of one of Gov. George W. Bush's most vital voting blocs: men. Mr. Cheney goes to football games. A lot. He talks on the stump about serious things like military procurement, and when he does engage in frivolous small talk, it is usually about his hobby, fly-fishing. Photo opportunities are staged in factories filled with heavy machinery. At a rally this morning in Plymouth, Mich., he posed for a picture with a group of men in leather motorcycle jackets and chaps, who brought signs reading ''Bikers for Bush-Cheney.'' This is a macho campaign. Mr. Cheney likes college football, too. He tailgated at the Iowa State-Nebraska game a few weeks ago, eating a beef burger and chatting gamely with quite a few inebriated fans. And today, the candidate stopped here for the game between the University of Michigan and Michigan State University. He joined tailgaters in the parking lot, putting his foot up on a beer keg and eating a bratwurst with mustard. Supporters chanted ''Football fans for Bush'' and ''Tailgaters for Cheney.'' That was after he took a brief bus tour through the state with another alpha male: John McCain, the Arizona senator and Vietnam war hero.  ''I know of no man who knows the military better, who understands the needs, who has a better strategic grasp of our national security challenges then Dick Cheney, my friends,'' said Mr. McCain, the erstwhile foe of Mr. Bush but now a supporter. Mr. Cheney, meanwhile, has opened an unusual new line of attack on Vice President Al Gore in recent days: Operation Goldilocks. Many of Mr. Cheney's campaign stops would seemingly do little to close the gender gap, in which men are for Mr. Bush and women for Mr. Gore. While Mr. Cheney did take a break earlier this month to pick up one of his granddaughters from soccer practice, he has not gone out of his way to make a pitch to the soccer-mom crowd. On the trail, his wife often plays that role, telling audiences that the women in his life are grateful that he views cooking as ''an honorable male occupation.''
 Louis Uchitelle Economic View column explores stated determination of presidential candidates George Bush and Al Gore to pay off national debt; explores options to that goal as well as possible uses of surplus government capital (M) PAYING off the national debt has been elevated to an obsession. Politics does that. Vice President Al Gore, in the presidential debate last Tuesday, solemnly promised millions of Americans that he would ''eliminate the debt in the next decade.'' So would Gov. George W. Bush. And in their unanimity, they deprive the country of a necessary debate on a crucial question: Is zero national debt healthy for the economy? PAYING off the national debt has been elevated to an obsession. Politics does that. Vice President Al Gore, in the presidential debate last Tuesday, solemnly promised millions of Americans that he would ''eliminate the debt in the next decade.'' So would Gov. George W. Bush. And in their unanimity, they deprive the country of a necessary debate on a crucial question: Is zero national debt healthy for the economy? Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, in fact, stump for such alternatives. They would devote big chunks of the projected $4.6 trillion in surpluses over 10 years to spending programs and tax cuts. But in their reverence for paying off the debt, they never ask whether it makes sense, given the high potential return from alternatives.
 Al Gore and George W Bush try to energize core supporters, Gore reaching out to union members and black ministers and Bush urging on Republican get-out-the-vote efforts in Washington State (M) Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each sought to energize their core supporters today, with Mr. Gore reaching out to union members and black ministers and Mr. Bush telling Republican get-out-the vote meetings in Washington State that his opponent favors ''meddling, overbearing government.'' As the campaign entered its final weeks, both sides also unveiled new advertisements, with Mr. Gore keeping up a media campaign against Mr. Bush on Social Security and Mr. Bush releasing two soft-toned spots focused on children and education. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each sought to energize their core supporters today, with Mr. Gore reaching out to union members and black ministers and Mr. Bush telling Republican get-out-the vote meetings in Washington State that his opponent favors ''meddling, overbearing government.'' As the campaign entered its final weeks, both sides also unveiled new advertisements, with Mr. Gore keeping up a media campaign against Mr. Bush on Social Security and Mr. Bush releasing two soft-toned spots focused on children and education. The Gore campaign said that its new advertisements were part of an all-out fight for a number of swing states, including Ohio, where earlier reports had indicated that the vice president might be pulling out to devote his resources to more fertile territory. Gore officials said that they would double their spending on television advertisements to $4 million next week, and match the Republicans in television spending for the rest of the campaign. They said their commercials would amplify the idea that Mr. Bush was not ''up to the job'' of being president. This is a theme that Mr. Gore has been building on for months, laying the groundwork with assaults on Mr. Bush's record in Texas, his tax-cut proposal and his plan to privatize part of Social Security. He added to that today by questioning Mr. Bush's judgment in calling for the withdrawal of United States peacekeeping forces from the Balkans. The Bush camp, meanwhile, expanded its purchases of advertising time into two new states: Mr. Gore's home state of Tennessee and Minnesota. Bush aides said today that they were so confident of winning Louisiana and Ohio that they would cut back on advertising there. And a buoyant Mr. Bush even predicted today, ''We have a solid chance to sweep the West Coast.'' In New Orleans this morning, Mr. Gore said he was not giving up on Louisiana despite polls that showed Mr. Bush with a lead. The vice president sought to ensure a solid turnout from black voters in the state, meeting with black ministers and saying, ''This election is not only about the economy, but it's about values.'' And he emphasized Social Security, arguing that keeping promises on issues like Social Security demonstrate the character of a campaign. Later, in Washington, D.C., Mr. Gore called on organized labor for help. ''I want you to campaign like we were one vote behind in every precinct,'' he told supporters from the 1.4-million-member Service Employees International Union in a get-out-the-vote rally. The event was linked by satellite to 17 similar events around the country. Mr. Bush made his own pitch in a speech by satellite from his Texas ranch to supporters in Spokane and  Seattle who were organizing a get-out-the-vote drive. Washington has voted for the Democrats in recent presidential elections, but the Bush campaign is fighting to win there. Mr. Bush sharply contrasted his agenda with Mr. Gore's. ''We are not just opposing the current administration,'' he said. ''We are proposing something better. For over a year we have been applying creative conservative ideas to the job of helping real people and that is the meaning of compassionate conservatism. And that is the message of my campaign. And that is a cause worth waging.'' Mr. Bush most pointedly focused  on Mr. Gore's proposal for nearly $500 billion in tax cuts over the next 10 years, mostly targeted for specific needs like college education, child care or retirement savings. ''You might call it an iffy tax scheme,'' Mr. Bush said. ''You can get a tax cut if you do everything Al Gore wants you to do. And that is the kind of meddling, overbearing government you're going to get if you vote for Al Gore.'' Mr. Bush's phrase was a play on Mr. Gore's own charge that Mr. Bush's sweeping $1.3 trillion, 10-year tax cut was a ''risky scheme.'' Mr. Bush also fought back on the issue of Social Security, saying that Mr. Gore ignored the fiscal problems facing the retirement system when the baby-boom generation retires. ''Social Security has long-term financial problems,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His plan does nothing to address them.'' He argued that Mr. Gore's proposal to add a new retirement savings plan for the middle class on top of traditional Social Security would lead to ''Social Security plus massive government debt. Social Security plus a staggering tax increase.'' The Democrats' advertising drive begins today with the latest commercials in a series that accuse Mr. Bush of promising the same $1 trillion in Social Security revenue to young adults to invest on their own and current retirees. The Bush campaign disputes that charge, but the Democrats are taking advantage of ambiguities caused by the fact that Mr. Bush has never presented a detailed plan but only overall principles for individual accounts. Tad Devine, a Gore strategist, said the campaign would use questions about Mr. Bush's Social Security plan to raise doubts about Mr. Bush's  qualifications to be president. ''There are some serious doubts about whether he is up to the job,'' Mr. Devine said, adding that Social Security ''focuses those doubts.'' The Bush campaign released two  30-second television advertisements of its own that were to run in 19 hotly contested states. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said that the scope of the purchase represented an ''expanded battlefield'' and that for the first time Tennessee and Minnesota were being included as states Mr. Bush might win. Aimed at parents and women, the advertisements both showed Mr. Bush in an open necked green shirt, tie less and talking about child-rearing and education. Each is filled with color pictures of children of all races, at play or at school. Speaking of raising school standards, Mr. Bush says in one advertisement: ''It's easy to just spend more. Let's start by expecting more.'' The second advertisement is focused on cultural values, and promises Internet filtering devices, character education in the schools and more effective drug prevention and school discipline. Mr. Bush says, ''I believe parents today need allies, not adversaries, to help raise moral, responsible children.'' GEORGE BUSH  Remarks by Gov. George W. Bush, speaking yesterday by satellite to Republicans in Washington State: You might call it an iffy tax scheme. You can get a tax cut if you do everything that Al Gore wants you to do. That is the kind of meddling, overbearing government you are going to get if you vote for Al Gore.'' Mr. Bush's phrase was a play on Mr. Gore's own charge that Mr. Bush's sweeping $1.3 trillion, 10-year tax cut was a ''risky scheme.'' Mr. Bush also fought back on the issue of Social Security, saying that Mr. Gore ignored the fiscal problems facing the retirement system when the baby-boom generation retires. ''Social Security has long-term financial problems,'' Mr. Bush said. ''His plan does nothing to address them.'' He argued that Mr. Gore's proposal to add a new retirement savings plan for the middle class on top of traditional Social Security would lead to ''Social Security plus massive government debt. Social Security plus a staggering tax increase.'' The Democrats' advertising drive begins today with the latest commercials in a series that accuse Mr. Bush of promising the same $1 trillion in Social Security revenue to young adults to invest on their own and current retirees. The Bush campaign disputes that charge, but the Democrats are taking advantage of ambiguities caused by the fact that Mr. Bush has never presented a detailed plan but only overall principles for individual accounts. Tad Devine, a Gore strategist, said the campaign would use questions about Mr. Bush's Social Security plan to raise doubts about Mr. Bush's  qualifications to be president. ''There are some serious doubts about whether he is up to the job,'' Mr. Devine said, adding that Social Security ''focuses those doubts.'' The Bush campaign released two  30-second television advertisements of its own that were to run in 19 hotly contested states. Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said that the scope of the purchase represented an ''expanded battlefield'' and that for the first time Tennessee and Minnesota were being included as states Mr. Bush might win. Aimed at parents and women, the advertisements both showed Mr. Bush talking about child-rearing and education. Speaking of raising school standards, Mr. Bush says in one advertisement: ''It's easy to just spend more. Let's start by expecting more.'' The second advertisement is focused on cultural values, and promises Internet filtering devices, character education in the schools and more effective drug prevention and school discipline. Mr. Bush says, ''I believe parents today need allies, not adversaries, to help raise moral, responsible children.''
 Sensible and wholesome, the five sisters all seem like characters out of a Jane Austen novel rather than the ''it'' girls found in one by Candace Bushnell. ''They're kind, warm, sweet, outgoing girls, really down-to-earth, very approachable,'' said Deborah Curry, a guest at the wedding.
 My solution is, perversely, to vote for a third-party candidate only where he can't win. If you live in Texas, where Bush is way ahead, or in New York, where Gore has a solid lead, you can vote for your third-party candidate without fear of tilting the race to the big-party candidate you dread.
 Paul Krugman Op-Ed column regrets that Al Gore's unfortunate misstatements make it impossible for him to get credit he actually deserves for recognizing Internet's potential at early stage; adds that neither Gore nor George W Bush know how to manage new economy, and neither does anyone else (S) Last week George W. Bush accused Al Gore of ''analog thinking in a digital age.'' It's a terrific line; my compliments to whoever wrote it. It's also a bit unfair. True, Mr. Gore didn't invent the Internet -- but then, he never said he had. What he did say was, ''During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative in creating the Internet.'' That was a deeply unfortunate sentence -- but what makes it so unfortunate is that now it is impossible for Mr. Gore to get the credit he actually deserves. Declan McCullagh, the Wired writer who first played up Mr. Gore's remark, puts it this way: the vice president ''was one of the first politicians to realize that those bearded, bespectacled researchers were busy crafting something that could, just maybe, become pretty important.'' Last week George W. Bush accused Al Gore of ''analog thinking in a digital age.'' It's a terrific line; my compliments to whoever wrote it. It's also a bit unfair. True, Mr. Gore didn't invent the Internet -- but then, he never said he had. What he did say was, ''During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative in creating the Internet.'' That was a deeply unfortunate sentence -- but what makes it so unfortunate is that now it is impossible for Mr. Gore to get the credit he actually deserves. Declan McCullagh, the Wired writer who first played up Mr. Gore's remark, puts it this way: the vice president ''was one of the first politicians to realize that those bearded, bespectacled researchers were busy crafting something that could, just maybe, become pretty important.'' For what it's worth, tech-sector C.E.O.'s seem to be divided about evenly between Messrs. Gore and Bush. That is a sharp contrast with C.E.O.'s at large, who overwhelmingly favor Mr. Bush -- a preference cynics might attribute to the large personal gains that people with seven- or eight-figure incomes would receive from that tax cut. Still, Mr. Bush is right: Mr. Gore doesn't know how to manage the new economy. But then neither does Mr. Bush. And neither does anyone else. But while I have the horrifying suspicion that Mr. Gore has heard of endogenous growth theory, and would actually enjoy talking about it,  this is not what Mr. Bush had in mind. In context, it's pretty clear he meant that Mr. Gore is an old-economy fuddy-duddy because he insists that you can't spend the same money twice -- that you can't divert Social Security taxes into individual accounts for young workers and use that same money to pay benefits to their parents.
 Every weekend, Gary Davis folds his 6-foot-5-inch frame into a black pickup truck -- the one with the license plates that say, ''THE NRA'' -- and rides like some latter-day Paul Revere to local gun shows, gun shops and shooting ranges bearing this alarm: Vice President Al Gore and his Democratic allies are coming, and they want to take away your guns. Mr. Davis, a bus driver, is not a registered Republican, but he is prepared to devote every spare hour to helping Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and other Republicans because that is what his true political party, the National Rifle Association, wants. Every weekend, Gary Davis folds his 6-foot-5-inch frame into a black pickup truck -- the one with the license plates that say, ''THE NRA'' -- and rides like some latter-day Paul Revere to local gun shows, gun shops and shooting ranges bearing this alarm: Vice President Al Gore and his Democratic allies are coming, and they want to take away your guns. Mr. Davis, a bus driver, is not a registered Republican, but he is prepared to devote every spare hour to helping Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and other Republicans because that is what his true political party, the National Rifle Association, wants. The independent groups are using some of the toughest oratory in this otherwise relatively tame campaign. At get-out-the-vote rallies in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Virginia, for example, Charlton Heston, the president of the National Rifle Association, has called this the most important election ''since the Civil War'' and said that Mr. Gore would appoint Supreme Court justices who will ''hammer your gun rights into oblivion.'' He even suggested that a ''lynching mob'' might be the best response to Mr. Gore's gun-control fervor. Other groups, while less inflammatory, are also resorting to harsh attacks on their opponents and their ideas. Union organizers are distributing leaflets that accuse Mr. Bush of trying to take away union pensions in Texas. Abortion opponents have been carrying huge photographs of bloody aborted fetuses to Democratic rallies. And abortion-rights advocates are mailing glossy fliers that say, ''If Bush decides, legal abortion could be banned and women will again die in dangerous back-alley abortions.'' The national office of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has created a Web site for its organizers to mass-produce customized fliers that compare Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush on major issues. The site allows union locals to type in messages from their leaders, with their logos. The four-color fliers are then printed by the national office and bulk-mailed within a day. ''It will be different than '96,'' said Alice Germond, executive vice president for National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, which is supporting Mr. Gore. ''We discovered that direct mobilization works, while ad campaigns often weren't helpful.'' The league has compiled a list of 170,000 Missouri voters who support abortion rights, many of whom are Republicans and independents. The group's goal is to call most of those voters by Election Day and deliver this message, ''George W. Bush wants to criminalize abortion,'' Ms. Fields said. Other groups aligned with Mr. Gore have smaller operations here. The Sierra Club is sending voter guides to 100,000 people in Missouri to remind them of ''all the bad things George W. Bush is for,'' from drilling in the Arctic wilderness to logging in national forests, said Daniel J. Weiss, the group's political director. Handgun Control Inc., the antigun group, has been organizing religious groups, students and mothers to go door-to-door in centrist Republican suburbs around St. Louis distributing literature that shows the contrasting views of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush on gun control. And the N.A.A.C.P. National Voter Fund will be distributing literature in predominantly black communities urging people to vote. The Missouri Right to Life Committee plans to mail newsletters carrying its endorsement of Mr. Bush to 85,000 households. The group has also been organizing phone banks, literature drops and canvassing at churches, said Pam Manning, the state president. The National Rifle Association, which has 100,000 members in Missouri, has posted ''Vote Freedom First'' billboards around the state. Mr. Heston's voice can be heard on radio advertisements running in several cities that urge gun owners to vote. And the group's headquarters in Virginia has mailed a barrage of letters to members praising Mr. Bush as a ''staunch firearms-rights advocate'' and accusing Mr. Gore of wanting to ''ban guns in America.''
 State Sen Roy M Goodman, who represents East Side of Manhattan, is taking on his 17th race for Senate; Democrtic opponent is Liz Krueger; this year's contest is decidedly more fierce with growing number of Democratic voters in district; Goodman says Vice Pres Al Gore's coattails are responsible for his tough re-election race; photo (M) Ms. Krueger, 42, is a political newcomer with a long history of work with nonprofit antipoverty groups. And in a year with Vice President Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton at the top of the Democratic ticket, and with women making up nearly 60 percent of registered voters in the district, her candidacy is viewed as the strongest challenge to Mr. Goodman in many years. ''Any difficulty I have would relate to the coattails of Al Gore rather than any special qualifications of my opponent,'' he said. ''I don't wish to denigrate her, but she has no awareness of how the Legislature actually functions.'' Mr. Goodman, who earlier this year lost an internal Republican race to become a delegate for George W. Bush, said his own polling information showed that he had enough support to win.
 Janney: What is going to happen if Bush gets in office? We're not going to get anywhere near the White House.
 How close Mr. Blumenthal came to reaching that pinnacle this year only Mr. Lieberman, whom Mr. Blumenthal calls a mentor and a ''good and loyal friend,'' knows for sure. For if Mr. Lieberman had caved to pressure from the public and from his own party to end his Senate bid and focus only on being Al Gore's running mate, Mr. Blumenthal would have been his most likely replacement.
 George W Bush, seeking advice in presidential race, has turned to Bible passages and preachers like James Robison, Dallas television evangelist who was called to help Bush prepare himself for campaign debate; Bush has consulted ministers on dealing with questions about his past drinking and reported drug use and whether he comes across as humble enough; photo (M) It was Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, looking for help in preparing for the third and final presidential debate, Mr. Robison said. It was Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, looking for help in preparing for the third and final presidential debate, Mr. Robison said. ''I told him, 'You're not going to know every answer to every question,' '' Mr. Robison said, so on the telephone together they prayed for God to grant Mr. Bush ''calm, confidence and the wisdom to know when to speak and when not to speak.'' As he runs for president, Mr. Bush has turned for advice not just to campaign consultants and briefing books, but also to preachers and Bible passages. He has consulted ministers privately about how to deal with questions about his past drinking and rumors of drug use, and whether he is coming across as humble enough to viewers in television interviews and debates. When faced with doubts or challenges, Mr. Bush has often in recent years turned toward religion for guidance, confidence and comfort. That is the portrait that has emerged from interviews with friends, the evangelical pastors he has cultivated and the minister of the Methodist church he belongs to in Dallas. They regard his public references to Christ during the campaign as the sincere confessions of an enthusiastic convert, and not as mere posturing. They do not, however, paint him as a choirboy. In fact, they say he turned to God to cope with his own sin. Mr. Bush himself, when asked in interviews about his faith, has for years volunteered the same Bible verse about sin and hypocrisy. ''I'm not going to try to take the speck out of your eye when I've got a log in my own,'' Mr. Bush said again in a telephone interview earlier this year, paraphrasing a New Testament verse from the Book of Matthew. (He declined to be interviewed for this article.) Like some kind of religious Rorschach, Mr. Bush has managed to allow spiritual leaders to see in him whatever image of Christianity they prefer. His mainline Methodist minister says he is a nondogmatic moderate. Conservative Southern Baptists see in him a fellow believer in moral absolutes. Charles W. Colson, a Watergate felon turned born-again evangelist, said in an interview that Mr. Bush was ''one of us.'' If it is difficult to hear the true timbre of Mr. Bush's Christian faith, it may be because he has a gift for emphasizing the universals and avoiding the potentially divisive particulars about what he believes. Mr. Bush's father was an Episcopalian, his mother a Presbyterian, and as a child, Mr. Bush attended churches of both denominations. When Mr. Bush married Laura Welch at the age of 31, he joined a Methodist church, and he has remained a Methodist. Methodist churches run the gamut from liberal to conservative, depending on the congregation. The congregation where the Bushes found a home, and where they maintain their membership, is Highland Park United Methodist Church in Dallas, where they lived while Mr. Bush owned the Texas Rangers baseball team just before he ran for governor. Mr. and Mrs. Bush regularly sat in the same pew near the pulpit in the transept, next to the door, while their twin daughters attended the Sunday school. The church, adjacent to the campus of Southern Methodist University, is in a leafy neighborhood of stately brick homes. The congregation leans Republican and includes more than 200 corporate leaders. But last Sunday, cars in the parking lot sported bumper stickers for the Gore-Lieberman ticket, as well as for Mr. Bush, and the half a dozen stickers about abortion supported abortion rights. ''This church is middle of the road,'' Mr. Craig said. ''It's a very traditional, very open and accepting church, and it is where Mr. Bush wanted to be. I think he is a moderate. I have no fear of him becoming more dogmatic.'' When Mr. Bush was elected to his second term as governor in 1998, he asked Mr. Craig to preach at the prayer service the morning of the inauguration. Mr. Craig's sermon ''reached out and grabbed me, and changed my life,'' Mr. Bush wrote in his official autobiography, ''A Charge To Keep'' (William Morrow, 1999). Mr. Craig preached about Moses, the reluctant leader, and said that people were ''starved for leadership.'' Mr. Bush wrote that his mother, listening in the pews, later told him that the minister was ''talking to you.'' Mr. Bush attributes his decision to run for president to the sermon that his minister preached that day. Mr. Bush told other ministers that their prayers had given him the peace of mind to run for president. Before the inauguration in January 1999, Mr. Bush met with a group of ministers at the Fellowship Church in Grapevine, Tex., a fast-growing megachurch loosely affiliated with the Southern Baptists. They stood in a circle around him, laid their hands on his body, and prayed for him, the ministers recalled. When they finished, Mr. Bush's eyes were filled with tears, several ministers said. Mr. Bush recounted for them the story he often tells about how he turned to Jesus Christ in 1986, when he was 40. He says he was drinking too much, allowing his marriage to go stale, and adrift in his job. That summer, at his parents' summer house in Kennebunkport, Me., he took a walk with Mr. Graham, an old family friend. In interviews earlier this year, neither man could remember the content of the conversation. But Mr. Bush, and friends who knew him at the time, say that he returned home to Texas resolved to quit drinking and turn his life around. ''He wanted to know more,'' Mr. Graham said, ''about what it means to be a Christian, to be a moral leader, and he always impressed me as a man that had his goal of being something more than just the son of George Bush.'' Mr. Bush said that Billy Graham ''planted the seed.'' He said that was the day he decided to ''recommit my heart'' to Jesus Christ. Those who know him say Mr. Bush goes through phases when he forsakes Bible reading. But in the last year, he has begun reading the ''one-year'' Bible, 365 brief portions that can each be read in a few minutes daily. Asked whether he regards the Bible as the literal and inerrant word of God, Mr. Bush said in the earlier interview: ''From Scripture you can gain a lot of strength and solace and learn life's lessons. That's what I believe, and I don't necessarily believe every single word is literally true. Mr. Bush learned a lesson from his first campaign for governor, when he created a controversy by telling an Austin reporter that only those who have accepted Christ as their savior can enter the kingdom of heaven. ''I want to win,'' Mr. Bush said in the interview, ''and I'm a tough competitor, but I also understand that winning this election may not be in the larger plan of things. I think it will be, but it may not be. Prayer helps me keep perspective.''
 Final article on life of Al Gore recounts Democratic presidential nominee's spiritual search, starting from his family's Tennessee Baptist roots; Gore recalls his 'smorgasbord of religious experiences,' attending Presbyterian church in Washington and other services back home in Carthage; he has continued to branch out over the years, studying mysticism, ethics at Vanderbilt Divinity School for three semesters and at least toying with New Age ideas; he has also come to see environmentalism as religious obligation to protect creation (L) At New Salem Missionary Baptist, the little country church in Tennessee where Senator Albert Gore's private funeral was held, folks were not at all sure that a woman should be allowed to speak from the pulpit, even if she was an Episcopal bishop, in from Washington, D.C. And some mourners on the other side of the cultural and religious divide that day did not understand them or their point of view. ''At the New Salem Bible Thumping Good News Evangelical High Hope Church -- it had one of those names,'' Vice President Al Gore's Harvard mentor and friend Martin Peretz said, laughing, ''there was a little bit of anxiety'' about whether she would be allowed to preach. At New Salem Missionary Baptist, the little country church in Tennessee where Senator Albert Gore's private funeral was held, folks were not at all sure that a woman should be allowed to speak from the pulpit, even if she was an Episcopal bishop, in from Washington, D.C. And some mourners on the other side of the cultural and religious divide that day did not understand them or their point of view. ''At the New Salem Bible Thumping Good News Evangelical High Hope Church -- it had one of those names,'' Vice President Al Gore's Harvard mentor and friend Martin Peretz said, laughing, ''there was a little bit of anxiety'' about whether she would be allowed to preach. Mr. Gore, though, had spent all his life straddling the two worlds -- of Tennessee and Washington, high church and low, gut-level religion and Ivy League intellectualism. So when they collided, perhaps inevitably, on that of all days, two years ago in December, he knew how to bridge the gap. He suggested that the Tennessee preacher ask himself, ''What would Jesus do?'' And in the end, Bishop Jane Holmes Dixon did speak at the service. ''I had a real smorgasbord of religious experiences,'' Mr. Gore said in a recent interview about his faith. ''On Sundays in Washington I'd go to the Presbyterian Church around the corner from the Fairfax,'' the hotel where his family lived during the school year, ''and in Carthage we'd alternate between my mother's Church of Christ and my father's Baptist church. Except when we went to the Methodist church.'' Mr. Gore has continued to branch out over the years, too, studying mysticism as well as ethics, his primary focus during three semesters at Vanderbilt Divinity School, and at least toying with New Age ideas. He also took a course called Theology and the Natural Sciences and, over time, came to see environmentalism as a religious obligation to protect creation. His 1992 book about the environment, ''Earth in the Balance,'' is suffused with ecospirituality. And clearly, his faith is still in flux. His oldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, said his spiritual search reminded her of the year he spent trying to decide whether to enlist in the Army. ''I remember hearing about the way he was thinking about going to Vietnam, and there's a similar strain in how he's open to religious faith,'' she said. ''There's a discomfort with being so sure about something. I see him searching, seeking and striving and don't see his faith as static.'' By definition, of course, religious belief is interior, personal, not necessarily a matter shared easily or even at all. But when Mr. Gore talks of his faith he is not so much reticent -- though he is that, too, sometimes -- as he is restless, unfinished. Though she sees the fact that he is still seeking as evidence of his openness, flexibility and tolerance, it might just as easily come across as another way in which Mr. Gore seems like a 52-year-old man who does not yet fully know himself. ''If you're Joe Lieberman, you're done, you're not searching outside the boundaries of your faith,'' said one of Mr. Gore's friends, adding that the vice president is not at all done and is still on that quest. Although Mr. Gore considers himself a born-again Christian, among even close friends there is some difference of opinion about whether he is a believer or someone who believes in believing, who respects and admires faith in God but finds the required leap outside his head a long, long way to go. Hard as it is to draw many straight lines between Mr. Gore's religious views and his public life, the one public policy exception, the single place where Mr. Gore does seem to see an explicit link between God and government, is the environment. This, for him, is where God and science seem to meet. Should Mr. Gore lose in November, Ms. Schiff said, ''I could see him pursuing environmentalism and theology in some way.'' Asked if he believed in a literal interpretation of the Bible, Mr. Gore paused, took a moment and then said, ''Well, I don't believe in the literal interpretation of the word 'literally.' '' ''Everything in the Bible makes sense to me,'' Mr. Gore went on. ''I interpret it my own way, and that's what my tradition teaches me to do. There are poetic passages that speak eloquently to me with meanings that transcend the literal words. In Genesis, for example, God creates this, that and the other in one day, two days, and that represents an order in creation that's perfectly evident to my heart.'' Mr. Gore's daughter Ms. Schiff cut to the chase: ''I remember as a teenager getting all hopped up about not wanting to go to church and literal Bible stories and religion as an agent of evil, and he always engaged me,'' she said. Moderate Baptists like Mr. Gore generally do not take the Bible literally. But he seems conflicted, if not about his beliefs then certainly over how to talk about them. He readily agreed to be interviewed about his faith. Yet in the interview, he said he felt he had to be careful. Al Gore did not inherit his faith from his parents, but came to it on his own. His mother, Pauline LaFon Gore, and his father, the senator, were ''turned off'' to organized religion, according to Ms. Schiff. At Harvard, Mr. Gore's roommate, John Tyson, would sometimes find him reading the Bible, he said. ''His thing was that even though man has become civilized, evil can still rise up inside a person or a group, so there has to be prayer and vigilance to cultivate the soul. The soul doesn't cultivate itself.'' Right after his college graduation in 1969, he went into the Army. And he apparently did, as he said, drift a bit. Marny Hendrick, who worked and shared a barracks with him at Fort Rucker, Ala., said, laughing: ''I don't ever remember the conversation going that way. We were 20 and 21, classically unchurched. I don't think we had a Bible in the room.'' Though most of them, Mr. Gore included, were headed to Vietnam, Mr. Hendrick said, ''We approached it more from a political standpoint.'' When he got back from Vietnam, however, Mr. Gore headed straight to Vanderbilt Divinity School, where he studied for a little over a year. He has said he was struggling to make sense of the war and the morality of his role in it. But the former dean of the divinity school, Walter Harrelson, now retired, said he thought Mr. Gore had more practical motivations. ''He was taking stock, and the divinity school at that time was full of such people, but it never seemed to me he came with existential angst; he was much more self-possessed than that,'' said Mr. Harrelson, who also got to know Mr. Gore socially. Mr. Gore was much taken with this, Mr. Harrelson said, and sat in on his course on the prophets, where he appeared fascinated by the stories of Amos and Hosea and Micah and their concern for the oppressed. At around the same time he was pursuing graduate-level theological studies, in his early 20's, Mr. Gore became a born-again Christian. When first asked if he considers himself born again, Mr. Gore said, ''I never talk about that unless I'm asked a direct question with the use of that phrase, because people have a lot of meanings they attach to that phrase.'' Then he waited to be asked the direct question, again, before saying, ''Yes, I do.'' Mr. Gore said that when he and his family moved to Arlington, Va., in 1977, after he was first elected to Congress, Karenna, then 4, cried that she did not like the Episcopal church they tried attending. ''I want Brother Gibbs,'' she said tearfully, according to her father. (''I still kind of like those eye-popping sermons,'' Ms. Schiff says now.) So they tried to accommodate her, he said, and switched to Mount Vernon Baptist, a small faith community near the Pentagon, where the congregation is relatively transient. That is where both Al and Tipper Gore were baptized by full immersion in the late 1970's. James Dunn, former executive director of the liberal Baptist Joint Committee in Washington and now a visiting professor at Wake Forest University Divinity School, filled in at Mount Vernon Baptist when the regular minister, the Rev. Jack Turner, was away. He said of Mr. Gore: ''That was his happy church. Jack had a great influence on Al and Tipper, not in some mystical, pious way, but he was the first pastor they had together who was a good friend.'' At least for a while, Mr. Gore was also a member of a small prayer group on Capitol Hill, where men read the Bible together and called one another to account when necessary. He would not talk about this either, other than to confirm that he took part and say that he got a lot out of it. But he has often said he leaned heavily on church friends and fellow believers when his son, 6-year-old Albert Gore III, was hit by a car in 1989. According to several friends, Mr. Gore absolutely believes that God saved his son and that the power of prayer helped heal him. It was that crisis that prompted Mr. Gore to write ''Earth in the Balance,'' an environmental book full of spiritual references. Initially, he had envisioned an even more religious book. ''I had some concern about this,'' said his editor, John Sterling. ''How do we present this book seriously if we work a lot of spiritual stuff in?'' Though Mr. Sterling said he did his best to rein in that impulse, God remained a main character in the book. In it, Mr. Gore explains why, for him, God and environmentalism are inextricably linked: ''How can one glorify the Creator while heaping contempt on creation? How can one walk humbly with nature's God while wreaking havoc on nature?'' He says Noah was an early environmentalist, after God gave him ''a commandment that might appear in modern form as, Thou shalt preserve biodiversity.'' To Mr. Gore, the Bible carries a ''strong activist message.'' ''It is my own belief that the image of God can be seen in every corner of creation, even in us, but only faintly,'' Mr. Gore wrote, in what seems to be as close to a statement of core religious belief as anything else he has ever said or written. ''By experiencing nature in its fullest -- our own and that of all creation -- with our senses and with our spiritual imagination, we can glimpse, 'bright shining as the sun,' an infinite image of God.'' Mr. Gore has not been active in church for a decade, and acknowledges a new distance from his larger faith community. The once liberal Southern Baptist Convention, which filed briefs in Brown v. Board of Education and Roe v. Wade and opposed the war in Vietnam, has more recently been dominated by fundamentalists, leaving moderates like Mr. Gore in the clear minority. Just last week, Jimmy Carter left the Southern Baptist Convention, saying he felt excluded by the adoption of ''increasingly rigid'' policies, including its declaration two years ago that women should be subservient to their husbands. Mr. Gore says he often turns to the Bible for answers to some of life's hardest questions. He did that, he said, after the Columbine High School shootings in Colorado. ''I read again the account of Cain slaying Abel,'' Mr. Gore said. As he began quoting from Genesis, he asked his interviewer to follow along -- ''Do you have your Bible?'' -- as he told the story of Cain, whose gift to God was rejected, killing his brother Abel, whose gift was accepted. ''If you do well, you will be accepted,'' Mr. Gore quoted from memory. ''If you do not do well, sin croucheth at your door . . . and thou shalt rule over'' sin. ''Now, here's how I read it,'' he went on, talking about the young men responsible for the Columbine killings. ''Those two boys in trench coats felt like what they had to offer in life was being rejected, and that made them vulnerable to sin.'' They still failed, though, he said, ''in their duty to rule over it.'' Mr. Gore's friend and mentor Mr. Peretz had already mentioned a discussion he had had with Mr. Gore about this very passage -- and his own question about whether God had been wrong to have refused Cain's gift in the first place. Why had God preferred Abel's live offering, an animal sacrifice, to Cain's fruits of the field? But when Mr. Peretz's line of thinking was repeated to Mr. Gore, he batted it right down. ''This passage'' -- about the killing of the shepherd Abel by Cain, who tilled the ground -- ''is a metaphorical reference to the move from a herding to an agricultural economy,'' he said, somewhat impatiently. In the current campaign, Mr. Gore has talked about God sparingly, and, though he did quote from the book of Matthew in one debate, certainly less frequently than either his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, or his own running mate, Mr. Lieberman. When asked, though, how he had reacted when Mr. Bush answered a question in a debate during primary season by saying that his favorite philosopher-thinker was Jesus, Mr. Gore said: ''I wasn't discomfited by his answer. I don't think of Christ first and foremost as a philosopher, but it's a perfectly good answer.'' This is the last article in a series about the life of Al Gore. The final installment of ''Governor Bush's Journey'' will focus on his decision to run for president.
 Excerpt from Earth in the Balance, Al Gore's environmental manifesto (S) Following is an excerpt from ''Earth in the Balance,'' Vice President Al Gore's environmental manifesto, which bolsters its arguments with frequent references to spirituality. Following is an excerpt from ''Earth in the Balance,'' Vice President Al Gore's environmental manifesto, which bolsters its arguments with frequent references to spirituality.
 Congressional Republicans and White Hosue battle over easing immigration law in way that could undercut George W Bush's courting of Hispanic voters in presidential election; Democrats want limited amnesty for hundreds of thousands of longtime illegal residents, permanent residency for certain Central Americans and others (M) Congressional Republicans are locked in a battle with the White House over easing immigration law that threatens to undercut Gov. George W. Bush's efforts to court Hispanic voters and shed the party's lingering image as insensitive to new immigrants. Congressional Republicans are locked in a battle with the White House over easing immigration law that threatens to undercut Gov. George W. Bush's efforts to court Hispanic voters and shed the party's lingering image as insensitive to new immigrants. Democrats say they are united behind the proposals, which Vice President Al Gore has said are essential to ''ensure fairness and equity for certain immigrants and their families already in the United States.'' Governor Bush, of Texas, sought to distance himself from the contentious issue. ''The governor has not gotten involved in the maneuvering or negotiations with any specific immigration bills,'' said Ray Sullivan, a Bush campaign spokesman. ''The governor has said he does not support a blanket amnesty for illegal immigrants at this time.'' But another Bush adviser, speaking on condition of anonymity, expressed concern that the issue could backfire on Republicans, adding, ''We're trying to find a way to do this without making it a political issue.''
 ''I thought he literally was going to hit him,'' Barbara Bush said on the campaign trail last week after the final of the three presidential forums, a town hall meeting in St. Louis. The former first lady was upset by what she concluded was Vice President Al Gore's effort to intimidate her son by crowding him on the stage of Washington University, an act that she said prompted her husband, President Bush, to shout at the television, ''My God!'' ''I thought he literally was going to hit him,'' Barbara Bush said on the campaign trail last week after the final of the three presidential forums, a town hall meeting in St. Louis. The former first lady was upset by what she concluded was Vice President Al Gore's effort to intimidate her son by crowding him on the stage of Washington University, an act that she said prompted her husband, President Bush, to shout at the television, ''My God!'' After the debate, Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas resumed their transcontinental quests to win over the undecideds and persuade the ''persuadables,'' those waffling potential voters who are recruited by the news shows to fill the seats in their on-air focus groups. Each candidate was taking sharper aim at his rival. The Democrats ran new ads attacking Mr. Bush's environmental and education record in Texas. The Republicans replied with new spots labeling Mr. Gore a spendthrift who will rapidly run through the surplus. With just a bit more than two weeks to go, political analysts say, things are likely to get rougher.
 The endorsement of the vice president by Fabio, ''the musclebound patron saint of non-butter-disbelievers,'' should have been satirized by the ''Daily Show'' writers as: ''Al Gore -- I can't believe he's not Bubba!'' The endorsement of the vice president by Fabio, ''the musclebound patron saint of non-butter-disbelievers,'' should have been satirized by the ''Daily Show'' writers as: ''Al Gore -- I can't believe he's not Bubba!''
 Alan Wolfe Op-Ed article on year of the independent, undecided voters; says challenge for George W Bush and Al Gore is to appeal to their bases by presenting sharply contrasting visions of government's role, while also attracting independents by playing down those differences (M) Al Gore and George Bush have the same challenge: to appeal to a base by presenting sharply contrasting visions of the role of government, while also appealing to independent voters by playing down these differences. In reality, Mr. Bush is a conservative who would cut taxes and limit government and Mr. Gore offers popular entitlements, like prescription drug coverage and tuition tax breaks, in line with his party's traditional liberalism. Yet many of the independent, undecided voters interviewed after the debates saw little difference between them. Those who did seemed confused, like the woman who favored gun control and abortion, yet still preferred Mr. Bush. Still others talked of how unhappy they were with both men, when what they really seemed to be saying was that they were prepared to hold out, hoping the candidates would tailor positions just for them. The phenomenon of myopic self-interest was captured in the third debate by a woman who asked not about the candidate's foreign policy, Supreme Court justices or the role of government, but about how the candidate's tax plans would help her as a single person with no dependents. Indeed, both candidates seem to assume that viewers sit in front of their TV screens with ''The Almanac of American Politics'' on their laps. Mr. Gore demonstrated his command of the Dingell-Norwood bill (in the third debate), while Mr. Bush spoke about how much he spent in Texas on the CHIPs program (in the second). No viewers, no matter how good their math or how keen their interest, could follow each man's defense of his tax program. Partisanship distills information. Independence disperses it.
 Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have both relied on their religious beliefs in helping to shape their presidential campaigns, making their spiritual life an intricate part of their political one. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have both relied on their religious beliefs in helping to shape their presidential campaigns, making their spiritual life an intricate part of their political one.
 Gov George W Bush and Vice Pres Al Gore have so narrowcasted their message to sliver of voters in swing states crucial to electoral college victory that they have deserted the rest; more and more, nominees are focusing on those few million undecided voters who, if they choose to vote at all, may decide the election, alienating wider public; diagram (M) IN the cliffhanger that is the 2000 race for president, the drama should be palpable. Suspense should be building because, with just 16 days left, either Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush could take the White House. IN the cliffhanger that is the 2000 race for president, the drama should be palpable. Suspense should be building because, with just 16 days left, either Vice President Al Gore or Gov. George W. Bush could take the White House. It may be the candidates' own fault. Both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have so narrow-casted their message to a sliver of voters in swing states crucial for an electoral college victory that they have deserted the rest.  Meanwhile, those in the sights of the candidates -- in fierce battlegrounds like here in Michigan -- seem to yearn for candidates who can stir more passion. Rather than talk about the merits of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush, two patrons at Dawn Donuts in Saginaw (''101 Delicious Varieties''), a Democrat and a Republican, lamented last week about how they missed a politician like Ronald Reagan. What the candidates are talking about seems only to accentuate their similarities. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have strikingly different philosophies and stands on everything ranging from abortion to the role of government to the Supreme Court to gun laws. Yet, in the candidates' determination to be all things to all voters, it is hardly surprising that voters cannot tell the two apart (even when they are not standing side-by-side wearing red ties). Gun control seemed a natural this year for the Democrats. But the vice president has largely stayed clear of the issue because polls suggest it will not win him any votes among undecided voters in swing states. Same with capital punishment. Both candidates favor it, but Mr. Gore has not even probed Mr. Bush's potential vulnerability by addressing racial disparities and other issues the death penalty underscores. An obvious explanation is that in blissful economic times, voters never have much taste for politics. That is especially true when no war-and-peace issues are brewing. In 1960, voters seemed riveted by the presidential campaign not because the economy was in the tank (it wasn't) but because there were weighty matters at stake. Somehow, the tussle over whether Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush would offer more generous prescription drug benefits does not seem on par with the space race or the missile gap. Even the impressive early rallying around Mr. Bush before the primaries seemed motivated not so much by Bush the man (many of his early supporters had never met him) but by Bush the man who has the best shot at returning his party to the White House. In interview after interview in battleground states, even people who said they are interested enough to vote admitted they were not enthralled with Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore. Francis Fritz, 61, a retired Firestone store manager in Saginaw, said he was torn between Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush. Did the debates help him decide? ''I think they were boring,'' he said.
 Excerpts from conversation with pollster Stanley B Greenberg, who has been working with client, Vice Pres Al Gore, in what he calls 'debate camp' in Tennessee; he comments on private polling he conducts for clients (M) Recently Dr. Greenberg worked with his client Vice President Al Gore in what he called ''debate camp'' in Tennessee to prepare for each debate. He says the purpose of  the polls is ''to understand what's going on in the campaign and develop a strategy.'' He has on occasion conducted polls together with Fred Steeper, Governor Bush's pollster on international affairs and foreign trade issues. They work together to reassure their clients that the polls will be nonpartisan. The difficulty with this election is Al Gore is not quite an incumbent. And you have an election where many more people think the country is moving in the right direction. This is not a ''throw the bums out election.'' People would like to preserve a lot of what's going right and so it's complex to gauge the undecideds.  The problem is not the accuracy of polls. The problem is interpreting them. A. I don't believe in doing just polls. I always do focus groups. In a  presidential campaign you poll quite regularly. We'll do two or three national polls a week. In addition to that every night we'll have focus groups. We bring a couple of groups of 10 people together in a room. Usually  they are people who are like-minded and undecided, people who say they are Bush voters and who say they are open to Gore. People who are the  kind of voters we need to reach. Also demographically similar so that they  are comfortable. We don't mix post graduates with high school graduates because the post graduates will dominate and there will be a kind of  deference to them on issues that they don't deserve. We have demographic  homogeneity so people are comfortable. I always separate women from men so women can bond to each other faster. These sessions last two hours maximum. Q. What factors do voters consider as they choose between Vice President Al Gore and Governor George W. Bush?
 FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.'' FOUR BLONDES, by Candace Bushnell. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The love lives of glamorous Manhattan women as seen by the author of ''Sex and the City.''
 For Harris, the campaign was winding down; for Roe, the toughest period lay ahead. The Rogan campaign was facing some tactical questions. The candidate was getting pounded with commercials paid for by the Democrats, and his own spots did not seem to be doing him much good. Like Rogan, Roe was disappointed that George W. Bush had not picked McCain, who remained popular in California, as his running mate. If he had, Roe thought, the race would be over. Schiff fits an emerging mold of politician, post-Gingrich and even post-Clinton, a type whose traits are exemplified in turns by George W. Bush and Al Gore. When it comes to politics, they are sophisticated enough, like Bush, not to talk much about how sophisticated they are; they deliver the good news with a grin, the attacks almost as amiably and the bad news rarely, if at all. When it comes to policy, they are mechanics, like Gore, rather than architects; they present themselves as unglamorous, hard-working public servants, on contract for a job. At the Congressional level, their watchwords are bipartisanship and constituent service, and they mean both. James Bennet is a staff writer for The Times Magazine. This year, among other articles, he has written about the campaigns of Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
 Jeffrey Rosen article on changes that may take place in US Supreme Court and in how US government works, in light of probability that next president will nominate two new justices; profiles David Tatel appellate judge in Washington, DC, and possible Gore nominee, and Michael Luttig, appellate judge in Virginia described as a conservative's conservative; photos (L) 'The next president is going to appoint three, maybe even four, justices of the Supreme Court,'' Al Gore declared in a moment of enthusiasm during the first presidential debate. But Gore and George W. Bush said little about their visions of the court, except to dance around the one question that has obsessed presidential candidates since 1980. ''The main issue is whether or not the Roe v. Wade decision's going to be overturned,'' the vice president announced. ''This is a very important issue, because a lot of young women in this country take this right for granted, and it could be lost.'' Bush countered with echoes of Richard Nixon's campaign rhetoric from 1968. He promised to appoint judges ''who will strictly interpret the Constitution,'' as opposed to ''liberal, activist judges who will use their bench to subvert the legislature.'' In fact, both candidates are repeating slogans from old debates that may not turn out to be central during the next four years. Consider abortion. There are now six justices on the court who support the core principle of Roe v. Wade -- namely, that abortions can't be banned before fetal viability. Only three justices believe, as Justice Antonin Scalia declared as recently as June, that Roe ''must be overruled.'' For Roe to be overturned, Bush would have to replace two pro-Roe justices -- say, John Paul Stevens and Sandra Day O'Connor -- with two committed anti-Roe justices. Given the uncertainties of Supreme Court retirements, he might not have this opportunity. What's more, overturning Roe wouldn't lead to a national ban on abortion. Although some state legislatures would vote to restrict abortion, many would maintain the status quo. 'The next president is going to appoint three, maybe even four, justices of the Supreme Court,'' Al Gore declared in a moment of enthusiasm during the first presidential debate. But Gore and George W. Bush said little about their visions of the court, except to dance around the one question that has obsessed presidential candidates since 1980. ''The main issue is whether or not the Roe v. Wade decision's going to be overturned,'' the vice president announced. ''This is a very important issue, because a lot of young women in this country take this right for granted, and it could be lost.'' Bush countered with echoes of Richard Nixon's campaign rhetoric from 1968. He promised to appoint judges ''who will strictly interpret the Constitution,'' as opposed to ''liberal, activist judges who will use their bench to subvert the legislature.'' In fact, both candidates are repeating slogans from old debates that may not turn out to be central during the next four years. Consider abortion. There are now six justices on the court who support the core principle of Roe v. Wade -- namely, that abortions can't be banned before fetal viability. Only three justices believe, as Justice Antonin Scalia declared as recently as June, that Roe ''must be overruled.'' For Roe to be overturned, Bush would have to replace two pro-Roe justices -- say, John Paul Stevens and Sandra Day O'Connor -- with two committed anti-Roe justices. Given the uncertainties of Supreme Court retirements, he might not have this opportunity. What's more, overturning Roe wouldn't lead to a national ban on abortion. Although some state legislatures would vote to restrict abortion, many would maintain the status quo. The word ''federalism'' tends to make most people's eyes glaze over. But although the issue gets less attention than affirmative action and abortion, it is no less important. During the past five years, the Supreme Court has struck down all or part of 25 federal laws, from the line-item veto to the Brady gun-control law. In many of these cases, the court decided -- by slim 5-to-4 margins -- that Congress or the president had encroached on states' rights or on the separation of powers. The election of 2000, therefore, could redefine the shape of the federal government. If Gore wins, the court might well abandon its recent attempts to impose meaningful limits on Congress's power. If Bush wins, however, the court could embark on a concerted attempt to roll back the boundaries of the modern regulatory state. Many people are familiar by now with the constitutional arguments for and against legalized abortion and affirmative action. But the debate over federalism tends to be too abstract to get even the hearts of lawyers pounding. In the hope of making the issue more concrete, I visited two judges who have written influential opinions on opposite sides of the debate: J. Michael Luttig, an appellate judge in Virginia; and David S. Tatel, an appellate judge in Washington. This choice of judges was not made casually. Luttig is considered a leading candidate for a Supreme Court appointment in a Bush administration; Tatel is among those who are similarly well regarded by the Gore camp. Conversations with each of them, therefore, offer insights into the very different directions the Supreme Court could take in a Bush or Gore administration. Having read Luttig's opinions, which display a relish for eviscerating the logical flaws of his colleagues, I was surprised and charmed by his self-deprecating friendliness and emotional accessibility. He is an extremely likable man. Unlike Justice Scalia, for whom he clerked, Luttig is intelligent without being a showoff. Born and reared in Texas, he has a down-home unpretentiousness that might very well appeal to George W. Bush. Luttig, 46, showed me around his chambers on the ninth floor of the federal courthouse in Alexandria, Va., which are adorned with autographed pictures of Supreme Court justices featuring unusually intimate inscriptions. As a Department of Justice official in the Bush administration, Luttig worked tirelessly for the confirmation of David Souter in 1990 and Clarence Thomas in 1991. Thomas's gratitude is evident in several pictures, one of which shows him in shirt sleeves with his arm around Luttig's shoulder. Another picture has an inscription from ''Clarence,'' which reads: ''This would not have been possible without you! Thanks so much, buddy!'' Luttig's speedy progress from law clerk for Chief Justice Warren E. Burger to White House aide to federal appellate judge -- he was appointed by President Bush at the improbable age of 36 -- has given his opinions a confident, relentlessly logical quality, like those of a bright, young law professor who has never been chastened by life outside the academy. Luttig, who studied Ludwig Wittgenstein in college, is known for making mathematically precise arguments, especially in cases involving the limits of federal power. One of the carjackers was convicted and sentenced to death. The death sentence is now being reviewed by the United States Court of Appeals, and Gov. George Bush may ultimately be responsible for deciding whether the execution should proceed. In a concurring opinion, Luttig's colleague J. Harvie Wilkinson 3rd reflected on the dangers of what he candidly called ''judicial activism'' by conservatives. Wilkinson, a well-respected moderate conservative, is himself mentioned as a leading Supreme Court candidate in a Bush administration. A former law professor and newspaper editor in Virginia, Wilkinson argued that any time courts refuse to defer to the decisions of legislative bodies, their decisions must be called activist. But he insisted that the Supreme Court's recent decisions limiting the scope of federal power were more defensible than than those of previous eras of judicial activism, the 1930's and 1960's, because the court was merely acting as a ''structural referee'' between federal and state governments. Looking to the future, however, Wilkinson cautioned that ''if modern activism accelerates to a gallop'' -- leading to a ''wholesale invalidation of environmental, civil rights and business regulation'' -- then the new conservative judicial activists would be just as discredited as their predecessors. If Bush judges are likely to question the scope of federal power, Gore judges are not. Although Gore has indicated that he would appoint liberal justices like Thurgood Marshall and William Brennan, it is not yet clear if Gore is more willing than President Clinton to expend significant political capital to appoint judicial liberals rather than judicial moderates. At the very least, however, it seems probable that Gore justices, like the moderate Clinton appointees Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer, would share a distaste for sweeping exercises of judicial power and a reluctance to strike down federal laws in the name of states' rights. One judicial moderate who fits this mold is David Tatel, appointed by Clinton to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
