 Hyman Bookbinder letter lauds Oct 29 editorial endorsement of Vice Pres Al Gore; holds it represents devastating respone to Ralph Nader's 'reckless campaign' Re ''Al Gore for President'' (editorial, Oct. 29): Re ''Al Gore for President'' (editorial, Oct. 29): Your editorial impressively lays  out the very substantial differences between the vice president and George W. Bush. And in doing so, it constitutes a devastating response to the letter from Ralph Nader that appears on the same page. Before Mr. Nader's supporters make a Bush victory possible, they should review your endorsement and then ask themselves which candidate is more likely, in your editorial's last words, to ''lead the country into a creative, productive and progressive era at the beginning of the 21st century.''
 Rodney Dueck letter lauds Oct 29 editorial endorsement of Al Gore as 'thoughtful and wise'; contends that editorial was 'too kind' to Gov George W Bush Your Oct. 29 editorial endorsement of Al Gore for president was thoughtful and wise. My only suggestion is that you seemed too kind to George W. Bush. His ''compassionate conservatism'' strikes me as a well-intended form of lip service that belies a profound lack of insight into the consequences of one's actions. Your Oct. 29 editorial endorsement of Al Gore for president was thoughtful and wise. My only suggestion is that you seemed too kind to George W. Bush. His ''compassionate conservatism'' strikes me as a well-intended form of lip service that belies a profound lack of insight into the consequences of one's actions.
 At the Tick-Tock Diner, Ted Friedrich, a stockbroker from Clifton, told Mr. Franks that he was somewhat undecided, even though he usually votes for Democrats. He said he was definitely voting for Al Gore, and might vote for Mr. Franks. ''I told him I would probably vote for him for the same reasons I will not vote for Bush,'' Mr. Friedrich said. ''Bush didn't go through the process. He didn't pay his dues and you have, I told him. And Jon Corzine didn't, either.''
 Ken Gelbard letter holds Oct 29 editorial endorsement of Vice Pres Al Gore 'glosses over' question of his honesty Your Oct. 29 editorial endorsement of Al Gore for president glosses over the question of his honesty. Following on the heels of the president's lying to the American people and under oath before a federal judge, Mr. Gore's inability to stick to the facts is a decisive issue that you choose to minimize. Your Oct. 29 editorial endorsement of Al Gore for president glosses over the question of his honesty. Following on the heels of the president's lying to the American people and under oath before a federal judge, Mr. Gore's inability to stick to the facts is a decisive issue that you choose to minimize. Based on his experience and the state of the economy, Mr. Gore should be running away with the election. Apparently, the American people put more of a value on honesty than you do.
 Joseph Mallia letter contends Oct 29 editorial finding that Gov George W Bush's lack of experience is reason not to support him conflicts with endorsement of Hillary Rodham Clinton for US Senate, and Oct 22 editorial suggesting she will grow in the job While I do not fault you on your endorsement of Al Gore for president (editorial, Oct. 29), I must note that your reasons for discounting George W. Bush seem to conflict with your Oct. 22 endorsement of Hillary Rodham Clinton for the United States Senate from New York. While I do not fault you on your endorsement of Al Gore for president (editorial, Oct. 29), I must note that your reasons for discounting George W. Bush seem to conflict with your Oct. 22 endorsement of Hillary Rodham Clinton for the United States Senate from New York. In general, you cite Mr. Bush's lack of experience as reason not to support him. On the other hand, in your support of Mrs. Clinton, you put aside that argument and suggest that she will grow in the job. I wish you had used the same measurements to apply to both endorsements.
 Bill Bradford letter contends Vice Pres Al Gore does not have the kind of foreign policy experience that merits election to presidency (Oct 29 editorial); contends Gore is identified with an administration with 'low international credibility' Re ''Al Gore for President'' (editorial, Oct. 29): Secret deals with Russia's president and participation in wag-the-dog initiatives and photo-op diplomacy are hardly the kind of foreign policy experience that merits election to the presidency. Re ''Al Gore for President'' (editorial, Oct. 29): Secret deals with Russia's president and participation in wag-the-dog initiatives and photo-op diplomacy are hardly the kind of foreign policy experience that merits election to the presidency. Al Gore is closely identified with an administration with low international credibility because of decision-making driven by short-term domestic political expediencies.
 Scott Jackson letter backs Oct 29 editorial endorsing Vice Pres Al Gore as most experienced candidate; contends, however, that reasons for voting for Gore are more basic, such as his proposals for universal health care, Social Security and paring down national debt Your support for Al Gore as being the most experienced candidate is laudable (editorial, Oct. 29). But the reasons for voting for him are more basic. Your support for Al Gore as being the most experienced candidate is laudable (editorial, Oct. 29). But the reasons for voting for him are more basic. For example, Mr. Gore has a plan for universal health care. George W. Bush has none. Mr. Gore has a program to pay down the $3.4 trillion national debt. Mr. Bush's budget and Social Security plans would leave the country unable to do so. It's that simple.
 Bush Is Pushing Hard To Take California  Gov. George W. Bush campaigned in California instead of more closely contested Midwestern states, portraying Vice President Al Gore as someone who practices the ''politics of division'' and suggesting the Republicans would carry the state, a cornerstone of the last two Democratic Presidential victories. Mr. Bush and the Republican Party spent $5.5 million on television commercials in California since June 1. Mr. Gore and the Democrats spent no money on television there. Dick Cheney said Vice President Gore was ''not up to the task'' of being commander in chief. Liberal Pressure on Nader  Liberal Democrats want Ralph Nader to endorse Al Gore in swing states, even as many liberals assail Mr. Nader as uninterested in abortion or gay and civil rights. Mr. Gore promised that as president he would hold an average of one open meeting a week with ordinary citizens and would not add a single extra job to the federal government.
 Gov George W Bush hurtles into stretch run of presidential campaign, making high-profile visit to California instead of more closely contested states in Midwest; portrays Vice Pres Al Gore as man who practices politics of division; says Gore is defender of status quo, who is sows cynicism and is afraid to lead; says his 'big government' ideas are out of touch with times and out of step with American people; portrays himself as uniter who would bring America together; predicts upset in state that has been cornerstone of last two Democratic presidential victories; is accompanied by wife and Sen John McCain; photos (M) Gov. George W. Bush hurtled today into the stretch run of the presidential race, making a high-profile visit to California instead of the more closely contested states in the Midwest and portraying his opponent as a man who practices the ''politics of division.'' Casting an aura of confidence, Mr. Bush insisted that his decision to spend some of the last days of the campaign in a state that has been a cornerstone of the last two Democratic presidential victories would pay off with an upset here. Gov. George W. Bush hurtled today into the stretch run of the presidential race, making a high-profile visit to California instead of the more closely contested states in the Midwest and portraying his opponent as a man who practices the ''politics of division.'' Casting an aura of confidence, Mr. Bush insisted that his decision to spend some of the last days of the campaign in a state that has been a cornerstone of the last two Democratic presidential victories would pay off with an upset here. ''I tell you, there are going to be a lot of shocked people on Nov. 7 -- starting with my opponent,'' Mr. Bush told a delighted crowd in a hotel ballroom here. He said political experts who had labeled the state as safely in Vice President Al Gore's column ''don't understand what's happening in California.'' As the audience roared, Mr. Bush proclaimed, ''We're going to send a message to the rest of the country: California is back.'' Senator John McCain of Arizona, Mr. Bush's rival in the primaries, stood with him on the stage, trying to bring the independents and swing voters who had once flocked to him to the Republican ticket. ''California's going to be blessed by the presence of the vice president of the United States tomorrow,'' Mr. McCain said, drawing playful boos from the crowd. ''We don't want to say that,'' he told the audience. ''We want to say Mr. Vice President, welcome to Bush country.'' While Mr. Bush ventured onto Democratic turf, Mr. Gore spent the day trying to shore up support in the Midwest, telling voters in Wisconsin that he would ''give democracy back to you'' and pledging to hold an open meeting every week with ordinary citizens if he is elected. [Page A21.] All through the day, Mr. Bush broadly summed up the rationale for his election, portraying himself as a uniter who would ''bring America together'' to deal with the problems facing Social Security, Medicare and struggling schools. ''Our country has unlimited potential,'' Mr. Bush told a crowd of several thousand in an airport hangar in Albuquerque, where he stopped on his way to the West Coast. ''But our politics is broken -- at least in Washington. ''You know what's wrong,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Washington is obsessed with scoring points, not solving problems. There is so much anger, so much division, so much important work left undone.'' Mr. Bush's insistence that ''we can aim higher, we can do better'' was designed to contrast with the Democrats' end-of-campaign attacks on his record in Texas and his relative inexperience in national politics. Yet even as he pledged to ''inspire and unite,'' the Republican presidential nominee took withering aim at Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Bush described his opponent as a defender of the status quo, who was sowing cynicism and was afraid to lead, or to grapple with the looming financial difficulties of the federal programs for the elderly. ''Surely the vice president can see these problems,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And yet he will not act. He is surrounded and supported by interest groups that exist to oppose reform. He seems guided by polls and focus groups that drain politics of its courage.'' He said Mr. Gore's ''big government ideas'' were ''out of touch with our time and out of step with the American people.'' Building to a crescendo, Mr. Bush went on: ''My opponent cannot bring America together because he practices the politics of division. He talks of ripping the lungs out of political opponents. He scares the elderly for political gain. His campaign attacks are designed to spread falsehood and cynicism.'' His supporters cheered and many of them held up three fingers for W, Mr. Bush's middle initial. Mr. Bush portrayed himself as a farsighted leader who would not shy away from fixing programs like Medicare and Social Security, which could run out of money in coming decades, and would change the lack of quality in some of the nation's public schools. ''Should I be elected president, I'm going to confront the hard issues,'' he said, ''from the inertia of our education bureaucracy to the third rail of Social Security. I won't take the easy way, the Washington way. I will act. And I will lead.'' Even with most national polls showing Mr. Bush with a small lead, the Republican's decision to spend two of the final days of the race in California was not without risk. This is when a candidate's time is most precious, and appearances normally are carefully chosen for where they can do most good. And while several recent polls suggest that California is more competitive than expected, Mr. Gore is still holding leads ranging from 5 to 10 percentage points. But Mr. Bush has refused to give up on the nation's most populous state the way his father did in 1992 and Bob Dole did four years later.  ''The time for head fakes are long past,'' said Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director. ''We're serious.'' Mr. Bush's stop in Burbank was built around a taping of the ''Tonight'' show with Jay Leno. At one point in the show, Mr. Leno donned a Bush mask and mispronounced the word ''subliminal.'' Mr. Bush promptly put on a Gore mask and said, ''This is more scary.'' After the show, Mr. Bush went to Fresno, Calif., to try to generate enthusiasm among Republicans in the  Central Valley, a swing area. Mr. Bush also planned to sweep up the West Coast, through Oregon and Washington, where Democrats have prevailed in recent elections, before heading back to the Midwest. Mr. Gore, too, was to arrive here on Tuesday to appear on the ''Tonight'' show, and his aides dismissed Mr. Bush's challenge. ''We welcome Governor Bush to spend as much of his time and money in California as he wants,'' said Kym Spell, a Gore spokeswoman, ''because we feel very confident about where we stand on issues like the environment that are important to California.'' Mr. Bush's speech in New Mexico was unusually long for a rally address and it summed up his closing appeal to voters, just eight days before the election. He painted himself as the antidote to politics as usual, and he drew contrasts with Mr. Gore on a range of issues, including education, Social Security, Medicare, tax cutting and the military. Mr. Bush read the speech from a teleprompter, but that did not stop him from making a mistake and inverting his words. At one point, he thundered that Mr. Gore believes that the federal surplus ''is the people's money.'' He meant to say that Mr. Gore considers the surplus the ''government's money.'' Mr. Bush's aides said that every day in this final week, Mr. Bush would highlight a particular theme of his campaign and today's was supposed to be education. But his off-the-cuff remarks at the Bosque Farms, N.M., elementary school were little more than a perfunctory rendition of his views on an issue on which he has run hard all year. At one point Mr. Bush appeared to be answering criticisms that Texas schools have put too much emphasis on preparing for standardized testing, compared with more meaningful instruction. ''I know you hear all the time about, well, you can't have accountability because teachers will teach to a test,'' he said. ''Here's my answer. Teaching a child to read, teaching a child to comprehend is not teaching to a test.''
 He also attacked Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore, whom he dismissed as ''little gentlemen'' of no substance.
 Republican Vice Presidential candidate Dick Cheney strikes back at Democrats, who question whether Gov George W Bush is qualified to be president; says Democratic ticket lacks experience and that Vice Pres Al Gore is not up to task of being nation's commander in chief; comments in response to remarks by Sen Joseph I Lieberman, Gore's running mate (S) Dick Cheney struck back today at Democrats who questioned whether his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, was ready to be president, saying it is the Democratic ticket that lacked experience and asserting that Vice President Al Gore was ''not up to the task'' of being the nation's commander in chief. Mr. Cheney, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, made the accusation one day after his Democratic counterpart, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, said on national television that he did not believe that Mr. Bush was ready to be president. At a rally at a small college here, Mr. Cheney disparaged Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman as lifelong politicians who are dependent on government paychecks. Dick Cheney struck back today at Democrats who questioned whether his running mate, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, was ready to be president, saying it is the Democratic ticket that lacked experience and asserting that Vice President Al Gore was ''not up to the task'' of being the nation's commander in chief. Mr. Cheney, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, made the accusation one day after his Democratic counterpart, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, said on national television that he did not believe that Mr. Bush was ready to be president. At a rally at a small college here, Mr. Cheney disparaged Mr. Gore and Mr. Lieberman as lifelong politicians who are dependent on government paychecks. Mr. Cheney spent 25 years in government -- a year longer than Mr. Gore -- serving as President Gerald R. Ford's chief of staff, being elected six times as Wyoming's lone congressman, and as defense secretary in the Persian Gulf war. When President George Bush lost his bid for re-election in 1992, Mr. Cheney joined a research organization before taking the helm at  Halliburton, an oil services company. ''Now, I'm proud of my national experience and public service,'' Mr. Cheney said here at Loras College. ''Al Gore and Joe Lieberman ought to be proud of their service, too, but I think it's rather limited, frankly. Neither one of 'em ever ran anything, neither one of 'em ever made a payroll, as best I can tell. And the world looks different if you've had to go out into the private sector.'' Mr. Gore worked as a journalist for five years before becoming a congressman from Tennessee, and Mr. Lieberman was a lawyer in Connecticut before he became a senator. Mr. Cheney's running mate, Mr. Bush, worked in the oil industry and was a part-owner of the Texas Rangers before he became governor. The Gore campaign seemed to be happy to discuss which candidate is more qualified to be the president. ''Our problem with Governor Bush's experience is not the jobs he's had but how he's done them,'' said Kym Spell, a campaign spokeswoman. ''We have a problem when you promise a Texas miracle in education that turns out to be a myth, when you appoint polluters to run environmental agencies, and when you deliver tax cuts for big oil instead of insuring health care for children.'' At the rally, Mr. Cheney also delivered a stinging rebuke of the vice president. ''A man like Al Gore, who doesn't seem to know the difference between whether or not the forces are in good shape today and doesn't seem willing to have a discussion about it, is not up to the task, in my opinion, of being commander in chief of this nation's armed forces,'' Mr. Cheney said.
 Liberal Democrats begin aggressive campaign to urge Green Party candidate Ralph Nader to endorse Vice Pres Al Gore in important swing states; also ratchet up criticisms of Nader; warn him and advisers that his legacy among Democrats on Capitol Hill and elsewhere will be one of bitter resentment if Gore loses narrowly to Gov George W Bush; photo (M) Liberal Democrats have begun an aggressive campaign to urge Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, to endorse Vice President Al Gore in important swing states. At the same time, many of those liberals have ratcheted up their criticism of Mr. Nader, saying he is not interested in abortion, gay or civil rights. The liberals say they have sharpened their once-polite attacks on Mr. Nader because they have given up any hope of persuading him to drop out of the race. Instead, they have begun warning Mr. Nader and his advisers that his legacy among Democrats on Capitol Hill and elsewhere will be one of bitter resentment if Mr. Gore loses narrowly to Gov. George W. Bush. Liberal Democrats have begun an aggressive campaign to urge Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate for president, to endorse Vice President Al Gore in important swing states. At the same time, many of those liberals have ratcheted up their criticism of Mr. Nader, saying he is not interested in abortion, gay or civil rights. The liberals say they have sharpened their once-polite attacks on Mr. Nader because they have given up any hope of persuading him to drop out of the race. Instead, they have begun warning Mr. Nader and his advisers that his legacy among Democrats on Capitol Hill and elsewhere will be one of bitter resentment if Mr. Gore loses narrowly to Gov. George W. Bush. A number of Democrats who have worked with Mr. Nader over the years said today that they had been calling their friends in Mr. Nader's inner circle, urging them to persuade Mr. Nader to throw his support behind Mr. Gore in closely contested states like Oregon, Washington, Minnesota, Wisconsin and New Mexico. The idea would be to allow Mr. Nader to continue his push for 5 percent of the national vote -- which would entitle the Green Party to federal matching funds in 2004 -- while also helping Mr. Gore win enough electoral votes to defeat Mr. Bush. Former Representative Toby Moffett, who worked with Mr. Nader during the 1970's, said that he spoke with Ms. Claybrook last week and that she expressed interest in trying to get Mr. Nader to help Mr. Gore in strategic states. ''She said she was worried about the possibility that Ralph could help elect Bush,'' Mr. Moffett said. Asked if she thought Mr. Nader's campaign might help elect Mr. Bush, she replied, ''I don't know.'' She added, ''I don't think anyone envisioned it would come down to this close of a race.'' Theresa Amato, Mr. Nader's campaign manager, called the efforts to get Mr. Nader to work with Mr. Gore in certain states, ''frivolous and diversionary.'' Mr. Nader has no plans to scale back his campaigning, with scheduled stops this week in three fiercely contested states, Michigan, Minnesota and Wisconsin, as well as in California, where he has cut into Mr. Gore's lead. His campaign also said it would unveil a new television commercial on Tuesday. On another front, Democrats in Congress who have worked closely with Mr. Nader, led by Representative Jan Schakowsky, Democrat of Illinois, have begun circulating a letter to Mr. Nader urging him to help Mr. Gore. ''The prospect of waking up on November 8 to a Bush presidency is too dangerous for too many,'' the letter says. ''Ralph, do not let your candidacy be the reason for that to happen. Ask your supporters in swing states to vote for Al Gore.'' ''If he succeeds and destroys the Gore candidacy, how many progressive congressmen will be prepared to take Joan Claybrook's telephone calls?'' asked Jack Blum, counsel to Americans for Democratic Action, a liberal lobbying group. In response to a question about whether the election of Mr. Bush might lead to the overturning of the landmark case legalizing abortion, Mr. Nader said, ''Even if Roe vs. Wade is reversed, that doesn't end it. It just reverts it back to the states.'' ''Gore is far more qualified to shepherd progressive causes than is Nader,'' Mr. Conyers asserts in the letter.
 With help from the New York City Board of Elections, the producers of the Broadway play ''Gore Vidal's 'The Best Man' '' set up a real voting booth in the lobby of the Virginia Theater on Oct. 11. People attending the play could step in and pull levers for the candidates they preferred in the presidential campaign and the New York Senate race. What the Board of Elections lends, the Board of Elections takes away. It carted the voting machine off the other day to be used at a real polling place next week. But the producers kept track, and said that of 1,200 theatergoers who voted, 75 percent voted for Vice President Al Gore and 25 percent for Gov. George W. Bush. As for the Senate race, 68 percent chose Mrs. Clinton; 32 percent her Republican opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio.
 Gail Collins Op-Ed column expresses awe at way Hillary Rodham Clinton has transformed herself from failed co-president and betrayed first lady into politician in her own right; says her Senate campaign operation very much reflects her own style, which is to work very hard and never say anything interesting or off-script; says there is something about her that makes people go crazy and fling charges so outrageous that they boomerang back on person who made them; says if she wins her election, but Vice Pres Al Gore loses his, she will immediately be among those mentioned for 2004 presidential nomination (M) If she wins, she instantly wipes out her identity as Bill Clinton's wife and becomes a high-ranking elected official from a state he barely knows. If Al Gore loses the election, she'll also enter the ranks of the Great Mentioneds for the 2004 presidential nomination. If Elizabeth Dole made the cut, there will be no way of keeping Senator Clinton off the list.
 Talk show hosts at KLBJ-AM in Austin, Tex, agree Vice Pres Al Gore or Gov George W Bush will make dull talk-show topics if either is elected president, and that life will not be same without polarizing presence of Pres Clinton; photo (M) ''It won't have quite the sizzle of the Lewinsky scandal,'' conceded Mark Caesar, half of the broadcast team, anticipating the altered world of talk radio if Gov. George W. Bush won the White House. ''But Bush should be good for talk radio. There'll be outstanding material: the anticipation of his tax cut, for example, and how much he'll try to push his agenda through Congress.'' ''It won't have quite the sizzle of the Lewinsky scandal,'' conceded Mark Caesar, half of the broadcast team, anticipating the altered world of talk radio if Gov. George W. Bush won the White House. ''But Bush should be good for talk radio. There'll be outstanding material: the anticipation of his tax cut, for example, and how much he'll try to push his agenda through Congress.'' ''There's one thing the liberals can't stop and it's a mandate!'' his voice boomed in the background in a taped promotion for his afternoon show happily predicting a Bush victory. The station professionals who groom if not tame the talk audiences agree that, whether Mr. Bush or Vice President Al Gore wins, life won't be the same without the polarizing, capering presence of Mr. Clinton crackling in the ether. ''We can make fun of Al Gore's goofiness if he's elected, and I'm not afraid of some Bush bashing if that's required,'' Mr. Ward said. ''But months from now I don't expect to have an easy talk show of Bush or Gore doing bizarre things.'' This city that knows Mr. Bush better than other metropolises know him clearly loves political talk, from pending local proposals for a city ''living wage'' and a mass transit rail system, to the daily anguish and imponderables of the Middle East conflict. Austin liberals admit they have still not adjusted to the surprise of Mr. Bush's winning the governorship. How did his low-key brand of amiable determination sneak up on them so? And they fairly gape at how close the polls show Mr. Bush to be approaching the ultimate level, the presidency, with his same soft-edged wares. ''We're wondering whether he can pull it off,'' observed Cactus Pryor, a fervid Democrat and legendary Texas broadcaster for five decades. He said he would be impressed if Mr. Bush could carry Austin, let alone the nation. ''This is the liberal dynasty of Texas,'' Mr. Pryor said of Austin's Travis County, noting that the only modern Republican to carry the city in a presidential vote was Ronald Reagan ''in a squeaker.''
 Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for the presidential campaign of Gov. George W. Bush, said the report was ''a politically motivated document'' intended to embarrass Mr. Bush. Mr. Rodriguez and the Democratic staff of the House committee said they were not using the data to embarrass Mr. Bush. Rather, they said, the study underlines the need to increase Medicaid reimbursement, to step up enforcement and to publicize the results of inspections.
 Mr. Lieberman and, earlier, Vice President Al Gore, spoke about their health as part of a series of articles in The New York Times in which candidates for president and other high political offices and, with the candidates' permission, their doctors have been interviewed about their medical conditions. An aide to Mr. Lieberman stopped the interview, in which he gave the first disclosures about his health, after about 15 minutes, saying the senator had to leave for the airport with Mr. Gore. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican nominee, has allowed one of his doctors to be interviewed. But the governor has so far declined to be interviewed. His running mate, Dick Cheney, has released doctors' letters summarizing his health but has not responded to requests for interviews with him and his doctors.
 Report by Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of Law finds Gov George W Bush spent more money on television advertising in California in most recent week than in any of swing states, where he is believed to stand better chance of winning on Election Day; says Bush spent more than $1.8 million for week ended October 24, which went unmatched by Democrats; says since June 1 Bush and Repoublican Party spent $5.5 million on television commercials, while Democrats and Vice Pres Al Gore spent none (M) Gov. George W. Bush spent more money on television advertising in California last week than in any of the swing states, where he is believed to stand a better chance of winning on Election Day, a new study shows. The Republicans' advertising outlays in California, more than $1.8 million for the week that ended on Oct. 24, went unmatched by the Democrats. In fact, the report released yesterday by the Brennan Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law said that since June 1, Gov. George W. Bush and the Republican Party had spent $5.5 million on television commercials in California, the country's most populous state. The Democrats and Vice President Al Gore, meanwhile, have spent no money on television there. Gov. George W. Bush spent more money on television advertising in California last week than in any of the swing states, where he is believed to stand a better chance of winning on Election Day, a new study shows. The Republicans' advertising outlays in California, more than $1.8 million for the week that ended on Oct. 24, went unmatched by the Democrats. In fact, the report released yesterday by the Brennan Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law said that since June 1, Gov. George W. Bush and the Republican Party had spent $5.5 million on television commercials in California, the country's most populous state. The Democrats and Vice President Al Gore, meanwhile, have spent no money on television there. California surveys show Mr. Gore leading, though the race appears to have narrowed somewhat over the last month. Still, political analysts say that the advertising offensive by Mr. Bush, which has been concentrated in Southern California, has so far not made the contest particularly competitive. ''There's no evidence that the advertising has made any difference in the chance of Bush pulling an upset,'' said Mark Baldassare, survey director of the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California. ''Our latest poll showed the race had tightened, but even by our calculations we were unwilling to put California in the 'battleground state' category.'' Recent polls give Mr. Gore a lead of between 5 and 10 percentage points. The Brennan Center, working with a University of Wisconsin professor, Ken Goldstein, has been tracking advertising spending in the nation's top 75 media markets. In the crucial third week of October, the researchers found, Mr. Bush and the Republican National Committee spent $9.1 million on television, while Mr. Gore, the Democratic National Committee and outside groups like Planned Parenthood spent $7.2 million. Virtually no money was spent on commercials for Mr. Bush by special-interest groups, which have been concentrating on supporting Republican congressional candidates. While Mr. Bush's largest expenditure was in California, Mr. Gore put more of his resources in Florida than in any other state. Even so, Mr. Bush outspent him there for the week, $1.5 million to about $1 million. Since June 1, Mr. Bush and the Republicans spent $65 million on television, and Mr. Gore, the Democrats and outside groups spent $61.6 million, the study said. The data also indicate that the 2000 presidential campaign is outstripping the 1996 race in sheer volume of advertising. Four years ago, viewers across the nation saw a total of 162,000 commercials, Mr. Goldstein said, adding that by Oct. 24 of this year, voters had already been exposed to 187,000 spots, evenly split between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. E. Joshua Rosenkranz, the Brennan Center's president, said the study further confirmed the expanding use of soft money, the unrestricted donations to the parties from corporations and wealthy individuals, to finance candidate advertising. Both the Democratic and Republican Parties, which can accept soft money, continue to outspend the Bush and Gore campaigns. But aides to Mr. Bush contend that the expenditures were intended to fulfill the campaign's promise to be a force in California. ''There was a commitment that we made to California early on, and that commitment was time and money,'' a top Bush adviser said. ''Plus, it's a 5- to 7-point race, so it's a good place for us to be.''
 Al Gore's Journey, article in series on Vice Pres Al Gore's political career, says case can be made that he has been most active and influential vice president in American history; Clinton administration has done little in last eight years in which he has not played some role, and he is considered as at least second most influential adviser to president after Hillary Rodham Clinton; he often was quickest to push aggressive approach, whether on foreign policy, or on budgets or on trade, but his advice has not always been accepted; those who work closely with him say his steadiness and strength is often welcome contrast to pliancy of president, who seems to waver on his commitments to people and to policy, particularly early in his administration; what mystifes many is that while Gore is often bold and forceful in councils of government, he has stumbled as presidential candidate, failing to capitalize on his significant record of accomplishment to make case for his election; photos (L) A case can be made that Al Gore has been the most active and influential vice president in American history. There is little the Clinton administration has done or tried to do over the last eight years in which Mr. Gore has not played some role. From his early eagerness to cut budget deficits in 1993 to the aggressive fund-raising of the 1996 campaign to his role in the final days of the Kosovo conflict in 1999, Mr. Gore has been heard and, more often than not, heeded. A case can be made that Al Gore has been the most active and influential vice president in American history. There is little the Clinton administration has done or tried to do over the last eight years in which Mr. Gore has not played some role. From his early eagerness to cut budget deficits in 1993 to the aggressive fund-raising of the 1996 campaign to his role in the final days of the Kosovo conflict in 1999, Mr. Gore has been heard and, more often than not, heeded. There were stumbles, as well. Two of the worst came in the same month, March 1997, when Mr. Gore famously told a White House news conference that ''no controlling legal authority'' barred him from making telephone calls asking for Democratic political contributions from his office. Later that month, in Beijing, Mr. Gore clinked Champagne glasses with Li Peng, the Chinese prime minister who ordered the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989. ''In the history of the vice presidency, Al Gore has a unique and remarkable record,'' said Stephen Hess, a scholar of the presidency at the Brookings Institution in Washington. Mr. Gore was known within the administration as at least the second most influential adviser to the president, after Hillary Rodham Clinton. He was often the quickest to push an aggressive approach, whether on foreign policy or on budgets or on trade. But Mr. Gore was still vice president, not prime minister, and his advice was not always taken. Early in the administration, Mr. Gore sought a significant assignment, like carrying out the campaign promise to end welfare ''as we know it.'' But he wound up with the less-than-electrifying ''reinventing government'' initiative. Some of Mr. Gore's more assertive environmental ideas, like ratcheting up fuel economy standards for cars, were rejected by Mr. Clinton, who believed the issue was a political loser in the industrial Midwest. Mr. Gore's early pleas on the Balkans likewise went unheeded. In numerous internal discussions in early 1993, Mr. Gore pressed for the use of American air power to slow the ethnic slaughter in Bosnia, White House aides said. Mr. Gore was essentially silenced until 1995 when he again became a passionate advocate for allied intervention. But what mystifies these people is that while Mr. Gore was often bold and forceful in the councils of government, he has stumbled as a candidate and has failed to capitalize on his significant record of accomplishment to make the case for his election. ''What's amazing about him is he's a much less courageous campaigner than I would have thought and much more courageous in governance than I thought he would be,'' said a senior White House official who has observed Mr. Gore closely for the last eight years. ''He was really gutsy as a government official, but that just doesn't translate to the campaign. Gore just wants to get elected, then he thinks he'll be free to do the right thing.'' Even before Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore were inaugurated in January 1993, the vice president had negotiated an unprecedented role for a No. 2.  He was not to be deputy president, but he would have real authority over a number of areas where he claimed expertise: the environment, science and technology and streamlining government. Mr. Gore exercised that power early on by placing loyalists in critical posts throughout the government. Leon Fuerth, his longtime foreign policy adviser, was included in every important meeting of the National Security Council. Carol M. Browner, a former Senate aide, was named administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Frank W. Hunger, Mr. Gore's brother-in-law, went to the Justice Department as head of the civil division. Kathleen McGinty, another former Senate aide, was put in charge of the White House Council on Environmental Quality. Reed Hundt, a friend from Mr. Gore's prep-school days at St. Albans, was named chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. Mr. Gore's first executive assignment was running the National Performance Review, more popularly known as the ''reinventing government'' initiative, or Rego. The task involved combing the entire federal bureaucracy for waste, duplication and uneconomic purchasing practices. It was a job for an accountant, not a would-be president, but Mr. Gore took to it like a man killing rats with a broomstick. In his third debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore claimed the reinvention program had reduced government civilian employment by 300,000 workers, to the lowest level since John F. Kennedy was president. In fact, the number of total jobs cut is considerably higher -- almost 400,000 -- but two-thirds of them are military workers whose jobs were eliminated by the military drawdown brought by the end of the cold war. ''Gore is clearly wrong to argue that reinventing government caused the decline in civil service employment that did occur,'' said Paul C. Light, director of governmental studies at the Brookings Institution. ''He would have been perfectly right to say the Clinton administration 'oversaw,' 'participated in,' or 'implemented' the cuts, but reinventing government did not cause the decline in total jobs. It was the end of the cold war, pure and simple.'' Mr. Gore was the first vice president to serve as a full member of the National Security Council and was given broad sway over a large part of United States policy toward Russia. In April 1994, Mr. Clinton asked Mr. Gore to meet regularly with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, then the Russian prime minister, to address aspects of United States-Russian relations that came under Mr. Gore's areas of expertise but did not rise to the presidential level. The two men took up disarmament, space cooperation, legal issues and the environment, among other issues. The first year of the administration was memorable for its early chaos and the budget package that passed only with Mr. Gore casting the tie-breaking 51st vote in the Senate. The White House was riven into competing camps: those who wanted to attack the growing federal budget deficits and those who believed Mr. Clinton had to make good on his campaign promises to ''invest'' billions of new dollars in education, training and other social programs. Mr. Gore was firmly in the camp of the deficit hawks. And he saw an additional benefit to budget stringency: he could test his environmental theories in a real-life laboratory. The vice president pushed hard to have an energy tax included in the administration's first budget package, and Mr. Clinton finally acceded, over the objections of many political advisers who said that the painful plan was a sure loser on Capitol Hill. They were right. Congress rebelled at the proposal and the president quickly abandoned it, leaving Mr. Gore embarrassed and politically scarred. ''Gore felt that if we were going to impose pain on the American people, he wanted it to be environmentally conscious,'' said a member of the administration's economic team. ''He believed that since we were raising so much from the top one or two percent, the plan's credibility depended on a little tough medicine that affected everybody.'' In this battle, as in later fights, Mr. Gore argued that the public would reward boldness, that the administration would win points for taking on its own party in Congress and entrenched interests in private industry. At a pivotal White House meeting in mid-July, Mr. Gore recalled a haunting newspaper photograph of a young woman from Srebrenica who had apparently hanged herself after Serbs overran the area. He said his daughter Karenna, then 21, had seen the picture and asked him why the United States was not doing more to end the conflict. He pleaded for more forceful action to punish the Serbs, according to officials who were present. Mr. Gore then sternly addressed the Pentagon officials in the room, according to Mr. Holbrooke's recollection of the scene. ''On Somalia, Bosnia, Kosovo and the Middle East, he was always the most forceful advocate in the room for a strong policy,'' said Mr. Holbrooke, who is often mentioned as a likely candidate for secretary of state in a Gore administration. ''He wasn't always an interventionist; he's a very careful man. But he had a deep conviction on the importance of American leadership based on moral values and American national interests.'' The president and the vice president had a standing lunch date every week for the first years of the administration, broken only when one was out of town. Aides said that Mr. Gore used those sessions, among other things, as a tutorial for the president on environmental issues -- global warming, logging in the Pacific Northwest, oil drilling in Alaska, the Clean Air Act, land preservation. Mr. Gore devoted whole sessions with the president to obscure matters, like the evaporation of the Aral Sea in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. The vice president contended that these issues were, like Bosnia and other foreign policy challenges, urgent matters not only of national interest but of moral obligation to future generations. It is a point that Mr. Gore made in his book, ''Earth in the Balance'' as well as in numerous public addresses. Mr. Gore's fervor won him friends among environmentalists even as he alienated Congressional Republicans and many in the business community. While he secured noteworthy successes -- particularly on air quality, the designation of more than three million acres as untouchable national monuments and a continued moratorium on oil drilling offshore and in the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge -- his record was not without failures. Blocked by Congress, the administration failed to impose the higher mileage standards that Mr. Gore sought for automobiles. In another defeat, Mr. Clinton ignored Mr. Gore's advice and signed a spending bill that permitted the clear-cutting of certain Western forests. Three months after Mr. Clinton signed the bill, Mr. Gore told a group of environmentalists that the measure was the ''biggest mistake of the first term.'' Perhaps the most significant environmental battle of the past eight years arose on Mr. Gore's signature issue, global warming. A 1997 worldwide conference in Kyoto, Japan, on reducing climate-altering gases was in danger of collapsing because of discord between industrialized countries and the developing world about how quickly and how sharply to reduce the output of greenhouse gasses. The Senate was already on record, 95-0, as opposing any agreement that held advanced nations to higher standards than developing ones. The United States delegation to the talks was making no progress, despite prodding from Mr. Gore by telephone. Mr. Gore's aides unanimously urged him to keep his distance from what was shaping up as a failure and a humiliating blow to his prestige. He overrode their advice and flew to Japan, where he told developing nations he understood their concerns and instructed American negotiators to reach a deal at all costs. ''Kyoto was a shining moment for Al Gore,'' said Gregory Wetstone of the Natural Resources Defense Council. ''He disregarded the passionate requests of his staff that he steer clear of an international meeting that everyone thought was going to be a train wreck and jumped right in to work on what we all see as a huge problem.'' And global warming remains a contentious political issue. Governor Bush and his surrogates use Mr. Gore's position as a weapon against him in states dependent on automobile manufacturing and coal production; Mr. Gore issues warnings that Mr. Bush's industry-friendly policies could devastate the earth's fragile ecology. ''The certainty, the absoluteness with which he states his position is frightening,'' said Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, a global-warming skeptic and sponsor of the Senate resolution that undercut Mr. Gore's position in Kyoto. ''He's so absolutely sure he knows what's best.'' More than any previous vice president, Mr. Gore was granted ministerial power by President Clinton. In April 1993, Mr. Clinton deputized him to oversee much of American policy on Russia and the former Soviet Union. The mechanism was a panel that became known as the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission. The relationship between Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin remains a subject of much debate today. Republicans have harshly criticized the vice president about a confidential 1995 agreement between Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin that allowed Russia to export a large cache of conventional weapons to Iran. The deal appeared to undercut a law, co-sponsored by Mr. Gore when he was a senator, that required economic sanctions against countries that transfer arms to countries that sponsor terrorism, including Iran. The early years of the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission yielded undeniable benefits, along with controversy. The two men sped the removal of nuclear weapons from Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan, discussed the privatization of much of Russian state industry, supervised the conversion of some Russian military enterprises to civilian work and took early steps toward establishment of free markets and the rule of law. Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin furthered cooperation between the United States and Russia in space; their relationship helped avert a trade war in 1996 over frozen chicken parts. The process throughout was fraught with missteps, charges of corruption and Russian backsliding on commitments to reform. The Gore-Chernomyrdin channel was abruptly closed in March 1998, when Boris Yeltsin dismissed Mr. Chernomyrdin. But Mr. Gore's close ties to Mr. Chernomyrdin came into play again a year later when the United States was seeking an end to the latest Balkan conflict. Mr. Chernomyrdin was named Moscow's special envoy to Belgrade, with the task of trying to persuade Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw his troops from Kosovo. Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin met late into the night at Mr. Gore's residence, helping to fashion a diplomatic strategy, ultimately successful, to force Mr. Milosevic to back down. Throughout much of American history, the vice president has served chiefly as a reminder of presidential mortality. These eight years have proved another way of looking at the job. Mr. Clinton granted Mr. Gore broad power in areas of his expertise, and Mr. Gore applied it. It was in large measure Mr. Gore's advocacy that moved Mr. Clinton to give the Food and Drug Administration authority to regulate tobacco as a drug and to restrict marketing of cigarettes to minors. (The agency's authority was struck down this year by the Supreme Court, which said such power resides only in Congress.) Mr. Gore demolished Ross Perot in a debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement and helped secure passage of the trade deal over the objections of many Democrats in Congress. Mr. Gore's commitment to breast cancer research led to a doubling of federal spending on breast cancer research, prevention and treatment, to $599 million last year, according to the vice president's office.
 Editorial says final week of any hard-fought campaign brings out best and worst in candidates and their campaign strategists and advertising experts; says that in presidential race between Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush, there have been some unfortunate excesses; says while there is nothing inherently wrong with sharp exchanges and rhetorical attacks about character and stands on issues in a campaign, both sides are pushing the outside of the acceptability envelope; says in New York Senate race, attacks by Rep Rick Lazio on Hillary Rodham Clinton have air of desperation and perhaps panic about them; says Lazio's charge that Clinton cavorted with terrorists is both absurd and extreme; questions his assertion that he had nothing to do with telephone campaign conducted by New York Republican Party that sounded to callers like opinion poll; says there is no excuse for waging irresponsible smear attacks and then pretending that he is only an observer in their dissemination The final week of any hard-fought campaign brings out the best and worst in candidates and their campaign strategists and advertising experts. The presidential contenders are in full cry and have gotten down to the basics of their pitches to the voters, with Vice President Al Gore portraying Gov. George W. Bush as lacking experience and Mr. Bush asserting that Mr. Gore lacks integrity. Much is being made of their negative tone and the ever tougher messages delivered by telephone. But our view is that while there have been some unfortunate excesses, there is also nothing inherently wrong with sharp exchanges and rhetorical attacks about character and stands on issues in a campaign. Indeed they are a vital part of the process and a standard feature of the last week of most campaigns. But we hope that both sides in the presidential contest realize they are pushing the outside of the acceptability envelope. The attacks that have riled Republicans include a phone message for the Democrats, delivered by the actor Ed Asner, warning that Mr. Bush's Social Security scheme jeopardizes current benefits, which is certainly an exaggeration. Another Democratic telephone attack featuring a Texas woman who suggests that her husband's death resulted in part from Mr. Bush's failure to improve nursing homes was hyperbolic and in bad taste. The Gore campaign, meanwhile, is furious that the governor's team is running an ad featuring Ralph Nader's attacks on the vice president's environmental record, which looks to us like fair game. An independent pro-Bush group's ad, showing a girl plucking a daisy like the girl in a notorious 1964 ad against Barry Goldwater, and asserting that the Clinton administration had given away nuclear secrets, is an unjustified smear and the Bush campaign was right to ask for its withdrawal. The final week of any hard-fought campaign brings out the best and worst in candidates and their campaign strategists and advertising experts. The presidential contenders are in full cry and have gotten down to the basics of their pitches to the voters, with Vice President Al Gore portraying Gov. George W. Bush as lacking experience and Mr. Bush asserting that Mr. Gore lacks integrity. Much is being made of their negative tone and the ever tougher messages delivered by telephone. But our view is that while there have been some unfortunate excesses, there is also nothing inherently wrong with sharp exchanges and rhetorical attacks about character and stands on issues in a campaign. Indeed they are a vital part of the process and a standard feature of the last week of most campaigns. But we hope that both sides in the presidential contest realize they are pushing the outside of the acceptability envelope. The attacks that have riled Republicans include a phone message for the Democrats, delivered by the actor Ed Asner, warning that Mr. Bush's Social Security scheme jeopardizes current benefits, which is certainly an exaggeration. Another Democratic telephone attack featuring a Texas woman who suggests that her husband's death resulted in part from Mr. Bush's failure to improve nursing homes was hyperbolic and in bad taste. The Gore campaign, meanwhile, is furious that the governor's team is running an ad featuring Ralph Nader's attacks on the vice president's environmental record, which looks to us like fair game. An independent pro-Bush group's ad, showing a girl plucking a daisy like the girl in a notorious 1964 ad against Barry Goldwater, and asserting that the Clinton administration had given away nuclear secrets, is an unjustified smear and the Bush campaign was right to ask for its withdrawal.
 Op-Ed article by Robert M Dunn Jr says Vice Pres Al Gore is not getting bigger bounce from Clinton era's boom economy because many Americans only vaguely remember what it is like to be in serious recession, and young voters have never experienced one at all; says good times are increasingly being taken for granted, meaning incumbents are not getting credit for economic success these days; cites factors that could contribute to recession or two in next several years (M) Some Democrats and pundits can't figure out why Al Gore isn't getting a bigger bounce from the Clinton era's boom economy. The implication is that the vice president isn't politically deft enough to capitalize on this huge advantage. But that's not the real reason why the economic conditions haven't favored Mr. Gore. The explanation is far simpler: many Americans only vaguely remember what it's like to be in a serious recession, and young voters have never experienced one at all. Good times are increasingly taken for granted, meaning that incumbents are not getting credit for economic success these days. Some Democrats and pundits can't figure out why Al Gore isn't getting a bigger bounce from the Clinton era's boom economy. The implication is that the vice president isn't politically deft enough to capitalize on this huge advantage. But that's not the real reason why the economic conditions haven't favored Mr. Gore. The explanation is far simpler: many Americans only vaguely remember what it's like to be in a serious recession, and young voters have never experienced one at all. Good times are increasingly taken for granted, meaning that incumbents are not getting credit for economic success these days. Though of no solace to Mr. Gore, the perceived irrelevance of the business cycle to this year's presidential race is not permanent. Few if any economists believe the United States has repealed the business cycle. There is a recession out there waiting for us, whether the stock market's current problems augur one or not.
 The Democrats are further buoyed by the presence of Al Gore on the top of the party's ticket. And they contend that Mr. Lancman will benefit from the lopsided advantage Democrats have in registrations: 53 percent of the district's voters are Democrats compared with the 23 percent who are registered Republicans.
 The reassessment coincides with intense media scrutiny of Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign and his support for capital punishment in Texas, which leads the nation in executions. Mr. Bush has remained firm in his position that the system in his state is administered fairly; he has said that no moratorium is needed there and that he would oppose a moratorium on federal executions. Mr. Bush's Democratic opponent, Vice President Al Gore, also favors capital punishment. Mr. Gore has chosen not to make a campaign issue of Texas' executing more prisoners than any other state, has voiced no support for moratoriums in states other than Illinois and has said he does not think a federal moratorium  is needed ''at this time.''
 INVOKING A SAINT -- The man for all seasons found his name being invoked this election season as Dick Cheney noted yesterday that Pope John Paul II was about to proclaim St. Thomas More the patron saint of statesmen and politicians. And, the way Mr. Cheney told it at a Catholic high school in Rochester, Minn., the churchman who stood up to Henry VIII sounded just a little bit like Gov. George W. Bush. ''When the announcement was made at the Vatican last week, one politician present praised More as a figure who unites rather than divides, a man with great universal appeal,'' said Mr. Cheney, whose running mate likes to say that he is a uniter, not a divider. ''Today our world needs more Thomas Mores. Governor Bush and I can never live up to his standards, but we can try, and that is what we will do if we are elected next Tuesday.'' THE NUMBERS -- Vice President Al Gore wrapped up a two-day swing through Michigan and Wisconsin, while Gov. George W. Bush headed west, for states like California that traditionally vote Democratic. Here are the stats: Length of official day: Gore, 14 1/2 hours; Bush, 15 hours States visited: Gore, 2; Bush, 2 Cities/towns visited: Gore, 5 (Muskegon and Green Bay, Mich.; Fond Du Lac, Waukesha and Milwaukee, Wis.) Bush, 5 (Austin, Tex.; Albuquerque and Bosque Farms, N.M.; Burbank and Fresno, Calif.) Miles traveled: Gore, 248; Bush, 1499 Official events: Gore, 4; Bush, 4 Main message: Gore, prosperity is on the ballot; Bush, ''bringing America together,'' school reform. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN  Correction:  November 3, 2000, Friday  A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Tuesday about travel by the presidential candidates referred incorrectly to one city visited by Vice President Al Gore. It was Green Bay, Wis., not Michigan. A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Tuesday about travel by the presidential candidates referred incorrectly to one city visited by Vice President Al Gore. It was Green Bay, Wis., not Michigan.
 The president's comments, which have circulated in news reports and on the Internet in recent days, came at an inopportune time for the Gore campaign, which has been doing everything it can to avoid the taboo subject of impeachment.
 Handful of Web sites have sprung up promoting notion that supporters of Vice Pres Al Gore and Ralph Nader barter votes and even giving them forum to do so; idea is that backers of Nader in states where Gore and Gov George W Bush are running neck-and-neck would cast votes for Gore and help out man they see as better choice; in exchange, voter in sure Gore state would vote for Nader and help Greens reach 5 percent threshold party needs to qualify for federal funding (M) In a case of grass roots meets back room, a handful of Web sites have sprung up in last few weeks promoting the notion that supporters of Vice President Al Gore and Ralph Nader barter votes and even giving them a forum to do so. The idea is that backers of Mr. Nader, the Green Party presidential nominee, in states where Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are running neck and neck would cast their vote for Mr. Gore, and help out the man they see as a better choice. In exchange, a voter in a sure Gore state would vote for Mr. Nader and help the Greens reach the 5 percent threshold the party needs to qualify for federal financing. In a case of grass roots meets back room, a handful of Web sites have sprung up in last few weeks promoting the notion that supporters of Vice President Al Gore and Ralph Nader barter votes and even giving them a forum to do so. The idea is that backers of Mr. Nader, the Green Party presidential nominee, in states where Mr. Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are running neck and neck would cast their vote for Mr. Gore, and help out the man they see as a better choice. In exchange, a voter in a sure Gore state would vote for Mr. Nader and help the Greens reach the 5 percent threshold the party needs to qualify for federal financing. All three campaigns disavowed any connection with the sites, though a Bush campaign spokesman saw the Web sites as ''loosely organized by the Gore campaign.'' ''I'm sure it's one step removed,'' said the spokesman, Dan Bartlett. ''It shows the panic that has stricken through the Gore ranks.'' Gore campaign officials said the Democratic strategy has been to take aim at Nader supporters by emphasizing what is dear to them. ''We believe that many Nader voters are concerned about freedom of choice, the environment, and don't want to see those issues put at risk by a Bush presidency,'' said a Gore spokesman, Doug Hattaway. Battleground states where votes for Mr. Nader could undermine Mr. Gore are Oregon, Wisconsin and Minnesota, as well as Washington and Michigan to a lesser extent, Gore campaign officials said. At least five sites are dedicated to what some call ''Nader Trading.'' One, www.votexchange2000.com, allows one to enter a preference -- Gore-turned-Nader voter, or vice versa -- and an e-mail address. The site automatically provides a matching voter who had previously sent in a request. ''Before the debates, I really expected Gore to shine, and he hasn't,'' Mr. Porter said. ''We just got nervous about the situation, and I think that's what inspired us to actually do something.'' Mr. Porter acknowledges that the idea has a ''potential flaw.'' Traders remain anonymous, so there is no guarantee each side will follow through, or that Bush supporters might not try to manipulate the system. Participants are encouraged to contact each other to judge intent. ''I've been agonizing like a lot of progressive Democrats who have been excited by Nader's revitalization of progressive politics, but don't want to see Bush elected president,'' Prof. Raskin said. ''It occurred to me that there was a win-win scenario out there.''
 Political Notebook column comments on some little-noticed goings-on in campaign of Vice Pres Al Gore (M) All right, it never really went away. But more than two months after the televised smooch between Al and Tipper Gore at the Democratic National Convention that pumped a little blood into the vice president's pallid image, it suddenly seems that he can't get enough. All right, it never really went away. But more than two months after the televised smooch between Al and Tipper Gore at the Democratic National Convention that pumped a little blood into the vice president's pallid image, it suddenly seems that he can't get enough. On Sunday, Mr. Gore planted multiple wet ones on Mrs. Gore at a rally in East Lansing, Mich., before they set off on a two-day bus tour of Michigan and Wisconsin. He did it again during a Fox News interview taped that evening. And later that night, he leaned in for another kiss in Muskegon, Mich., in front of 15,000 people who roared their approval. But after the first one, Mrs. Gore playfully pushed her amorous husband away. Like every spouse ever caught out, Mr. Gore tried to explain himself. Pointing into the audience, he said to his wife: ''Look at that sign now. It says, 'Let us see the kiss.' Are you embarrassed? Once is enough?'' When the caravan stopped today in Chilton, Wis., there were more demands from the crowd for kisses. The vice president made as if to oblige, but Mrs. Gore, laughing, said, ''No, no.'' On Sunday, at least, Mr. Gore might have used the excuse of looking for a little warmth on a cold night, but he blew it, stripping off his suit coat and saying, ''I know it's chilly out here, but I'm feeling hot.'' In a much-dissected makeover early this year, Mr. Gore adopted a just-folks set of casual clothes, mostly in earth tones, in one of many bids to loosen up. But in the last few weeks, in the campaign's final sprint, the vice president has ditched the taupes and khakis, even in settings that invite informality, in favor of the dark suits, white shirts and ties that used to be his public uniform. With his wardrobe switch, Mr. Gore today echoed (no doubt unintentionally) another era and another politician. Before delivering a speech this morning on the sandy shore of Lake Michigan in Muskegon, the vice president strode across the beach in a suit, along with Mrs. Gore. It was reminiscent of a photo opportunity staged for Richard M. Nixon, in which he strolled down a beach wearing a suit -- an image that crystallized Nixon's reputation for being perpetually ill at ease. Mr. Gore should have been well aware of the Nixon parallel. Last month, on a beach in Florida, the vice president joked with two reporters and an aide about Nixon's beach walk. That day, he wore shorts and a polo shirt, and went barefoot. Chris Lehane, the campaign press secretary, said the change was nothing more than a bow to the cooler weather. When asked if Mr. Gore might be trying to look more presidential for the stretch run, Mr. Lehane said, ''I think you're looking too deeply into this.'' Mr. Gore drew 30,000 people last week to a rally in Madison, Wis. -- an extraordinary figure, by contemporary standards, for a small city -- more than 15,000 in Muskegon, and 11,000 tonight in Waukesha, Wis., according to the police in those cities. Last Thursday, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Mr. Gore's running mate, spoke to more than 5,000 people at a rally in Santa Fe, N.M. Gov. George W. Bush has also drawn larger audiences lately. Even as recently as the last hotly contested race, in 1992, Bill Clinton and Mr. Gore were speaking to large groups in midsummer, just after the Democratic convention. Whether the later appearance of big turnouts this year reflects the continuation of a long trend, or simply a lack of interest in this year's contest, is open to question. ''I just couldn't get into it before now,'' said Mike Kuhn, one of the throng cheering for Mr. Gore today in Green Bay, Wis. ''But I'm glad I came.''
 Vice Pres Al Gore campaigns in Wisconsin in ongoing struggle to blunt appeal of Ralph Nader and keep traditionally Democratic states in his column; sounds populist themes; photo (M) Power to the people was Al Gore's cry today as he trundled across the fading emerald farmland of Wisconsin in his ongoing struggle to blunt the appeal of Ralph Nader and keep traditionally Democratic states in his column. Power to the people was Al Gore's cry today as he trundled across the fading emerald farmland of Wisconsin in his ongoing struggle to blunt the appeal of Ralph Nader and keep traditionally Democratic states in his column. ''We need to give democracy back to you, the people!'' Mr. Gore declared at a lunchtime rally in front of the copper-domed courthouse in Green Bay. Senator Russell D. Feingold, the Wisconsin Democrat who -- with Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican -- has championed campaign-finance reform, gave Mr. Gore his endorsement today. And Mr. Gore spoke at length at his rallies about the importance of diminishing the effect of money in politics -- a major plank in the platform of Mr.  Nader, the longtime consumer advocate whose appeal to voters in states like Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan, Washington and Oregon could tip the election to Mr. Gore's rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. In an interview tonight, Mr. Gore said he had not tailored his message to win over Nader supporters. He also said he had ''not talked to a single person'' about trying to persuade Mr. Nader to get out of the race. On Tuesday, Mr. Gore is to fly from Milwaukee to Portland, Ore., where he hopes a last-minute rally can move that state his way. Carter Eskew, a top Gore strategist, said that Mr. Gore might break through to Nader voters with two particular themes -- discussion of campaign finance and a reminder that abortion rights are at stake in this election. Mr. Gore focused heavily on both. On the subject of revamping campaign finance, Mr. Gore said that the drug companies and insurance industry were backing Mr. Bush to protect their profits. ''It is morally wrong for the decisions about your health to be made on the basis of what is going to improve the bottom line for an H.M.O. rather than on the basis of what's best for your health,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The H.M.O.'s and the big insurance companies have been able to use their wealth and their political influence and power to convince a majority in the Congress to block a patient's bill of rights,'' he declared. ''They want to stay in control of the medical decisions. And they're supporting Governor Bush because they want him in control of the medical quality. I want to fight for you.'' Mr. Gore was not all earnestness today. He doffed his jacket at the Green Bay rally, telling the crowd,  ''It's chilly, but I'm hot, and I'm telling you, this election is hot!'' Off and on throughout the day, more than two dozen vehicles in the Gore bus caravan snaked southward through Wisconsin. After drawing a crowd of 30,000 people last week in Madison, Mr. Gore is gaining a slight edge over Mr. Bush, the polls show. Still, Mr. Nader continues to draw a fraction of the vote, which could prove crucial to Mr. Gore in the final balloting. The same is true in Michigan, where Mr. Gore began his day where it had ended the night before, in Muskegon. This morning, he stood on the shore of Lake Michigan in a blue suit and read a slightly retooled stump speech to about 200 people who were sitting on chairs planted in the sand, bundled up against the morning chill. The serene setting and low-key tone of the event softened an edge to the words that Mr. Gore summoned against Mr. Bush. He said that Mr. Bush would ''play games'' with Social Security and leave families ''worse off than they are today.'' Saying that his own smaller tax cut would allow the nation to pay down the debt, Mr. Gore said that Governor Bush's larger tax cut would ''repeat the past, like a broken record, letting the wealthiest Americans gorge themselves on tax cuts they don't really need.'' Americans ''deserve a president who champions all of the people and doesn't just cave in to the few,'' Mr. Gore said. And they ''deserve better than rubber checks to pay for runaway spending and a rubber stamp for the powerful interests.'' In the pledge department, Mr. Gore vowed to make government smaller, saying, ''I will not add to the number of people doing work for the federal government -- not even by even one position.''
 Text of remarks by Vice Pres Al Gore during campaign swing through Wisconsin in which he sounded populist themes (S) They want Governor Bush to be in control of the policy because they support him and he supports them. They know that I have never been afraid or unwilling to take on the H.M.O.'s or the insurance companies or any other powerful interest, if they are operating in a way that is contrary to what your best interest is.
