 Gore Campaign Challenges Bush's Ability to Be Leader  Vice President Al Gore's wife and his running mate -- but not Mr. Gore himself -- portrayed Gov. George W. Bush as too inexperienced to be president, an argument the Gore campaign hopes will help derail the Bush candidacy. Mr. Gore cast the presidential election as a chance for people to reject the influence of special interests, saying at a rally in Michigan, ''This country belongs to you, and I want to give it back to you.'' Mr. Bush's aides detailed plans for a last push to reach undecided voters as well as Republicans through telephone calls, mail and the use of surrogates like former President Bush, Barbara Bush, Bob Dole and Elizabeth Dole on the campaign trail. Prominent Democrats say Mr. Gore needs to spend the rest of his campaign promoting his role in the administration's economic successes. They say he has not capitalized on what they see as his best selling point: that he has the record and skill to keep the economy strong. Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore are trying to convince the rest of the world that each of them would step lightly in foreign affairs. Beneath their words, however, lie very different priorities, and probably very different styles, in managing America's relations with allies and enemies. Environmental, abortion-rights and gay-rights advocates kicked off a five-state tour aimed at persuading people thinking of voting for Ralph Nader that they should vote for Mr. Gore instead.
 Vice Pres Al Gore portrays presidential election as chance for people to reject special interests; wife Tipper and running mate Sen Joseph I Lieberman pronounce Gov George W Bush too inexperienced to be president; themes dominate during Gore bus tour through Michigan; he addresses black churchgoers, Reagan Democrats and throng of supporters in Muskegon; portrays Bush as captive of special interests; photos (M) Vice President Al Gore portrayed the presidential election today as a chance for people to reject special interests, while his wife and running mate pronounced Gov. George W. Bush too inexperienced to be president. Those two themes dominated the day as Mr. Gore scoured for votes throughout Michigan on a bus tour that had him speaking before black churchgoers in the morning, Reagan Democrats in the afternoon and a throng of about 15,000 supporters this working class city in Western Michigan. Vice President Al Gore portrayed the presidential election today as a chance for people to reject special interests, while his wife and running mate pronounced Gov. George W. Bush too inexperienced to be president. Those two themes dominated the day as Mr. Gore scoured for votes throughout Michigan on a bus tour that had him speaking before black churchgoers in the morning, Reagan Democrats in the afternoon and a throng of about 15,000 supporters this working class city in Western Michigan. ''You have the power,'' Mr. Gore said at an afternoon rally in East Lansing. ''You have the opportunity, because on that one day every four years, the special interests tremble at the thought that you will penetrate the smoke screen, that you'll see through the efforts to fool you, that you'll ignore the clever, the cleverly designed TV commercials.'' By contrast, Mr. Bush was off the campaign trail today. He spoke by satellite from his home in Austin, Tex., to a group of Hispanic Republicans in California. His aides, meanwhile, outlined what they called the largest ever Republican grass-roots effort to get out the vote. [Page A15.] While Mr. Gore was emphasizing what he wants to do as president, his campaign was trying to sow doubts about how Mr. Bush would perform in the job. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, Mr. Gore's running mate, made the round of Sunday talk programs to voice this emerging campaign theme, and Tipper Gore declared it to a few thousand people at a rally in Warren, Mich. ''It's not 'The Dating Game,' '' Mrs. Gore said, perhaps tacitly ceding the edge in likability to Mr. Bush. ''You don't have to fall in love with Al Gore -- I did that,'' Mrs. Gore said. ''What you need to do is figure out who you're going to vote for for president, and I know that you are going to weigh experience. That's important.'' ''I don't think Governor Bush is ready -- based on his experience, his record, his proposals in this campaign -- to be the kind of president that the American people need at this point in our history,'' Mr. Lieberman said on the ABC News program ''This Week.'' Mr. Gore did not talk about his opponent's qualifications, sticking to his vow not to personally attack Mr. Bush. But he did assail Mr. Bush's record and proposals, delivering sermons laced with lines from his stump speech at two black churches in Detroit. Describing Mr. Bush's tax-cut plan, he warned a church congregation that if Americans ''put our trust in that disproven, discredited, failed theory that says give it to those at the very top and ultimately it will work its way down, we tried that. Been there, done that, still paying the bill.'' As his campaign caravan cut through Michigan today, Mr. Gore pleaded for votes at every stop, portraying Mr. Bush as a captive of special interests like drug companies, the oil industry and the managed-care industry, and telling voters that Election Day was their chance to strike back. ''This country belongs to you, and I want to give it back to you,'' Mr. Gore shouted at the rally in Muskegon on the first day of a two-day bus caravan in Michigan and Wisconsin.  ''And if you elect me on Nov. 7, I will give it back to you.'' Casting his 24 years in political office as those of a crusader against the ''special interests,'' Mr. Gore added, ''I know where the rats in the barn are, and you know what, the rats in the barn know that I know, and that's why they're coming out trying to stop us.'' Mr. Gore's day began with a private meeting with two dozen representatives of Arab-Americans, who make up an important voting bloc in this state, and after the meeting, six endorsed him. James Zogby, president of the Arab-American Institute and chairman of the Arab-American Democratic Leadership Council, said that about 20 Arab community leaders would endorse Mr. Gore on Wednesday when he returned to Michigan. Some Arab groups have been concerned that Mr. Gore's selection of Mr. Lieberman as his running mate would make him biased in favor of Israel. ''He made it very clear that he was a friend of Israel,'' Mr. Zogby said. ''But he said, 'Look, I'm also a friend of Egypt, I've worked to promote job development in the West Bank,' '' a reference to Mr. Gore's having been a sponsor of a group called Builders for Peace, which is an Arab-American and Jewish-American alliance to promote investment in the West Bank. At the church services, Mr. Gore talked stump and Scripture as he sought to inspire the congregants to go to the polls for him. ''Paul wrote twice, to the Galatians and Second Thessalonians, 'Do not grow weary in well doing.' We have done well in the last eight years,'' Mr. Gore said from the pulpit at the Hartford Memorial Baptist Church. Continuing to quote, he said: ''But in due season we shall reap if we faint not.'' He found a new way to illustrate Mr. Bush's tax cut: ''My opponent proposes to spend more money on tax benefits to the wealthiest 90,000 multimillionaires than all his proposals to spend money on 90,000 public schools all across the United States of America.'' In the spring, Mr. Gore contended  that Mr. Bush lacked the experience to be president, but he has not made that argument for months, presumably for fear of being seen as breaking his vow not to personally attack the governor. Mr. Gore has even gone to some lengths to tell reporters that he is not making that argument. In a late-night flight on Saturday from Minneapolis to Romulus, Mich., Mr. Gore was asked about an editorial in The New York Times, which in endorsing Mr. Gore said that Mr. Bush was too inexperienced for the job. Nonetheless, Tad Devine, a top Gore strategist, said the campaign intended to capitalize on the ''tremendous sense of unease'' that voters feel about Mr. Bush's lack of experience. ''In many ways, Governor Bush is not up to the job of being president,'' Mr. Devine said, adding that while Mr. Gore's positions on issues would be the central argument for the vice president's election, the campaign would make the lack of experience the central issue against Mr. Bush. Mr. Devine also said that Mr. Gore would be linking Mr. Bush more directly with Congressional Republicans, an argument Mr. Gore began to make on Saturday in an address in Pennsylvania when he said a health care bill provided millions for health maintenance organizations but did not include patient protections. ''He will be tied in with the Republicans in Congress,'' Mr. Devine said. ''This is why he's having difficulty in Florida, after the Republican takeover, and it's why Gore is ahead there -- there's a perception that the Republicans in Washington have done some very bad things for programs that people rely on. This could be very damaging to Bush.''
 Vice President Al Gore has long been an advocate of dealing aggressively with global warming, which was the focus of his book, ''Earth in the Balance.'' He recently described global warming as a ''moral issue.'' Mr. Gore has done some campaigning on the issue and has proposed creation of an environmental trust fund, which, among other things, would provide incentives for the development of new technologies to limit emissions of greenhouse gases. Gov. George W. Bush has been somewhat equivocal when it comes to global warming. He has acknowledged that it is a problem. But in his second debate with Mr. Gore, the governor said, ''I don't think we know the solution to global warming yet and I don't think we've got all the facts before we make decisions.'' Mr. Bush opposes the Kyoto Protocol, which he has said is ''unfair to the United States.'' Nevertheless, he has offered a proposal that would require reductions in all pollutants from electric power plants, which scientists and environmental advocates see as an important step in the fight against global warming.
 Educators, parents and academics are questioning whether Texas public school system is truly producing better students as claimed by Gov George W Bush, who has made education signature issue of presidential campaign by boasting of rising test scores during his governorship and portraying state's system as blueprint for America; say test preparation is overwhelming curriculum in many school districts, and many state university officials complain large numbers of students are not prepared for college; other critics wonder whether reason why scores have improved may be because weaker students have simply dropped out; others question whether scores are inflated, because tests are padded with easy questions (M) It is also important to Gov. George W. Bush. From the day he began running for president, Mr. Bush has made education his signature issue, boasting of rising test scores during his tenure and portraying the Texas system as his blueprint for America. It is also important to Gov. George W. Bush. From the day he began running for president, Mr. Bush has made education his signature issue, boasting of rising test scores during his tenure and portraying the Texas system as his blueprint for America. But even as Mr. Bush has pointed to the scores, a growing number of teachers, parents and academics are questioning whether Texas's system is truly producing better students. The political rhetoric of the so-called Texas miracle in education seems high blown to many parents and teachers. Nor do they believe the other extreme, that the system is fundamentally failing. But many worry that the test has become so consuming that more meaningful instruction is often eclipsed in the rush for high scores. The test covers math, reading and writing, and is given in the 3rd through 8th grades and in 10th grade as a requirement of graduation. The number of students in all grades passing all sections of the test has risen to 80 percent this year, from 58 percent in 1995, when Mr. Bush took office. The biggest gains have been among black students, where the rate has gone to 67 percent from 31 percent, and Hispanics, to 72 percent from 39 percent. Although the Bush campaign strongly disputed the RAND study, pointing to an earlier, more favorable RAND report, some parents, like Carol Holst, were not surprised. Mrs. Holst's son is a fifth grader in a suburban Houston school where she said teachers spent six weeks ignoring subjects not on the test, like science and social studies, while preparing students for the TAAS. The shortage of such courses comes as Texas is struggling to better prepare students for college. Even as TAAS scores have gone up, the scores of Texas students on college entrance exams have been stagnant. The Bush campaign says those scores have remained flat because more students are taking the tests, considered a good sign, though the percentage of the overall enrollment taking the test has actually not changed. Many legislators credit Mr. Bush for emphasizing education and helping to strengthen the system. The issue of dropouts cuts directly to Mr. Bush's promise that the system ''leaves no child behind.'' State statistics show the dropout rate is nearly 15 percent, higher among blacks and Hispanics, while other studies question the state's counting system and put the rate above 30 percent. In September 1999, The El Paso Times published an investigation showing that more than 30,000 students labeled by the system as ''transfers'' were most likely dropouts. A study of big city schools by State Senator Gonzalo Barrientos, a Democrat, found that more incoming ninth graders dropped out than graduated on time. Although the state curriculum has become more rigorous under Mr. Bush, the test has not. Many administrators feared that the test would be tougher when the new curriculum was incorporated last year.
 Joanna Zahren, a freshman from a charismatic Christian family, knows more about presidential politics than ever before, because the newspaper is required reading in her political science class. She will drop off her ballot this weekend on a trip home to the mostly Republican town of Mooresville, N.C. She is leaning toward her family's choice, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, but worries that he is not up to the intellectual demands of the job. To some who run voter registration drives and encourage young people to vote, Mr. Bush and Vice President Al Gore have not done enough to make the issues relevant. ''There's no recognition of the issues young people care about, in any of these speeches,'' said John Dervin, the spokesman for Youth Vote 2000, a Washington-based coalition of organizations that promotes civic involvement by young people. ''It's almost like we aren't worth that extra couple of sentences. You throw out a $10,000 tax credit without saying, 'to keep you out of debt' or whatever.'' Both campaigns point to MTV appearances and traditional networks of student support, but spokesmen for both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore said their candidates did not tailor their messages when speaking on college campuses. ''What we've seen from Governor Bush and the Bush campaign is a strong and consistent message aimed at all Americans,'' said Ray Sullivan, a Bush spokesman. Some credit Mr. Gore with making a greater effort. Unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore agreed to participate in a 90-minute question and answer session on MTV. And at a rally in Madison, Wis., last week, he catered to the college town crowd with expressions like ''Hull-oh?'' But Mr. Gore is competing with Ralph Nader, whose change-the-system message and rock-star-studded rallies are credited with drawing a large youth audience, although some polls show that young people are no more likely to vote for Mr. Nader than are older adults. Still, at N.C. Central, a number of students said they had already voted in the campus's early polling station, which has had a steady stream of business. Travis Grady, a junior, was one who had cast his ballot for Mr. Gore. ''I don't want anything to change,'' he said. ''Clinton paved the way for us for the past three or four years. And Gore's going to be on the level.'' Except, perhaps, for a state bond referendum for higher education, there was no single issue driving students to the polls in North Carolina. For many, the decision-making process involved a painful weighing of many issues rather than a sudden epiphany. Most often, those who had settled on Mr. Gore said his intelligence was the reason; those firmly in the Bush camp frequently cited a Republican upbringing. Enthusiasm for the candidates as people was virtually nonexistent, with many students poking fun at rhetoric such as Mr. Bush's ''affirmative access'' or Mr. Gore's claim of inventing the Internet. ''I think they're both crackheads,'' said Jenny Jones, 27, referring not to drug addicts but to people who appear less than rational. ''I think they're a joke,'' she said, though she is planning to vote for Mr. Bush. Ms. Goodman had just come from volunteering at a shelter for families in trouble, and said her personal experiences had contributed to her concerns about welfare. The crystal chandeliers in the private home for the elderly where she had worked in her home town of Gastonia, N.C., for example, were too great a contrast with the shoddy conditions of the homes she had visited with her mother, a social worker. She said she will vote for Mr. Gore. Constance Lindsay, curled up in deep communion with a sofa in the student union at Duke University, said studying in Ghana had made her question why certain countries get more aid than others. Although she said she would vote, she was not convinced that the election's outcome would affect her. ''The one thing that did resonate with me is when Gore said he would give people $10,000,'' she said, referring to the candidate's proposal to make some higher education expenses tax-deductible. ''Because I know how expensive it is to be here.'' Erica Smiley, 20, would seem to fit the profile of a Nader fan: she is a leader among progressive students at U.N.C., active in the Young Communist League and describes herself as a ''queer woman of color.'' But she has been urging members of the Progressive Student Coalition to vote for Mr. Gore, to prevent a Bush victory. ''I don't mind Gore's personality,'' was how Ashley Steed, a Duke senior who was weighing what she called Mr. Gore's willingness to help people against Mr. Bush's toughness on crime and support of a strong military, put it. ''I think he gets a hard rap. But Bush gets a hard time for the mistakes that he's made. They'll get the power and the respect that they want from the office, not their personalities.''
 Tony Schwarz letter on Oct 27 article deplores both Republican perversion of ad he created in 1964 presidential campaign and frightening and inaccurate language ad uses to attack Al Gore and Pres Bill Clinton Re ''Infamous Political Commercial Is Turned on Gore'' (news article, Oct. 27): As the creator of the original ''Daisy'' advertisement in 1964, I am shocked by the Republican commercial that features my concept of a little girl picking petals off a daisy and fades to the countdown and mushroom cloud of a nuclear bomb. Re ''Infamous Political Commercial Is Turned on Gore'' (news article, Oct. 27): As the creator of the original ''Daisy'' advertisement in 1964, I am shocked by the Republican commercial that features my concept of a little girl picking petals off a daisy and fades to the countdown and mushroom cloud of a nuclear bomb. We did not mention the opponent, Barry Goldwater, or the Republican Party. However, in the Republicans' attack ad, Al Gore and Bill Clinton are vilified with frightening and  factually inaccurate language, and with images of nuclear warheads pointed against our homes and children. I am very disturbed at both the perversion of my own ad for such scurrilous purpose and even more so by the perversion of truth.
 Special report, World Views, compares foreign policy positions of Vice Pres Al Gore and Gov George W Bush; Gore has repeatedly portrayed himself in debate performances as one who now believes in vigorous American intervention abroad, in reversal of Democratic philosophy for most of time since end of Vietnam War; described how Clinton administration's slowness to move in Bosnia drove him to conclude that America must be prepared to prevent disaster, and how two successive global financial crises reshaped his understanding of central role economic stability must play in foreign policy agenda; Bush has woven middle ground between battling factions of Republican Party: internationalists who support engagement with great powers and isolationists deeply suspicious of UN, International Monetary Fund and World Trade Organization; is far more tentative about committing American troops, and rules out their use for what he dismisses as nation building; Gore has long record in Senate and as Vice President; Bush as governor has had Mexico, whose long border with Texas is major matter of state and local politics, as his only real foreign focus; photos (L) If elected president, Al Gore says he will use America's military power to halt Bosnia-style massacres, its economic influence to press failing states to adopt democracy, and the carrot of trade accords to encourage adoption of Western-style labor and environmental standards. If elected president, Al Gore says he will use America's military power to halt Bosnia-style massacres, its economic influence to press failing states to adopt democracy, and the carrot of trade accords to encourage adoption of Western-style labor and environmental standards. George W. Bush, in contrast, argues that an overextended American military should gradually pull out of the Balkans -- a step that the Europeans view as abandonment. He insists on charging ahead with a national missile defense system -- which Russia and China have vowed to defeat by building up new nuclear forces to overwhelm defensive interceptors. Yet Mr. Bush, asked in the second presidential debate to describe his philosophy for projecting American power, sounded startlingly like Mr. Gore. ''If we are an arrogant nation, they will resent us,'' he said. ''If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us.'' Mr. Bush has woven a middle ground between two battling factions of his party -- internationalists who support engagement with great powers like China and isolationists who are deeply suspicious of the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization. Drawing on the advice of Gen. Colin L. Powell, widely viewed as a potential secretary of state in a Bush administration, Mr. Bush is far more tentative about committing American troops and rules out their use for what he dismisses as nation building. ''There may be some moments when we use our troops as peacekeepers, but not often,'' he said in the final presidential debate. In the second debate he suggested a broader philosophical disagreement with Mr. Gore: ''I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say, 'This is the way it's got to be.' '' Any comparison of foreign policy between the two candidates is inherently unbalanced: Mr. Gore has a long record, in the Senate and as vice president, while during Mr. Bush's time as governor, his only real foreign focus has been Mexico, whose long border with Texas is a major matter of state and local politics. Mr. Gore is always eager to mention his extensive dealings with foreign leaders and to analyze international events; he granted an hour-long interview for this article. Mr. Bush took four weeks to consider repeated invitations to be interviewed on his foreign policy views. In the end he declined. The Texas governor has traveled frequently to Mexico, and says that as president he would focus on Latin America far more intensively than the Clinton Administration. But beyond those trips Mr. Bush, now 54, has left America's shores only three times in his adult life. He spent five or six weeks in China in 1975, on a break from graduate school when his father was American envoy to Beijing. When his father was president, he led an American delegation to the Gambia for a celebration of the country's independence. The Bush campaign also provided a list of 150 foreign officials Mr. Bush has met with in Texas and elsewhere, mostly diplomats and trade officials, but also representatives of Russian energy firms. He saw the foreign minister of Russia, Igor Ivanov, this year. Mr. Bush's aides say these meetings have left him at least as well prepared for the presidency as three past governors: Bill Clinton, Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter. Nonetheless, Mr. Bush makes foreign policy by committee, and prefers to have his coterie of advisers answer all the questions. Mr. Gore's eagerness to place America's imprint on the world has clearly grown in his seven years in the vice presidency, which have featured dozens of trips abroad and many meetings with world leaders. White House advisers recall him making an impassioned plea to President Clinton in the summer of 1995 to threaten bombing Serbian forces after they overran a United Nations safe area in Bosnia, a moment that one aide said was now ''seared on the front of Al Gore's brain.'' The former United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, recalls bringing Mr. Gore to meetings about how to confront Japan on opening its economy ''so that I would sound like only the second-most vociferous guy in the room.'' What Mr. Bush derides as nation building, Mr. Gore calls a natural evolution, decades later, of the Marshall Plan -- when American willpower and capital, and some American troops, helped rebuild Europe. That difference was accentuated this month when Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said the Republican contender would, if elected, gradually pull the remaining American troops out of the Balkans, after consulting with NATO allies. That prompted Mr. Gore and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright to shoot back that Mr. Bush would squander a nascent American victory in rebuilding the former Yugoslavia, where there are now some 11,400 troops, less than 20 percent of the total peacekeeping presence in Bosnia and Kosovo. Lurking just beneath the surface of that dispute are questions that both candidates have left unanswered. Mr. Bush has never defined what kind of mission is in the ''vital national interest.'' Mr. Gore has never said how long he would keep troops in place to build a democratic state. Mr. Bush, in short, won't say when he'll wade into a crisis, and Mr. Gore won't say when he'll get out. These positions reflect, in many ways, the advisers who surround the two men. Mr. Gore depends heavily on Leon Fuerth, his national security aide for two decades, who urged him to break with the Democrats and vote for going to war with Iraq in 1991. Richard Holbrooke, the United Nations ambassador, supported Mr. Gore's ill-fated run for the presidency in 1988, a political risk one aide says ''the vice president has not forgotten.'' He is often mentioned as candidate for secretary of state. And Mr. Gore has grown closer to Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers, the architect of the Clinton administration's biggest financial interventions, from the Mexican bailout to the Asian crisis. Mr. Bush relies heavily on Ms. Rice and a large cast of other graduates of his father's administration. Their influence is evident: Long before Mr. Bush ever criticized the International Monetary Fund, another close adviser, former Secretary of State George P. Shultz, said it should be shut down. Mr. Bush has made it clear that he will go ahead with a missile defense shield no matter what America's allies think -- and despite the harm it might inflict on America's fundamental relationships with Russia and China. Mr. Gore has repeatedly expressed a desire to incorporate environmental and labor rules in every future trade accord -- even though poorer nations view that as an unvarnished effort to assure that developing nations remain less competitive with American manufacturers. Gore and Globalization Not surprisingly, Mr. Gore tries to portray himself as the candidate best prepared to delve into the newest and most complex territory of foreign affairs, the challenges of economic globalization. The vice president's aides whisper that Mr. Bush's advisers are lost in the thicket of 1980's era problems, and are unprepared for a world in which global capital flows can cause as much havoc as global arms sales. In a speech last spring in Boston, Mr. Gore charged that his rival was ''stuck in a cold war mindset,'' that ''continues to view Russia and China primarily as present or future enemies.'' At one point he said that ''Governor Bush's foreign policy is noticeably blank.'' Mr. Gore has never repeated that charge, but his aides do what they can to sow doubts about Mr. Bush's competence as a potential world leader and a recent New York Times poll indicated that roughly half of American voters have their doubts on that score. Mr. Bush's campaign officials say that in the second presidential debate their candidate established himself as respectably conversant in the major international issues of the day. Mr. Bush himself was comfortable enough to joke shortly afterward about his trouble wrapping his tongue around the names of world leaders. ''I was especially pleased that Mr. Milosevic has stepped down,'' he said after the Yugoslav leader bowed to a street revolt. ''It's one less polysyllabic name for me to remember.'' Mr. Gore, in his interview, showed that he indeed has absorbed seven years of daily intelligence briefings -- and that he can name names with ease. He spoke with authority about the differences between the separatist movements in two parts of Indonesia, and discussed what kind of opposition movements in Iraq the United States could exploit to help unseat Saddam Hussein. But Mr. Gore frequently passes up opportunities to describe a sweeping vision of how he would position the United States in the world. Mr. Clinton, by contrast, has mastered that patter, rarely missing a chance to draw the link between economic integration and the spread of capitalism and democracy. Mr. Gore knows Asia well. He talks about his priorities there more crisply than many of his foreign policy advisers do. (Sometimes, in fact, he is too crisp: When he backed anti-government protesters in Malaysia two years ago, using their rallying cry of ''reformasi,'' in a speech, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad deftly used the moment to whip up a nationalist backlash against America that squashed the reform movement.) But as one of his informal advisers says, ''all the imagery is bad for him'' in Asia. Raising broad visions of how to deal with China, for example, invites the Bush campaign to play up the photos of Mr. Gore bowing at the Buddhist temple in California that became the subject of lengthy campaign finance investigation. (The temple was linked to Taiwan, not China, but such subtleties are lost in campaigns.) So Mr. Gore's campaign has indicated that he would continue in the Clinton mode of using economic ties to encourage China to greater openness, democracy and capitalism. But as China's leaders have stepped up the arrest of political and religious dissidents in the last year, Mr. Bush has homed in on the Clinton administration's oratory about a ''strategic relationship'' with Beijing. (Mr. Gore does not use that term.) ''China is a competitor, not a strategic partner,'' Mr. Bush often says. And he has indicated that he would sharply depart from the Clinton script in two ways: by pursuing the national missile defense, which China vigorously opposes and would counter with more and better intercontinental missiles, and perhaps by announcing a break with longstanding policy and pledging that the United States would come to Taiwan's aid if it was attacked by China. There has been more talk about Russia, where Mr. Gore played a leading role, though a commission he co-chaired with former Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin. Mr. Gore knew from the outset that an active role in guiding Russia toward a new role in the world would distinguish him from any potential rival for the presidency. And the effort had some early successes, including an agreement to return to Russia the nuclear weapons that had been stationed in Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan. But American hopes of guiding economic reforms went off-track, and recent disclosures indicate that Mr. Gore failed to get Russia to halt arms sales to Iran by this year. Mr. Bush argues that the administration was naive, ''focusing our aid and attention on a corrupt and favored elite'' that sometimes failed to fulfill promises made to Mr. Gore. ''When Bill Clinton compared Boris Yeltsin in Chechnya to Abraham Lincoln, what signal did that send to states around Russia's periphery?'' asks Ms. Rice, a Russia expert. ''When the Russians didn't follow the favorable and attractive script we wrote for them, we continued to pretend they were carrying out their part of the bargain. They lost respect for us as a result.'' Mr. Bush has offered only generalities about how he would handle Russia differently, and has never said how he would persuade Moscow to accept the missile defense system that could require quitting the Antiballistic Missile Treaty. (Ms. Rice says that Mr. Bush would review ''the size of the American arsenal,'' and perhaps reduce it). On the Middle East, Mr. Bush has gone to some lengths not to criticize Mr. Clinton's handling of a volatile and deteriorating situation -- at least not directly. And Mr. Gore has been almost completely uninvolved in managing the failed Camp David talks and diplomacy that followed -- until he flew back to Washington 10 days ago to sit in on the meetings planning Mr. Clinton's summit meeting with Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and Mr. Barak. Indirectly, though, Mr. Bush has thrown a few jabs. ''You can't put the Middle East peace process on our timetable,'' he said in a not-so-subtle suggestion that Mr. Clinton rushed into Camp David in hopes of a comprehensive agreement before he left office. Mr. Bush stumbled when asked in the first debate how he would handle a stock market crisis -- and then announced that he would summon his top advisers. Mr. Gore pointed to Robert E. Rubin, the former treasury secretary, in the audience, a man regarded in Washington and on Wall Street as a cool manager of such crises. He seemed to suggest that he would call his old friend -- now a top executive at Citigroup -- and then he changed the subject. ''He clearly wasn't prepared for that one,'' one of his close economic advisers said. In his interview, Mr. Gore was similarly vague about his standards for economic intervention. ''I'm not sure there is a handy cookie cutter on that one,'' he said. ''I think there are so many variables that you have to know it when you see it.'' Ms. Rice said in an interview that Mr. Bush's first criteria for bailing out a foreign nation would be ''whether the countries we are helping have the political will to make economic reforms.'' Clearly Russia in 1998 -- a bailout Mr. Gore helped coordinate -- did not fit her test. Other Bush aides tick off economic criteria closely parallel to that of Mr. Summers. Bush and the I.M.F. Mr. Bush is more leery of the role of the International Monetary Fund. ''I think a lot of times we just spend aid and say we feel better about it and it ends up being spent the wrong way,'' he said in the second presidential debate. He charged that the fund -- which the United States effectively controls as its largest shareholder -- often sends the message to international bankers that ''if you make a bad loan, we'll bail you out.'' He also charged that much of the $4.8 billion lent to Russia in 1998 ended up ''in the pockets'' of Mr. Chernomyrdin. Mr. Chernomyrdin denied it, threatening to sue Mr. Bush for defamation. The I.M.F. says independent auditors have found no evidence that the money was diverted, and the Bush campaign has cited no evidence to back up the charge. Ms. Rice insisted that Mr. Bush's broader point was correct. ''Once the Russians were flaunting it, cooking the books, and once their privatization effort went awry, we kept pumping I.M.F. money in,'' she said. ''That weakened the I.M.F., and it allowed the Russians to have a kind of drug on which they became dependent. It was a mistake. A big one.'' Economic sanctions create a sticky problem for both candidates. Mr. Gore defends the slow lifting of sanctions against North Korea, saying, ''Incredibly enough, we have seen a positive response to initiatives there,'' but refuses to consider trying the same approach on Cuba. ''I'm a hard-liner on Castro,'' he said, ticking off the Cuban leader's list of offenses, and ignoring a similarly long list for North Korea. Cuba, of course, is a highly emotional issue in Florida, whose 25 electoral votes are hotly contested. So Mr. Bush has taken a similarly tough line. But he has also distanced himself from the views of his running mate, Dick Cheney. In 1998, while running Halliburton, the oil services company,  Mr. Cheney said unilateral sanctions almost always fail and hurt the competitiveness of American businesses. He called for lifting sanctions on Iran, saying the United States could no longer rely on them ''as a club that we can use to punish those who disagree with policies or goals or objectives of the United States.'' Mr. Bush has said pointedly that he is not ready to lift sanctions on Iran. Mr. Gore is accustomed to weaving between his free-trading boss and the labor unions that make up his core support. Those unions have opposed every major free trade initiative by the administration, from the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 to the China trade bill that passed last month, and some threatened to bolt from Mr. Gore. In the end, they backed down. This year, Mr. Gore backed the China trade legislation, just as he backed the North American trade pact in 1993. It did not include standards for protecting workers or preserving the environment that he said in his interview he would, if elected, try to get included in all trade negotiations. A free trade agreement with Jordan, signed by Mr. Clinton last week, is the first to include all of those standards in the core of the accord. Mr. Bush insists that he would aggressively press new accords -- without labor and environmental provisions -- and expand the North American pact to include much of the rest of Latin America. In short, he sounds like a true free-trader. Yet in coal country, Mr. Bush has also bent over backward to draw in union workers who have become disaffected with Mr. Gore. Earlier this month he visited a coal-rich area of West Virginia, and was introduced by a laid-off miner who is president of a United Mine Workers local. ''This is an administration that fears coal,'' he said. ''They see it as a threat. I see it as an opportunity to make us less dependent on big, foreign oil.'' Correction:  November 6, 2000, Monday  A chart last Monday with an article comparing the foreign policy views of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year President Ronald Reagan sent troops to stabilize Lebanon. It was 1982, not 1984. A chart last Monday with an article comparing the foreign policy views of Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year President Ronald Reagan sent troops to stabilize Lebanon. It was 1982, not 1984.
 Aides of Gov George W Bush outline dimensions and details of aggressive final push to reach undecided voters and Republican stalwarts through telephone calls, mail and use of surrogates; say about 62 million phone calls and 110 million pieces of mail will reach voters by November 7, culminating efforts by campaign and state Republican parties, begun about two weeks ago; photo (M) As Gov. George W. Bush spent his last full day in Texas before Election Day, his aides today outlined the dimensions and details of an aggressive final push to reach undecided voters and Republican stalwarts through telephone calls, mail and the use of surrogates. Clearly trying to cast Mr. Bush's bid for the presidency as an unstoppable force, they said that about 62 million phone calls and 110 million pieces of mail would reach voters by Nov. 7, the culmination of efforts by the Bush campaign and state Republican parties that began about two weeks ago. As Gov. George W. Bush spent his last full day in Texas before Election Day, his aides today outlined the dimensions and details of an aggressive final push to reach undecided voters and Republican stalwarts through telephone calls, mail and the use of surrogates. Clearly trying to cast Mr. Bush's bid for the presidency as an unstoppable force, they said that about 62 million phone calls and 110 million pieces of mail would reach voters by Nov. 7, the culmination of efforts by the Bush campaign and state Republican parties that began about two weeks ago. ''We are launching the largest-ever Republican grass-roots effort,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, in a conference call with reporters today. Mr. Fleischer and other Bush aides also said high-profile surrogates including former President George Bush, Barbara Bush, Bob Dole and Elizabeth Dole would hit the campaign trail in full stride this week. Both the former president and the former first lady were scheduled to make stops in Florida, including a joint appearance there with their son Jeb, the Florida governor. Their oldest son, the Texas governor, is trying to beat back a surprisingly strong challenge in Florida from Vice President Al Gore. Mr. Fleischer emphasized that the Texas governor's itinerary over the first three days of a final, eight-day campaign swing would bring him to several states that were initially expected to be more favorable to Mr. Gore than they turned out to be. Mr. Fleischer's obvious intentions were to project an aura of strength around the Bush campaign and to give Mr. Bush the luster of an inevitable winner, images that could sway some undecided voters in the end. Between Monday and Wednesday, Mr. Bush's schedule includes stops in California, Oregon, Washington, Minnesota and Iowa. And while California in particular remains a long-shot for Mr. Bush, his campaign continues to lavish attention on the nation's most populous state, drawing attention to polls there that are tighter than most political analysts had predicted and making a statement of sorts about the campaign's confidence. In fact, Mr. Bush's only public event today was a satellite address to a gathering of California Latinos for Bush in Anaheim Hills. In those remarks, he seized on new language and evidence to press his charge that Mr. Gore's proposed programs would make the federal government too large. ''My opponent would add between 20 and 30,000 additional federal employees,'' Mr. Bush said, using a figure that the Gore campaign has disputed. In fact, Mr. Gore last week pledged a freeze on the hiring of new federal employees if he is elected president. But Mr. Bush said: ''The effort's already begun. The I.R.S. recently announced it's hiring more than 2,000 new employees.'' ''You have to wonder if the administration might be on a hiring spree so they can announce a freeze next year,'' Mr. Bush added. Kym Spell, a spokeswoman for the Gore campaign, dismissed that notion, along with any suggestion that Mr. Gore was not committed to a lean federal government. Mr. Bush's father used to talk about the ''Big Mo,'' meaning momentum, and that was clearly what the Bush campaign, encouraged by Mr. Bush's slight lead in several national polls, was trying to signal today. And if they managed to rattle their opponent in the process, all the better. As part of that endeavor, Mr. Bush's aides accused Democrats and the Gore campaign of adopting a divisive, negative tone that bespoke desperation. Mr. Fleischer said that Mr. Gore had ''brought politics to an unprecedented low,'' but that the Bush campaign would end their campaign on a positive, inspirational note. Mr. Bush's theme for his last eight days on the campaign trail, starting on Monday, will be ''bringing America together,'' and he will attempt to make the case, as he goes day by day through issue by issue, that he can unite Republicans and Democrats to solve tough problems. Part of his argument, aides said, would be that he uses hope to appeal to people while Mr. Gore uses fear. Tad Devine, a top strategist with the Gore campaign, said that despite all the Bush campaign's talk about California being competitive, the Gore campaign was on solid ground there. He said that the principal reason for a visit that Mr. Gore plans to the state this week is to tape the ''Tonight'' show. He went on to note that the Bush campaign has its own troubles in states that it was expected to dominate, citing recent polls in Florida that show Mr. Gore with an edge and signs that Mr. Bush's strong standing in Ohio has softened. Mr. Bush's aides, asserting that they had the campaign well in hand, went into extraordinary detail about some Republicans' activities, noting that Republicans will have planted about 1.2 million yard signs and distributed about 1.5 million bumper stickers by Election Day.
 A GENERAL ENLISTS -- In a final-week blitz of television advertising, automated telephone calls and mass mailings, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has enlisted the help of General Norman H. Schwarzkopf, his father's top field commander in the Persian Gulf war. The general, now retired, made some appearances with Governor Bush earlier in the presidential campaign. But now he is on the phone, telling voters in recorded messages to disregard all those disparaging remarks Vice President Al Gore has been making about the governor's plans for Social Security. ''You trusted me with the lives of your sons and daughters,'' General Schwarzkopf says in the call, ''so trust me on this. I can promise you that George W. Bush will never do anything to hurt seniors or threaten Social Security. Don't be fooled by the scare tactics.'' THE NUMBERS -- On the next-to-the-last Sunday before the election, Gov. George W. Bush spent the day relaxing at his Texas ranch, except for addressing a group of Hispanics in California via satellite, while Vice President Al Gore stayed on the campaign trail, working the Great Lakes region. The numbers: Length of official day: Gore, 13 hours; Bush 2 hours States visited: Gore, 1; Bush, 0 Official events: Gore, 6; Bush 1 Cities/towns visited: Gore, 4 (Warren, East Lansing, Grand Rapids and Muskegon, Mich.) Bush, 0 Miles traveled: Gore, 172; Bush, 0 Main message: Gore, environment and prosperity; Bush, getting out the vote
 Prominent Democrats, frustrated and worried that Vice Pres Al Gore has failed to capitalize on what they see as his best selling point, say he must devote closing week of presidential campaign delivering urgent pitch about his role in Clinton administration's economic successes; several, including Gore's most enthusiastic supporters, are nearly unanimous in belief that he has not benefitted politically from flourishing economy; say best way to overtake Bush is to convince voters he has record and skill to keep economy strong (M) Frustrated and worried that their candidate has failed to capitalize on what they see as his best selling point, prominent Democrats say Vice President Al Gore needs to devote the closing week of the campaign to delivering an urgent pitch about his role in the administration's economic successes. Several of these Democrats, including many of Mr. Gore's most enthusiastic supporters, offered a nearly unanimous verdict: the vice president has not benefited politically from the flourishing economy. And the best way for him to overtake Gov. George W. Bush, they said, is to convince voters that he has the record, and the skill, to keep the economy strong. Frustrated and worried that their candidate has failed to capitalize on what they see as his best selling point, prominent Democrats say Vice President Al Gore needs to devote the closing week of the campaign to delivering an urgent pitch about his role in the administration's economic successes. Several of these Democrats, including many of Mr. Gore's most enthusiastic supporters, offered a nearly unanimous verdict: the vice president has not benefited politically from the flourishing economy. And the best way for him to overtake Gov. George W. Bush, they said, is to convince voters that he has the record, and the skill, to keep the economy strong. ''He has to talk about the success of the last eight years,'' Mr. Breaux said, ''and say that Bush has not given the country enough reason for a change. He should have been emphasizing more the economic successes of the administration. That would have not allowed the Bush people to paint him as a big-government candidate.'' Scoffing at polls showing that the economy ranked below issues like education and health care among many voters, Gov. Gray Davis of California said: ''All the more reason to remind them of their great and relatively recent good fortune. Most voters remember things were not too good when President Bush left office.'' In a poll released today by ABC News, as well as in other recent surveys, voters said that Mr. Gore was no more likely to protect the economy than Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore has not entirely neglected the administration's success with the economy in his speeches and has talked about it increasingly in recent weeks. But he has not made it the central theme of his campaign. As the campaign entered its final week, with most polls showing that Mr. Bush holds a slight lead nationwide, the friendly counsel of these Democrats took on a sense of anxiety. While several Democrats said they were still optimistic that Mr. Gore would prevail, they expressed fear that Mr. Gore, who was moving ahead in the polls only a month ago, had been outsmarted by Mr. Bush and had let his advantage slip away. Today, Mr. Gore, who is growing more intense in his oratory, implored congregants at a black church in Detroit to support him on Election Day. ''You have the ability to make the difference,'' Gore said at Hartford Memorial Baptist Church. Shedding their usual spin, some of the Democrats interviewed in recent days uttered something that is obvious but that is not often heard from respected party officials: that a Bush victory is possible. Even William M. Daley, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, allowed as much in an interview on Friday. ''Nobody really knows,'' Mr. Daley said of who will be the next president. ''I don't know where it's going to be tomorrow, much less 11 days from tomorrow. Anything's possible. The only definite is it's statistically impossible for Nader to win -- or Buchanan.'' In some ways, Mr. Gore's failure to capitalize on the economy was the result of his desire to stand on his own and chart a course separate from President Clinton, and the scandals that marred the administration. Many Democrats argued that he had never found a way to embrace the administration's economic legacy without throwing his arms around Mr. Clinton himself. Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, a former Democratic national chairman, said Mr. Gore has been focusing on the economy but that ''it hasn't been resonating effectively.'' Mr. Dodd explained: ''One of the difficulties is to talk about it and not talk about the president at the same time. It makes it an awkward conversation. Al Gore knows if we're talking about a third Clinton term, that would be a great liability. It makes your discussion about this somewhat stilted.'' In the interviews, prominent Democrats said Mr. Gore had not sought their advice. But they said they had voiced concerns to his advisers that he had not sufficiently sought credit for the economy. Gov. James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina, a Democrat, said Mr. Gore needed to talk more not only about the economy but also about what Mr. Bush could do to harm it. ''He's got to be very aggressive in talking about what Americans have at stake and how Bush's tax cut is very risky,'' Mr. Hunt said, adding that the economy needs ''to be the issue that brings the election home for Al Gore and the Democrats.'' Several Democrats said that after the Democratic convention and into September, they were lulled into a sense of comfort that many voters had finally decided that Mr. Gore was the best candidate and that he had the edge with the president and a booming economy behind him. But they said they were now in the unexpected position of fighting to hang on to the White House in light of the vice president's lackluster debate performances and his failure to lay out his achievements, as well as the Bush campaign's attack on his credibility. While many Democrats still predicted that Mr. Gore would prevail, as a group the vice president's party seemed more nervous than the Republicans. Leading Republicans were much less likely than Democrats to offer advice for Mr. Bush in the final week. It could be that the Republicans were more self-assured. Mr. Dodd said he and several Democratic colleagues met informally late last week and ''everyone made a little wager'' over who would win. ''The overwhelming consensus was Gore's going to win this in a narrow election.'' But he said a couple of senators said that ''they felt in their gut it was too close to call.'' Mark Fabiani, Mr. Gore's deputy campaign manager, took issue with those who argued that the vice president should dwell more on the past. ''I can understand the frustration of people,'' Mr. Fabiani said. ''But at the same time, everyone has to understand that Al Gore will be elected based upon his vision of the future. People naturally are going to give him credit for the last eight years. It doesn't help to be standing up and taking credit for yourself.'' David Worley, chairman of the Georgia Democratic Party, said it was important for Mr. Gore to campaign independently of Mr. Clinton. He also argued that Mr. Gore should emphasize the economy and his role in its success. ''He needs to keep focusing on the issues and the economy,'' Mr. Worley said. ''As long as he does that he'll do fine.'' Some Democrats argued that if Mr. Gore had concentrated more on the economy, the Republicans would have had less success raising questions about his personality and stirring up the controversy over whether he embellishes facts. ''People are looking for something to finally resolve this personality thing,'' said Senator Russell D. Feingold of Wisconsin, who counsels Mr. Gore to avoid attacking Mr. Bush harshly. ''He should just stay focused on the issues, be presidential in his manner without overdoing it, but definitely point out that he knows how to do the job and that he's results-oriented.'' Mr. Feingold was not as harsh as other Democrats in saying that the vice president had squandered opportunities. In the wake of the impeachment, he said, he had convinced himself for a year and a half that Mr. Gore could never win because of the Clinton connection. ''I think Gore has done as well as he could with the cards that were dealt him,'' he said. ''Don't you remember a year ago, a lot of the stories said, 'Gore is sinking like a stone.' They tried to write the guy off.'' Some Democrats said Mr. Gore's advantage in the polls after the convention evaporated not because he avoided talking about the past but because of other factors. Governor Davis said he understood why Mr. Gore did not want to focus on Mr. Clinton or the past.
 Republican vice presidential candidate Dick Cheney exudes more relaxed demeanor as Republicans' confidence grows that they will win White House; is beginning to enjoy himself, usually at Vice Pres Al Gore's expense; photo (M) ''No, Gore,'' one of the women told him. ''It rained when he started to speak,'' she added, laughing. There are a lot of laughs just now in Bush-Cheney country, where confidence about next week's election is so high that both Republican candidates felt they could take Sunday off. The Republicans' only campaign event was remarks by satellite by Mr. Bush. At a joint appearance in Wisconsin today, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presidential nominee, seemed barely able to contain himself, mugging, morphing, making funny faces at the crowd, his antics throwing Mr. Cheney's quiet-man persona into even greater relief -- and vice versa. (''What a solid citizen!'' Mr. Bush said of his vice-presidential pick.) Still, there was no mistaking the fact that Mr. Cheney, whose grudging campaign style has been well documented, has started to enjoy himself, too -- usually at Vice President Al Gore's expense. On the stump and off, he shows an open lack of respect for the competition that Mr. Gore does not reciprocate. And watching Messrs. Gore, Bush and Cheney campaign on back-to-back days only highlights the striking difference in tone, with Mr. Gore rarely mentioning his opponents by name. ''He claimed he invented the Internet,'' Mr. Bush said again today, though that itself is an exaggeration of Mr. Gore's boast about his role in its development. Then he mocked Mr. Gore's statement that he is against big government. ''I knew the man was prone to exaggeration,'' Mr. Bush said, ''but not to that extent.'' When he began by saying that the ''end to the Clinton-Gore era'' is around the corner, the crowd chanted: ''No More Gore! No More Gore!'' Standing behind him, Mr. Cheney's 6-year-old granddaughter, Kate Perry, waved a tiny American flag and booed at the mention of Mr. Gore's name. Then Mr. Cheney mentioned President Clinton again -- ''Al Gore, Joe Lieberman and Bill Clinton are drooling at the prospect of getting their hands'' on the surplus, he said, ''because they want to spend it.'' His audience went wild, shaking red, white and blue pompoms. Mr. Cheney told the group, ''I was intrigued when I got to Memphis'' on a recent campaign swing. ''There were Al Gore and Joe Lieberman. I thought that was his home state. They have no home state! Maybe that's why they're in Washington, D.C.'' Then he said, as he had before, that in the debates, Mr. Gore changed so radically from one occasion to the next that Mr. Bush was ''up against three different guys and he beat them all.'' He got a laugh when he said, ''If you've got a solar panel on your house, you get tax relief,'' though the Republicans offer a similar provision. And there were boos when he went on to say, ''But if you're a stay-at-home mom taking care of your kids, you don't get anything,'' though Mr. Gore's plan does offer financial incentives to stay-at-home parents. He ended by talking about his own favorite subject, the military. Mr. Gore disagrees with Mr. Cheney's view that the readiness of American troops has declined under the Clinton administration.
 Carol Greitzer letter on Oct 26 article scores Ralph Nader's attacks on Vice Pres Al Gore Re ''Under Fire From Democrats, Nader Assails Gore's Record'' (news article, Oct. 26): Rather than castigate Al Gore for ''promises broken'' on the environment, Ralph Nader and his followers should marvel that there were so many progressive accomplishments in the Clinton-Gore administration -- despite the machinations of a very hostile Congress. Re ''Under Fire From Democrats, Nader Assails Gore's Record'' (news article, Oct. 26): Rather than castigate Al Gore for ''promises broken'' on the environment, Ralph Nader and his followers should marvel that there were so many progressive accomplishments in the Clinton-Gore administration -- despite the machinations of a very hostile Congress.
 Group of advocates of environment, gay and abortion rights kicks off five-state tour to woo people thinking of voting for Green Party candidate Ralph Nader into voting for Vice Pres Al Gore (M) Joined by rock stars and flanked by signs proclaiming ''Remember the Supreme Court,'' a group of advocates of the environment, gay rights and abortion rights today kicked off a five-state tour aimed at people thinking of voting for Ralph Nader. Their message: Don't do it. Vote for Al Gore. ''We appeal to Nader voters across the nation to reconsider their vote,'' said Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest organization of gay men and lesbians. Other rallies are planned in New Mexico, Minnesota, Oregon and Wisconsin. At today's rally, Ms. Birch argued that Vice President Al Gore was vastly preferable to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Joined by rock stars and flanked by signs proclaiming ''Remember the Supreme Court,'' a group of advocates of the environment, gay rights and abortion rights today kicked off a five-state tour aimed at people thinking of voting for Ralph Nader. Their message: Don't do it. Vote for Al Gore. ''We appeal to Nader voters across the nation to reconsider their vote,'' said Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest organization of gay men and lesbians. Other rallies are planned in New Mexico, Minnesota, Oregon and Wisconsin. At today's rally, Ms. Birch argued that Vice President Al Gore was vastly preferable to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. ''There is a Grand Canyon between these men,'' Ms. Birch said of the two major-party candidates. ''From the environment to a woman's right to choose to basic civil rights, we believe that great harm, in fact severe harm, will come with a Bush presidency.'' The rally at the Paramount Theater, featuring a free concert by the singer Melissa Etheridge, was part of an increasingly energetic and even agitated campaign started by Mr. Gore's allies in the labor, environment, gay and women's movements. They fear that votes for Mr. Nader, the Green Party nominee, could tip the presidency to Mr. Bush. ''Today the dead hand of Richard M. Nixon is still writing Supreme Court decisions in the body of Chief Justice William Rehnquist,'' said Robert Cox, president of the Sierra Club, who predicted that a Bush presidency would have ''the most far-reaching consequences for the environment in 20 decades.'' Alice Germond, vice president of the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, said that Bush appointees to the Supreme Court could help eliminate abortion rights in state after state where legislatures would vote against them. One women in the crowd, Jodi Mumford, of Olympia, Wash., said she was distressed by what she considered Mr. Bush's and Mr. Gore's lack of respect for lesbian rights. Although the speakers had made her ''think about'' her vote, she said she would probably stick with Mr. Nader. And a Nader supporter handing out leaflets, Joe Katroscik, repeated  arguments made by many Nader supporters, who say that a Bush victory might just invigorate what Mr. Katroscik described as a ''true progressive movement'' in the country.
 William Safire Op-Ed column says Democrats have become desperate as presidential camapign winds down; focuses on 'savaging' of Green Party candidate Ralph Nader, who may be siphoning votes away from Vice Pres Al Gore (M) The Desperation Index, a reliable election indicator, shows the Gore campaign rocketing up the desperation charts. Only yesterday, Joe Lieberman -- after renewing his offer of respects to America's most virulent anti-Semite -- found nothing wrong with a TV spot paid for by the N.A.A.C.P. that associates George W. Bush with dragging a black man to death. While Republicans condemn such below-the-belt ads by extremist supporters, desperate Democrats accept all the racist or senior-scaring help they can get. The Desperation Index, a reliable election indicator, shows the Gore campaign rocketing up the desperation charts. Only yesterday, Joe Lieberman -- after renewing his offer of respects to America's most virulent anti-Semite -- found nothing wrong with a TV spot paid for by the N.A.A.C.P. that associates George W. Bush with dragging a black man to death. While Republicans condemn such below-the-belt ads by extremist supporters, desperate Democrats accept all the racist or senior-scaring help they can get. Nowhere is Democratic desperation more evident than in the liberals' savaging of Ralph Nader. The same crowd that stood on principle for Pat Buchanan's right to draw votes from Bush now frantically accuses Nader of hypocrisy, egomania and unforgivable spoilerism for daring to offer voters a chance to voice their protest. Certainly the enthusiasm for Nader in ''safe'' Democratic states has given disaffected liberals a place to go other than to Bush. But let's take a closer look at the conventional wisdom as expressed by Minnesota's Democratic chairman, Mike Erlandson: ''I don't think there are a lot of Bush votes hiding in the Nader vote.'' I think the legion of liberal Nader-bashers is mistaken. I suspect that at least one in three of those in the electorate now leaning toward Nader would otherwise be voting for Bush. Who are these right-wing protest voters? Among them are hard-hat union types, frustrated at the support of Nafta by both Bush and Gore and the fecklessness of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. With the Reform Party split and the collapse of Buchanan's campaign, they have gravitated to Nader; the more the liberals attack him, the more that iso-conservatives are willing to overlook his far-out greenishness. Nader declares ''the use and sale of Social Security numbers by private firms and most government agencies should be banned.'' Gore says so, too, but Clinton has waffled. Bush's Senate ally, New Hampshire's Judd Gregg, is pushing a bill to exempt commercial snooping firms from state laws that would protect citizens from the sale of S.S.N.'s. Privacy advocates, long disillusioned by the Democratic White House, were stunned at how easily Republican leaders were manipulated by credit-agency lobbyists. Contrary to Nader's claim that he's running against Tweedledum and Tweedledee, Bush and Gore differ on plenty -- taxation, education reform, missile defense -- but where they fail to compete, the consumer advocate offers millions a way out of apathy.
 Polly Morrice Op-Ed article on Texas public school system, which Gov W Bush boasts of high test scores and advocates as blueprint for American schools; discusses findings of study by Rand Corp, which found that while Texas schoolchildren, particularly those from minority groups, posted dramatic increases in state test scores during Bush's tenure their gains on leading national exam have been less impressive; photo (M) Seemingly insensitive, her comment merely pointed up what teachers, administrators and parents in Texas have long known: that results on the TAAS, or the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills test, are all important. As the presidential race grows tighter, this statewide standardized test, given yearly to public school children from third grade through high school, has achieved notoriety as well. A study released last week by the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit research group, claims that while Texas schoolchildren, particularly those from minority groups, have posted dramatic increases on their state test scores during George W. Bush's tenure as governor, their gains on a leading national exam have been less impressive. The rise in state scores,  researchers speculated, might reflect the practice of ''teaching to the test,'' that is, drilling children on  questions typical of those on the exam. Seemingly insensitive, her comment merely pointed up what teachers, administrators and parents in Texas have long known: that results on the TAAS, or the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills test, are all important. As the presidential race grows tighter, this statewide standardized test, given yearly to public school children from third grade through high school, has achieved notoriety as well. A study released last week by the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit research group, claims that while Texas schoolchildren, particularly those from minority groups, have posted dramatic increases on their state test scores during George W. Bush's tenure as governor, their gains on a leading national exam have been less impressive. The rise in state scores,  researchers speculated, might reflect the practice of ''teaching to the test,'' that is, drilling children on  questions typical of those on the exam. A spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, who has campaigned on his education record, dismissed the RAND results as ''dead wrong.'' Al Gore seized on the study gleefully, denouncing ''illusory test scores that might elevate the reputations of politicians.'' Unlike Al Gore, though, I'm not ready to declare that Texas schools aren't making progress. RAND itself released a study in July claiming that Texas students rank high nationally, especially in math. Could it be that relying on a single study, like relying on a single standardized test, doesn't give a complete picture of children's educational achievement?
 Mr. Rutelli, who was anointed in a balloon-filled political convention this month before embarking on a ''listening tour'' of Italy that included preparing a Caprese salad on a cooking show on the Italian version of MTV, faces an oddly similar problem. (That tape may never be aired, however, because the producers belatedly realized that the new law on equal access would oblige them to invite many other chef-politicians who are far less appetizing to their youthful viewers). The media-savvy mayor has already sought the advice of Jeremy Rosner and Tal Silberstein, political consultants who work with Stan Greenberg, Al Gore's pollster.
 ''It's not 'The Dating Game.' You don't have to fall in love with Al Gore -- I did that.'' ''It's not 'The Dating Game.' You don't have to fall in love with Al Gore -- I did that.''
 What is more, if it appears that Vice President Al Gore is going to win New York easily -- this poll suggests that he is 21 points ahead of George W. Bush in New York, 52 percent to 31 percent -- then Democrats may not bother to turn out in the numbers Mrs. Clinton needs to win the race. If the percentage of voter turnout falls near 45 percent, then Mrs. Clinton's edge in the Times/CBS News Poll shrinks to just a few percentage points.
 But it was a departure of sorts for Archbishop Egan. Since his installation four months ago, he has largely maintained a low-key profile, although he did issue a statement on Oct. 1 against the federal Food and Drug Administration's approval of the abortion pill RU-486. He shied away from direct political commentary at the recent Alfred E. Smith Memorial Dinner, an annual archdiocesan event that drew Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Cardinal O'Connor had often used the dinner as a platform to express his political views.
