 William Lara, who met the president when both were studying political science in a postgraduate course a decade ago and is now one of his closest political advisers, said: ''Like Hugo Chavez I am from the plains, which is a place that has very few trees. So when a plainsman sees a tree, his first impulse is to look behind it to see if someone is waiting there to ambush him. Hugo Chavez has that characteristic.'' Ms. Disenhouse graduated from the Yeshiva of Flatbush and Hunter College, and received a master's degree in chemistry from the University of Washington. She became involved with the Green Party in 1995.  Her work in the 1996 presidential campaign, in which Mr. Nader let the Green Party use his name but did little else, was, she acknowledges, ''frustrating.'' But her efforts in the 1998 gubernatorial campaign helped to win the Green Party a place on the New York ballot. VIOLENCE -- One beheading, many stabbings and a sleet of gore. (Where's your sense of humor?)  SEX -- The sex act is continually flaunted and discussed and partially performed. Genitals are on view.  PROFANITY -- Any obscenity you've ever heard (or most).  FOOTNOTE -- On the LCD (lowest common denominator) scale, the film rates a 9, saved from a 10 by a passing attempt at wit now and then. Vulgarity is celebrated in all forms, from the sexual to the intestinal, with an emphasis on bowels. Drugs are heavily in use and there are leaden racial jibes and stereotyping. FLAX HARVEST, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3 p.m. at the Lefferts Homestead Children's Historic House Museum, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue near Empire Boulevard, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, (718) 965-6505. The flax crop will be harvested from the garden in preparation for September's Harvest Fair. The Lefferts, the house's 18th-century owners, spun flax into linen, their main cash crop. (The seeds are used for linseed oil.) Also taking place Sundays through August, the storytelling series ''Summer Songs and Stories,'' at 2 and 3 p.m. Free. ''NEW URBAN SCULPTURE.'' The Commons, Metrotech Center, between Jay Street and Flatbush Avenue, downtown, (212) 980-4575. Through Oct. 1. ''FIVE SCULPTORS.'' Long Island University, 1 University Plaza, corner of Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Fort Greene, (718) 488-1198. Through Oct. 31. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. ''He went on to write 'Rififi in Tokyo,' 'Rififi in San Domingo,' 'Rififi in Flatbush' and so on.'' Today, while much of the road to Riaba remains hidden under overgrown trees and bush, workers are digging up and paving over the way to Malabo. A new port for the oil companies is being built here. If some of them are stock characters, she gives all but a couple a self-awareness that makes them richly entertaining in an ornery way. And she has a good poet's sense of when to leave a message unspoken, for example, when a Russian immigrant braiding her small black daughter's hair tries to persuade her to ignore racial slurs hurled at her by their Flatbush neighbors.