 The West Africans will be trained as light infantry, ready to ''get off the roads and into the bush,'' the Pentagon official said. Blueberries are a completely native American crop, but the kind most common today originated in the 1920's, when Elizabeth White, the enterprising daughter of a cranberry farmer in Pemberton, N.J., set out to improve upon the wild huckleberries that grew in the forest thickets and swamps. She selected cuttings and bred bushes that form the largest, sweetest-tasting berries, with the darkest blue color and the tiniest seeds. In collaboration with Dr. Frederick Coville, a botanist in the federal Agriculture Department, who had also been working to improve the huckleberry, she developed the modern blueberry. These are called high-bush blueberries to distinguish them from the wild, ground-hugging low-bush variety common in Maine and New England. In Hammonton, a hundred pallets of blueberries, about 50,000 pounds, is barely a few  hours' work for Dennis Doyle's team of roughly 1,000 pickers, who move down the rows with quick-fire efficiency, nudging each berry off the bush into a can or bucket, to be consolidated in sturdy yellow plastic lugs. Mr. Doyle, a former president of the Tru-Blu Cooperative in New Lisbon, N.J., which packages and markets berries, is the product manager for the Atlantic Blueberry Company, which bills itself as the largest family-run blueberry farm in the world. Its 1,300 acres produce nearly a quarter of the state's annual yield. Harvesting and selling blueberries takes only 60 days, but growing them requires steady, year-round toil. Cultivated blueberry bushes (Vaccinium corymbosum) grow for three years before they become fully productive and produce for about eight years before they must be replaced. Like grapevines, each bush must be pruned and tended by hand each winter. The soil must be weeded and irrigated, its chemical composition monitored to keep acidity balanced, and insects and fungi must be warded off.  And then there are mammals to contend with, particularly deer, and birds. Most of the fresh berries Mr. Worrell sells are picked by hand, because they command a better price. Machine harvesters, both the deluxe, Zamboni-like model and the smaller kind towed by a tractor, are boxy contraptions that straddle the bushes, brushing berries off with spring-loaded feelers. The berries collect in a trough, and a conveyor deposits them in a bin. When she wasn't on the forklift, Ms. Sansone was on the phone, fielding calls from buyers for supermarkets and cajoling growers to harvest more berries. In her role as  the Tru-Blu inspector, she picked through a pallet of pint containers and removed a picture-perfect sample: rotund berries with taut skins and perfect bloom, the powdery, silvery appearance of a blueberry still on the bush.