 MALLIS-Vera. Loving wife of Maxwell, mother of Stephanie, Fern and Joanne, grandmother of Brooke, Victoria and Alexandra. Also sister, aunt, sister-in-law, and great friend of many. She is now somewhere wonderful with a garden hose in her hand, washing down the street and spraying everyone who walks by. She is loved by all and will be missed forever. Services Thursday, July 6th, 1PM, at IJ Morris, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, New York, 718-633-0400. MALLIS-Vera. Loving wife of Maxwell, mother of Stephanie, Fern and Joanne, grandmother of Brooke, Victoria and Alexandra. Also sister, aunt, sister-in-law, and great friend of many. She is now somewhere wonderful with a garden hose in her hand, washing down the street and spraying everyone who walks by. She is loved by all and will be missed forever. Services Thursday, July 6th, 1PM, at IJ Morris, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, New York, 718-633-0400. Q.  In my western New York garden I used native viburnums, partly because they are supposed to be more pest-resistant. Now, I find that my arrowwood and cranberry bush viburnums are being attacked by something. The leaves look more like lace tatting, and underneath some of them I am finding small larvae. If native shrubs are more pest-resistant, why are they being attacked? Is there something I can do about it?  A.  Native shrubs and trees are normally better adapted to the resident pests as well as to the climate, but the viburnum leaf beetle (Pyrrhalta viburni) is a stranger who has come to dinner. Q.  In my western New York garden I used native viburnums, partly because they are supposed to be more pest-resistant. Now, I find that my arrowwood and cranberry bush viburnums are being attacked by something. The leaves look more like lace tatting, and underneath some of them I am finding small larvae. If native shrubs are more pest-resistant, why are they being attacked? Is there something I can do about it?  A.  Native shrubs and trees are normally better adapted to the resident pests as well as to the climate, but the viburnum leaf beetle (Pyrrhalta viburni) is a stranger who has come to dinner. Most vulnerable to the beetle are arrowwood (Viburnum dentatum), European cranberry bush (V. opulus), American cranberry bush (V. trilobum) and, to a lesser degree, Sargent viburnum (V. sargentii), and their cultivars.