 The Sydney guides I prefer also tell visitors intriguing things they might miss, like what stages the Sydney Harbour Bridge was built in and in what time spans, or tips about the different styles of Aboriginal art. De rigueur, too, are detailed accounts of excursions to nearby areas, like the majestic Blue Mountains about 65 miles to the west and the breathtaking juxtaposition of bush and waterways in Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park about 19 miles to the north. In 1934 the magazine House and Garden published designs for new kinds of houses by several leading architects -- including a Prairie-style copper-clad house by William Van Alen. In September 1935 a letter writer named Herman Lazarus wrote to The New York Times predicting that metal houses would take over the market -- he said he had seen one erected in Flatbush in 12 days by only three men. If you prefer to let someone else do the driving, there's the Bushmobile. It carries 24 passengers -- from infants to seniors -- and is emblazoned with the motto of Dieter Hartmann, its German operator: ''Ve get U there when others would not dare!'' Mr. Hartmann is a tour operator with a unique resume. He migrated to Australia as an engineer and then decided to live in the bush with his wife and another couple. They built a cabin deep in the forest and subsisted for several years entirely on food they hunted and gathered themselves. ''I was the guinea pig for the plants we found,'' he says. ''I would eat it, and if I didn't get sick, then we knew it was safe.'' Doreen Weisenhaus and Gene Mustain travel article describes striking changes since 1993 to Homebush Bay section of Sydney, Australia, as result of upcoming 2000 Olympic Games, continuing economic prosperity and in anticipation of millennium events and Australia's upcoming centennial celebration; photos (M) It is an area of wetlands, grassy fields and eucalyptus forest about a half hour's train ride from downtown. Aborigines know it as the place between sea and mountains, the place that divided the coastal people from the forest people. After the English arrived  in 1788, it became the pathway to the Blue Mountains and the vast, harsh land beyond. A settler named it Homebush; the country was the bush and this was his home. Over time it became the site of a salt mine, a slaughterhouse, a prison, an ammunition depot and the municipal dump. It is an area of wetlands, grassy fields and eucalyptus forest about a half hour's train ride from downtown. Aborigines know it as the place between sea and mountains, the place that divided the coastal people from the forest people. After the English arrived  in 1788, it became the pathway to the Blue Mountains and the vast, harsh land beyond. A settler named it Homebush; the country was the bush and this was his home. Over time it became the site of a salt mine, a slaughterhouse, a prison, an ammunition depot and the municipal dump. In a few more weeks, after an ingenious makeover, Homebush Bay, as it is now called, will become the main site for the Games of the XXVII Olympiad. It is the pride of Sydney and the most dramatic proof of the new city that has blossomed in the bright light of Olympic preparation. About 70 percent of the action will be held in Homebush Bay, in strikingly sleek steel-and-glass structures that seem to float and soar at the same time, including Stadium Australia, with its 110,000-seat capacity one of the largest facilities in Olympic history.  Most of the 15,000 athletes, coaches and officials will live a long javelin's throw away in solar-powered town houses and apartments on streets named after Olympic heroes like Michael Jordan and Muhammad Ali. A couple days earlier, a musician at the harbor's Northern Territory and Outback Centre had given our son a lesson on playing the didgeridoo, an Aboriginal musical instrument made from small logs found in the bush that have been hollowed out by termites. The center was an Aboriginal arts and cultural exhibition when we visited seven years ago, but  attendance fell off, a clerk told us, and the owners had to try something new. Until recently, the Aborigines, who make up about 2 percent of the country's 19 million people, remained in the background of modern Australian life. Most still live in the bush and suffer high rates of unemployment, poverty and illiteracy. But an Aboriginal rights movement has gained strength as the Olympics draw near.  One catalyst was a 1997 government report describing how, during much of this century, about 50,000 children of full or mixed Aboriginal blood were forcibly taken from their parents and placed with white families or institutions in a government-directed effort to assimilate them into white culture. Spectators who come to see Freeman go for gold and other Olympics visitors will find buses and trains  their best bets: Private cars will be banned in the city center and Homebush Bay. Many buses and trains will serve the sporting sites (Olympic ticketholders travel free), and you can get around the city by ferry, taxi, bus, commuter train and monorail. At Kibbutz Kabri, a glorious setting of grassy lawns, spreading trees and flame-red bougainvillea bushes that looks down from rocky hillsides toward Haifa, almost all the refugee militiamen hail from Merj 'Uyun. Some were senior officers, majors and lieutenant colonels, others high-ranking members of the militia intelligence units associated with the worst abuses against civilians that occurred in the occupied zone. Jodi Wilgoren is a national education correspondent for The New York Times.