 Outside the station, at Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, the scene was one of controlled chaos last night, with dozens of emergency vehicles swarming around the normally busy intersection and about 30 passengers waiting on a triage line as the police barked orders at them. In an anecdote meant to illustrate George W. Bush's ''practical intelligence'' (front page, June 19), we're told that he was able to name all 55 fellow fraternity pledges during a hazing. So why wasn't he able to name a handful of world leaders during the famed ''ambush interview''? In an anecdote meant to illustrate George W. Bush's ''practical intelligence'' (front page, June 19), we're told that he was able to name all 55 fellow fraternity pledges during a hazing. So why wasn't he able to name a handful of world leaders during the famed ''ambush interview''? Mr. Bradford said the Branch Davidians had ambushed the 80 officers involved in the first raid on Feb. 28, 1993. He said Mr. Koresh had trained them to use weapons in anticipation of just such a confrontation, and quoted him as telling his followers, 'If you can't kill for God, you can't die for God.' '' On a recent school day in the Morrisania section, students from Middle School 158, working like Virgil's bees, planted beets and added flowers between the apple tree and the rose bushes in a garden on Union Avenue. ''We're planting marigolds around the tomato plants to keep the bugs away,'' said Jennifer Davila, 12, one of more than 150 sixth graders who began tending the quarter-acre plot this spring. BUSH TOPS $90 MILLION MARK -- Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign continues to shatter fund-raising records, topping the $90 million mark when receipts for May are included. But most of the money has already been spent and the Texas governor continues to beat the bushes for more. Campaign officials announced yesterday that Mr. Bush raised $6 million in May and spent $4.9 million, leaving him with $7.1 million in the bank. Vice President Al Gore reported that he had raised only $587,802 in May, and had spent $1.3 million. He was left with $8.2 million, out of $37 million raised over all during the campaign. Mr. Gore expects to qualify for $15 million in federal matching funds, bringing his total preconvention fund to the $40.5 million spending cap placed on candidates who accept federal money. Mr. Bush, who is not accepting federal money, expects to spend nearly twice as much before the Republican National Convention, which starts on July 31. After the conventions, candidates must stop fund-raising and will be given $67.6 million in federal funds to spend on the general election. BUSH TOPS $90 MILLION MARK -- Gov. George W. Bush's presidential campaign continues to shatter fund-raising records, topping the $90 million mark when receipts for May are included. But most of the money has already been spent and the Texas governor continues to beat the bushes for more. Campaign officials announced yesterday that Mr. Bush raised $6 million in May and spent $4.9 million, leaving him with $7.1 million in the bank. Vice President Al Gore reported that he had raised only $587,802 in May, and had spent $1.3 million. He was left with $8.2 million, out of $37 million raised over all during the campaign. Mr. Gore expects to qualify for $15 million in federal matching funds, bringing his total preconvention fund to the $40.5 million spending cap placed on candidates who accept federal money. Mr. Bush, who is not accepting federal money, expects to spend nearly twice as much before the Republican National Convention, which starts on July 31. After the conventions, candidates must stop fund-raising and will be given $67.6 million in federal funds to spend on the general election. ''There's no report of her yet,'' Mr. Kirschhoch said. ''They have intensified their search throughout the island.'' Mr. Kirschhoch met Monday with F.B.I. agents in New York and handed them fliers with his daughter's picture, the reward amount and a toll-free telephone number. He said the agents agreed to help distribute them in neighborhoods with large numbers of Jamaicans, like Flatbush in Brooklyn and Jamaica in Queens.