 DAVID HAZELTINE-JOE LOCKE QUARTET, Up Over Jazz Cafe, 351 Flatbush Avenue, at Seventh Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, (718) 398-5413. Two solid young mainstream players, on piano and vibraphone -- the sort of guys who you used to see at good old Bradley's, when it existed -- lead a quartet that includes the bassist Essiet Essiet and the drummer Tony Redus. Sets are tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30 and midnight; cover charge is $15; and there is a $5 minimum (Ratliff). PARK SLOPE, Brooklyn, covers the architecture and history of this landmark district. Meets tomorrow at 1 p.m. on the southwest corner of Flatbush Avenue and Plaza Street West. Fee, $12; $10 for students and the elderly. Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours. Information: (212) 439-1090. ''SURFACE TRANSIT.'' It was smart of the organizers of the first New York Hip-Hop Theater Festival to make Sarah Jones's one-person play its centerpiece. Ms. Jones first presented it a couple of years ago in the East Village, and since then she and the show have grown. Among artists most respected by other hip-hop poets and performers, Ms. Jones has the clearest sense of distance; she can satirize the phenomenon in ways that open it up for people who think there is something mysterious about it. The eight characters she creates include an octogenarian who burns with the desire to be with it, whatever ''it'' is; a Russian immigrant trying to persuade her small black daughter to ignore racial slurs hurled at her by their Flatbush neighbors; a West Indian black woman with a British accent who pops into a studio for an MTV spot audition; and a white policeman who abuses women and hates gay men but could not possibly have anything against gays because his best friend from childhood ''is one of those'' (2:00). P. S. 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, (212) 477-5288. Wednesdays through Saturdays, at 8:30 p.m.; also 11 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. Tickets: $25; $15 student tickets with identification (D. J. R. Bruckner).