 Not quite up to the level of the rest of the meal was gored gored, a generous bowl of cubed beef marinated in red wine and rosemary, then sauteed in nitir kibe (clarified butter), with onion, garlic, chili pepper and herbs. The meat, despite all the cooking, was tough and the sauce oily. Even the injera couldn't neutralize it. 380 Flatbush Avenue Extension The Olympic site at Homebush is away from the city center; getting there will be a challenge. But once there, visitors will be dazzled by the main stadium and especially the Aquatic Center. Already, swimmers are raving about the speed of the pool and the spacious surrounds. For the next five days we hiked and camped at about 13,000 feet and above. We moved slowly, drank plenty of water and thus avoided altitude sickness. We crossed two more passes; the higher was Sinche La, at more than 16,000 feet (by this time free of snow). We saw Himalayan griffons -- vultures with 10-foot wing spans -- coasting the thermals over a valley; a covey of gray-and-white blood pheasants crossed our path, the males striking with red legs and tails. There were thousand-foot waterfalls, firs with purple or indigo cones and wild rose bushes with giant scarlet hips. We saw no other trekkers, but did encounter families of yak herders on the move, the women with butter churns strapped to their heads. And don't underestimate the fun of a plastic baby pool or the sprinkler. Ms. McManus said her children loved it when she turned on the sprinkler system in the yard and they could run from spigot to spigot getting a squirt. Lemonade stands, making ice pops from juice and looking for butterflies near the butterfly bush are also favorite pastimes, she said. Or, more to the point, can the speed horse Red Bullet ambush Fusaichi Pegasus and destroy his chances of sweeping the Triple Crown? Or, more to the point, can the speed horse Red Bullet ambush Fusaichi Pegasus and destroy his chances of sweeping the Triple Crown? At the Ryland Inn, the main garden consists of two fenced acres that produce vegetables, herbs, fruits and ornamental and edible flowers. Another unfenced acre is home to mulberry and elderberry bushes.  The head gardener, Chip Shepherd, uses the ''French intensive gardening'' system, growing plants close together in raised beds full of organically enriched soil to produce larger yields in relatively small spaces. A walk through Mr. Shepherd's beds is a lesson in the art of composing a kitchen garden. Bare earth is rarely visible. Magenta bee balm, the herb best known as the flavoring in Earl Grey tea, leaps out of one bed, as bees hover over its blossoms. The purple blooms of thyme sprawl along the ground. Red-leafed lettuces face upward, their heads resembling many-petaled flowers. A row of basil plants with green and purple varieties planted alternately runs alongside a bushy row of orange-flowered nasturtiums, creating a combination that would be equally at home on a plate or in a vase. Mr. Boehlert began his gardening career at the age of 12, and his career at the Stockton Inn as a waiter six years ago. Since that time he has become chief gardener as well as owner. When he bought the property in 1998, the garden beds were engulfed in English ivy, and the hillside was covered with scrubby vegetation. Gradually he and his crew of part-time helpers weeded out the unwanted greenery and began putting in other plants. In the future Mr. Boehlert hopes to install fragrant lilac and viburnum bushes in the outdoor dining area. For the present he will plant hanging baskets with trailing nasturtium. By summer the flowers will be doing double duty in the kitchen and garden. Soybeans were introduced into North America in the 18th century but didn't become a commercial crop until the 20th century, first for forage and then as a dry bean for animal feed and industrial use. Henry Ford was an early devotee of this plant, so much so that in the 1930's  each Ford automobile included a bushel of soybeans converted into  industrial products, like plastics. If  Ford had tasted edamame, we might all have been enjoying this delectable vegetable for decades. ''Pollinating Partners'' at the Champion Greenhouse in Stamford and ''Flower Power: Botanical Art'' at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich each explores the ways in which flowers attract their animal mates -- the apple blossom and the bumblebee, the butterfly bush and the butterfly, the hummingbird and the trumpet vine -- and how vital these relationships are to the propagation of the species. ''Pollinating Partners'' at the Champion Greenhouse in Stamford and ''Flower Power: Botanical Art'' at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich each explores the ways in which flowers attract their animal mates -- the apple blossom and the bumblebee, the butterfly bush and the butterfly, the hummingbird and the trumpet vine -- and how vital these relationships are to the propagation of the species. Ms. Lee, an instructor at the New York Botanical Garden botanical illustration program and the illustrator of numerous books, painted a series of eight delightful small works for the current show, featuring pollinators such as carpenter bees, bumblebees, honeybees, orchid bees, beetles, moths and even a long-nosed bat, a night-foraging creature that buries its head deep into the night-blooming white blossoms of the giant saguaro cactus. The lovely butterfly is a vital partner in the pollinating game. Dick Rauh, a resident of Norwalk who also teaches at the New York Botanical Garden and is president of the International Guild of Natural Science Illustrators, depicts a spicebush swallowtail approaching the aptly named butterfly bush, or Buddleia davidii. In another of his paintings, a great spangled fritillary drinks nectar from a purple coneflower, its wings as delicate as hand-made lace. ''The only way we can end this war is to call these guys out of the bush and talk to them,'' he said. ''So we invited them to come out. If we said we are going to end it militarily, we will never succeed.''