 Actual cyclists and pedestrians, a steady flow of whom pass the spot each day, had their own opinions on the matter. Emmanuel Rivers, a carpenter from East Flatbush, halted as he approached the narrow section of the walkway on his bike, then passed through on foot. He said he supported broadening the walkway by doing away with the entrance. KAUFMAN-Evelyn. Beloved wife of the late Dr. Morton L. for 57 and 3/4 years. Loving father of Dr. Richard and Lois, and Dr. Jerome and Elaine. Cherished grandmother of Erika, Lauren and Deborah. Former President of Sisterhood, East Midwood Jewish Center Shaare Torah. Services are at Boulevard-Riverside Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn (at Avenue L), today at 1:00 PM. KAUFMAN-Evelyn. Beloved wife of the late Dr. Morton L. for 57 and 3/4 years. Loving father of Dr. Richard and Lois, and Dr. Jerome and Elaine. Cherished grandmother of Erika, Lauren and Deborah. Former President of Sisterhood, East Midwood Jewish Center Shaare Torah. Services are at Boulevard-Riverside Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn (at Avenue L), today at 1:00 PM. A day care center within the building provides contact with children; Mr. Kamp plans to redesign the playground. An assisted-living complex of 40 units will be built in the adjacent woods, a rolling terrain of scrub oak, pine and high bush blueberry. But don't kid yourself. There are limits to this so-called reality television. The team of videographers, awash in blood and gore, worked under strict orders: under no circumstances were we to film a victim's face at the moment of death (even though it happened every day) and there were to be no shots of bare breasts or genitalia. These rules came not from the hospital but from the producers: they argued that spilled brain matter and horrific knife wounds made for great television, but viewers would just not accept death and private parts. ''My Dad bought Burpee seeds for years and years and years,'' Mr. Reilly said, a potted rosebush in his hand. ''I saw that sign and I had to stop. I'll plant the roses down the shore house and maybe stop on the way home for something for the other house.'' For what it's worth, Sperber has never been afraid to debate any rational Knight supporter, including university officials. Several weeks ago, he walked into what could have been an ambush, on sports talk radio with Mike Francesa and Chris Russo in New York. Francesa seemed eager to put Sperber on the defensive. To his credit, he conducted a spirited but fair interview. He later agreed that Sperber in no way came across as uninformed or unreasonable. For what it's worth, Sperber has never been afraid to debate any rational Knight supporter, including university officials. Several weeks ago, he walked into what could have been an ambush, on sports talk radio with Mike Francesa and Chris Russo in New York. Francesa seemed eager to put Sperber on the defensive. To his credit, he conducted a spirited but fair interview. He later agreed that Sperber in no way came across as uninformed or unreasonable. I SHOULD have gotten my pole beans in by early May, but the weather didn't cooperate. Every time I got down to the farm, it rained buckets, and the ground was like cement. The fine, sunny weekends came when I was off seeing someone else's garden. So it was mid-June before I got my seeds in the ground. Which is plenty of time for a bush bean like Royal Burgundy, which only takes 60 days, but pole beans, which grow on vines that like to wind up strings or trellises, often take more like 70 or 80 days to mature. And since they keep coming, as long as you pick them, all summer long, it's a shame to lose a month to the vagaries of weather and the gardener. I SHOULD have gotten my pole beans in by early May, but the weather didn't cooperate. Every time I got down to the farm, it rained buckets, and the ground was like cement. The fine, sunny weekends came when I was off seeing someone else's garden. So it was mid-June before I got my seeds in the ground. Which is plenty of time for a bush bean like Royal Burgundy, which only takes 60 days, but pole beans, which grow on vines that like to wind up strings or trellises, often take more like 70 or 80 days to mature. And since they keep coming, as long as you pick them, all summer long, it's a shame to lose a month to the vagaries of weather and the gardener. I'm concentrating on pole beans this summer because they look so pretty on trellises, where you can see their various-colored blossoms, and they have a real beany taste, which makes bush beans pale by comparison. Bush beans also give up the ghost after a few pickings, after which you have to pull them up and start another crop in another part of the garden. I'm getting too lazy to do anything I can avoid -- so pole beans seem the far better choice. Ellen and Shepherd Ogden, the founders of Cook's Garden in Londonderry, Vt., think pole beans are so delicious they don't even bother with bush beans anymore. And I've planted a few of their favorites. Kwintus is a long, flat-podded bean in the Romano type. ''It bears as soon as a bush bean, but it keeps going all summer,'' Mr. Ogden said. ''And no matter how big they get, the beans are still good.''