 423 Quackenbush Place BOYARSKY-Morris. Beloved husband of the late Anna. Loving father of Linda and Allen Essner, and Isaac and Malkah Boyarsky. Devoted grandfather of Daniel, Deana, Naomi and Tamar. Services today, 12 noon, at Sherman's Flatbush Memorial Chapel, 1283 Coney Island Avenue, Brooklyn. BOYARSKY-Morris. Beloved husband of the late Anna. Loving father of Linda and Allen Essner, and Isaac and Malkah Boyarsky. Devoted grandfather of Daniel, Deana, Naomi and Tamar. Services today, 12 noon, at Sherman's Flatbush Memorial Chapel, 1283 Coney Island Avenue, Brooklyn. With the slightly unnatural aura of hand-colored photographs, these landscapes have a dream-like quality that straddles the border between real and surreal. In fact, they are mostly montages created in the machine, using interactive textures and tones. ''Transition'' superimposes a pair of desolate bushes on a wood-grain texture that approximates a windswept sky, but not so perfectly that one doesn't pause to question what it really is. Nor is color left in its natural state. In ''Blazing Bush,'' for example, certain areas are intensified, as if a selective light had been trained on them, while others are played down. The overall effect is haunting and subtle, and it works much better without glass between image and viewer. Look at the unframed prints in portfolios to get a fuller appreciation of their tonal richness and delicate detail. IN August 1998, Scott Robinson Hirsch boarded the Manhattan-bound Hamptons Jitney in East Hampton, N.Y., loaded up the seat next to him with reading material, and prayed that no one would have the nerve to bushwhack all his papers and take the spot. Of course, as jitney riders know, passengers will leap over any obstacle, like the horses at the annual Hampton Classic. IN August 1998, Scott Robinson Hirsch boarded the Manhattan-bound Hamptons Jitney in East Hampton, N.Y., loaded up the seat next to him with reading material, and prayed that no one would have the nerve to bushwhack all his papers and take the spot. Of course, as jitney riders know, passengers will leap over any obstacle, like the horses at the annual Hampton Classic. PEOPLE are starting to realize that the Asiatic bittersweet, a pretty vine with orange berries and pointed leaves, has unattractive habits. It smothers bushes, wraps itself around poles and squeezes trees to death. It's so aggressive that this year state lawmakers tried to have the plant outlawed. PEOPLE are starting to realize that the Asiatic bittersweet, a pretty vine with orange berries and pointed leaves, has unattractive habits. It smothers bushes, wraps itself around poles and squeezes trees to death. It's so aggressive that this year state lawmakers tried to have the plant outlawed.