 While homeowners are certainly free to do as they please with their backyards, I found it rather dismal that one golfer thinks a putting green is ''far more functional than trees or bushes,'' and another replaced an acre of woods with a fairway. While homeowners are certainly free to do as they please with their backyards, I found it rather dismal that one golfer thinks a putting green is ''far more functional than trees or bushes,'' and another replaced an acre of woods with a fairway. At a time when the South Fork is rapidly being overdeveloped, the birds, mammals and insects that are being displaced by grand lawns and now home putting greens need every native tree, bush and wooded area that's left. KARGMAN-Ethel. Beloved wife of the late Alex. Devoted mother of Judith Borell, Lewis and Richard. Loving mother-in-law of Martin M. Borell, Amy, Judie. Cherished grandmother and great grandmother. She was active in many charitable organizations: Hadassah, B'nai Brith, City of Hope, A.D.L., and local community groups. Services Sunday, 11:30 AM at ''Parkside Memorial Chapel'' 2576 Flatbush Avenue. KARGMAN-Ethel. Beloved wife of the late Alex. Devoted mother of Judith Borell, Lewis and Richard. Loving mother-in-law of Martin M. Borell, Amy, Judie. Cherished grandmother and great grandmother. She was active in many charitable organizations: Hadassah, B'nai Brith, City of Hope, A.D.L., and local community groups. Services Sunday, 11:30 AM at ''Parkside Memorial Chapel'' 2576 Flatbush Avenue. Eleven years ago, Ann and Ralph Badagliacca went to Mattituck to buy a retirement home and found Mrs. Badagliacca's personal field of dreams disguised as a hayfield. As soon as the couple moved into the adjacent farmhouse, she began making a garden. Now her dream has been realized in raised beds full of flowers and vegetables, blossoming shrubs and an array of fruit trees and berry bushes. A dozen or so azalea bushes flourish in the shelter provided by the blue spruce trees, a prelude to the back half of the garden, which is home to beds of fruits and vegetables, accented by small trees and shrubs. Tall ferny stalks have sprouted from the asparagus bed, now that the season is over, and the rhubarb leaves are almost as big as car tires. Various types of tomatoes, including plum, Big Boy and Big Girl grow plump. As with all vegetable beds, there are successes and failures. ''The crows ate all the butternut squash,'' Mr. Badagliacca said. Fruit from Ann Badagliacca's raspberry, blackberry and gooseberry bushes, and the peach and nectarine trees find their way into her baked goods, jams and jellies. This year she is also growing grapes. Eleven years ago, Ann and Ralph Badagliacca went to Mattituck to buy a retirement home and found Mrs. Badagliacca's personal field of dreams disguised as a hayfield. As soon as the couple moved into the adjacent farmhouse, she began making a garden. Now her dream has been realized in raised beds full of flowers and vegetables, blossoming shrubs and an array of fruit trees and berry bushes. A dozen or so azalea bushes flourish in the shelter provided by the blue spruce trees, a prelude to the back half of the garden, which is home to beds of fruits and vegetables, accented by small trees and shrubs. Tall ferny stalks have sprouted from the asparagus bed, now that the season is over, and the rhubarb leaves are almost as big as car tires. Various types of tomatoes, including plum, Big Boy and Big Girl grow plump. As with all vegetable beds, there are successes and failures. ''The crows ate all the butternut squash,'' Mr. Badagliacca said. Fruit from Ann Badagliacca's raspberry, blackberry and gooseberry bushes, and the peach and nectarine trees find their way into her baked goods, jams and jellies. This year she is also growing grapes. She loved to swim in the ocean off her summer home in Maine. First-time houseguests knew they had to swim with her or sink forever in her estimation. On one such occasion, she drove to a favorite bathing spot, handed David Kleinberg (now a successful decorator in New York) a pair of old trunks and told him to go change in the bushes. ''I knew that I had to go in the water, which in Maine practically has ice cubes floating in it . . . or the weekend was over,'' Kleinberg recalls. He dived in, swam for a bit, and thought he was dying. When he got out of the water, Mrs. Parish handed him one of her old terry-cloth Porthault robes. Back in the car, all she said was, ''Those bushes are much skimpier than I thought.'' At one end of the pool, there's an elegant stone bench flanked by tall iron stanchions holding geraniums and Swedish ivy. A 25-year- old rose bush grows along the house, and wild blueberry and mulberry bushes grow along the rear fence where the ivy advances toward the pool so quickly that it has to be cut back every week. Eleven years ago, Ann and Ralph Badagliacca went to Mattituck to buy a retirement home and found Mrs. Badagliacca's personal field of dreams disguised as a hayfield. As soon as the couple moved into the adjacent farmhouse, she began making a garden. Now her dream has been realized in raised beds full of flowers and vegetables, blossoming shrubs and an array of fruit trees and berry bushes. A dozen or so azalea bushes flourish in the shelter provided by the blue spruce trees, a prelude to the back half of the garden, which is home to beds of fruits and vegetables, accented by small trees and shrubs. Tall ferny stalks have sprouted from the asparagus bed, and the rhubarb leaves are almost as big as car tires. Various types of tomatoes grow plump. As with all vegetable beds, there are successes and failures.  ''The crows ate all the butternut squash,'' Mr. Badagliacca said. Fruit from Ann Badagliacca's raspberry, blackberry and gooseberry bushes, and the peach and nectarine trees find their way into her baked goods, jams and jellies. Several sweet pepperbushes (Clethra alnifolia) start the month with an intoxicating oomph. Their  panicles -- two to four inches, in light to white pink -- emit a lush fragrance that permeates muggy humidity. Those in sun start their bloom period of two to three weeks in early August, and those in shade a week later. A dwarf form, Hummingbird, is only three feet high, and the species plant tops out at 6 to 10 feet. So I arrived at Chanel on the appointed morning and went to the top of the stairs, where Joy Henderiks, the salon director, was waiting. Though I had seen the show in January, it now hit me that from this point forward, until my suit arrived six weeks later, all my decisions would be personal rather than professional. Henderiks, sensing my panic, suggested we get down to business. Having rehearsed this moment in my mind, I flung off my pique dress and stood there in my black high heels, black underpants and Wonderbra. This last was my idea of perky joie de vivre. Boy, was I bush league.