 This is not television to eat dinner by. While the programs offer varying degrees of gore, the most benign procedures can still trouble even the slightly squeamish. It's hard to imagine any woman wanting breast implants after watching a doctor use a metal poker to jab a jiggling plastic bag into the gaping wound on a patient's chest. Instead of shying away from a brain-revealing gash in the back of a construction worker's head (''Trauma'') or an exposed, pumping heart during surgery (''The Operation''), the camera zeroes in the same way it might follow a foul ball into the crowd during a baseball game. Dr. Richard Corlin, a senior official of the American Medical Association, adds: ''In general, I think these shows are quite helpful. They're educational and informative. They let the public know what's happening in the world of medicine. I think I'd rather have somebody see one of these shows with a little blood or gore from surgery than something where 17 people get killed.'' Deer, chipmunks and other wildlife dart in and out of the bushes and trees that seem to sprout from the rock itself, and hawks soar on the updrafts of the quarry's miniature palisades, level with the back windows of the houses perched on the quarry's perimeter. Deer, chipmunks and other wildlife dart in and out of the bushes and trees that seem to sprout from the rock itself, and hawks soar on the updrafts of the quarry's miniature palisades, level with the back windows of the houses perched on the quarry's perimeter. Raised in the small town of Nutbush, Tenn., the former Anna Mae Bullock rose to fame as Mrs. Ike Turner, singing with his Kings of Rhythm and later partnering with him in the Ike and Tina Turner Revue. Her big break was in 1960, when a singer failed to show up for a recording session. In what was to become another in a series of dramatic, cinematic-type moments in the entertainer's turbulent life, Ms. Turner filled in for the missing singer and ended up recording her first hit single, ''Like A Fool.'' The Turners enjoyed a series of R&B hits in the 1960's and 1970's, including ''Nutbush City Limits,'' ''It's Gonna Work Out Fine'' and ''River Deep, Mountain High.'' But their marriage turned violent, and Ms. Turner left both her husband and her successful career. She made herself over, becoming a Buddhist and regaining enough self-confidence to strike out on her own. Impoverished (she was on food stamps) and ignored by the music industry, which once fawned over her, she saw a glut of R&B singers finding success in a field where she had paved the way. I was left with a short pitch for birdie. I threw a delicate beauty that caught the rays of the noonday sun as it hovered an instant just over the basket's mouth. Then it fell, ricocheted off the head of the pole, and landed behind some mulberry bushes 20 feet away. ''Welcome Back to Brooklyn Festival,'' today; noon to 6 p.m.; Grand Army Plaza; junction of Flatbush Avenue and Eastern Parkway; free; (718) 855-7882, ext. 46. About 2:40 a.m. yesterday, a masked gunman walked up to a man and two women in front of 434 East 22nd Street in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn and began firing a pistol, the police said, hitting the man, who is 25, several times in the head and chest. One woman, 23, was shot in the leg and the second woman, a 21-year-old, was hit in the stomach, the police said. They were taken to Kings County Hospital, where the man was in critical condition and the two women were in stable condition, the authorities said. Though he was standing in front of a tiny island of working pumps, the gas station attendant, shyly and as tactfully as he could, was trying to tell us that we should, well, sort of just pull behind the bushes across the road, where the gasoline could be siphoned into the car. The station could not sell us gas, he said, because it was not allowed to take dollars, which could be used only at places designated by the state.