 Has he vanished into the bush? Did a rival militia kidnap him? Was he even alive? The United Nations force said it did not have him, and did not know his whereabouts. In the confusion on Monday, United Nations peacekeepers fled from the compound and apparently did not return in time to see what happened to Mr. Sankoh. It was with that message that Mr. Sankoh began a civil war from the bush in 1991. The message struck a chord. Sierra Leone, rich with diamonds, had long been controlled by a corrupt elite made up of Lebanese businessmen and urban Sierra Leoneans. Many of those Sierra Leoneans were descendants of the freed slaves who gave the capital its name and formed a privileged class. O'CONNOR-John Cardinal. The Ronald S. Lauder Foundation deeply mourns the passing of an eminent humanitarian John Cardinal O'Connor. We gratefully recall his magnificent participation at the 50th commemoration of Kristallnacht organized by our foundation. His moral voice and inspired leadership will always be remembered. Ronald S. Lauder, President Marjorie S. Federbush, Executive Vice President Rabbi Chaskel O. Besser, Chairman for Poland and Ukraine O'CONNOR-John Cardinal. The Ronald S. Lauder Foundation deeply mourns the passing of an eminent humanitarian John Cardinal O'Connor. We gratefully recall his magnificent participation at the 50th commemoration of Kristallnacht organized by our foundation. His moral voice and inspired leadership will always be remembered. Ronald S. Lauder, President Marjorie S. Federbush, Executive Vice President Rabbi Chaskel O. Besser, Chairman for Poland and Ukraine Has he vanished into the bush? Did a rival militia kidnap him? Was he even alive? The United Nations force said it did not have him, and did not know his whereabouts. In the confusion on Monday, United Nations peacekeepers fled from the compound and apparently did not return in time to see what happened to Mr. Sankoh. It was with that message that Mr. Sankoh began a civil war from the bush in 1991. The message struck a chord. Sierra Leone, rich with diamonds, had long been controlled by a corrupt elite made up of Lebanese businessmen and urban Sierra Leoneans. Many of those Sierra Leoneans were descendants of the freed slaves who gave the capital its name and formed a privileged class. O'CONNOR-John Cardinal. The Ronald S. Lauder Foundation deeply mourns the passing of an eminent humanitarian John Cardinal O'Connor. We gratefully recall his magnificent participation at the 50th commemoration of Kristallnacht organized by our foundation. His moral voice and inspired leadership will always be remembered. Ronald S. Lauder, President Marjorie S. Federbush, Executive Vice President Rabbi Chaskel O. Besser, Chairman for Poland and Ukraine O'CONNOR-John Cardinal. The Ronald S. Lauder Foundation deeply mourns the passing of an eminent humanitarian John Cardinal O'Connor. We gratefully recall his magnificent participation at the 50th commemoration of Kristallnacht organized by our foundation. His moral voice and inspired leadership will always be remembered. Ronald S. Lauder, President Marjorie S. Federbush, Executive Vice President Rabbi Chaskel O. Besser, Chairman for Poland and Ukraine