 DEMOCRATS DRILL FOR OIL -- No sooner had Dick Cheney been selected as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate than the Democratic National Committee put up a Web site, www.bush-cheney.net, as a parody of the team. With a graphic of an oil well gushing dollars, the Web site says the two men are ''covered with money from Big Oil'' and features statements that Mr. Cheney's Congressional voting record is more conservative than that of Jesse Helms. A committee spokesman said the site went up minutes after Mr. Cheney's selection was announced and, so far, it has received more than 15,000 hits. The Bush campaign, which has acquired a large number of domain names to prevent parody sites, had apparently never purchased the Bush-Cheney combination. ''We like to think of our site as like 'Dragnet','' said the committee spokesman, ''It's just the facts, ma'am.'' DEMOCRATS DRILL FOR OIL -- No sooner had Dick Cheney been selected as Gov. George W. Bush's running mate than the Democratic National Committee put up a Web site, www.bush-cheney.net, as a parody of the team. With a graphic of an oil well gushing dollars, the Web site says the two men are ''covered with money from Big Oil'' and features statements that Mr. Cheney's Congressional voting record is more conservative than that of Jesse Helms. A committee spokesman said the site went up minutes after Mr. Cheney's selection was announced and, so far, it has received more than 15,000 hits. The Bush campaign, which has acquired a large number of domain names to prevent parody sites, had apparently never purchased the Bush-Cheney combination. ''We like to think of our site as like 'Dragnet','' said the committee spokesman, ''It's just the facts, ma'am.'' Q.  I have two Queen Elizabeth climbing roses on a west-facing wall that gets sun all afternoon. The bushes are about five years old. They have lush foliage but have produced only one flower between them in all these years. I have cut them back severely. I have also let them grow. The canes get 12 to 14 feet long, but do not bloom. I give them rose food in the early spring, hoping that if I'm good to them they will produce, but no luck. Q.  I have two Queen Elizabeth climbing roses on a west-facing wall that gets sun all afternoon. The bushes are about five years old. They have lush foliage but have produced only one flower between them in all these years. I have cut them back severely. I have also let them grow. The canes get 12 to 14 feet long, but do not bloom. I give them rose food in the early spring, hoping that if I'm good to them they will produce, but no luck. Mr. Lazio collected most of the PAC money last month at a fund-raiser held at the Long Island home of Christopher Quackenbush, who said he has been a friend of Mr. Lazio for many years. Mr. Quackenbush is head of investment banking at Sandler O'Neill & Partners, which is also involved works in mortgage finance, a field that Mr. Lazio helps oversee as housing chairman. Mr. Quackenbush donated $25,000 to the PAC, and three other members of the firm each donated $2,000 to the Senate campaign and $8,000 to the PAC. Asked whether the PAC donations were intended to get around the Senate limits, Mr. Quackenbush said, ''We're aware of the campaign finance laws.''