 In Flatbush,  Russian Jews and Pakistanis Yakov Semichan, 56, a Russian Jew whose barbershop has been at Coney Island Avenue and Glenwood Road in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn for nine years, was fighting the crosscurrents. In the last five years, his original customer base, Orthodox and Russian Jews whose synagogues and kosher restaurants once dominated the corner, has been departing for wealthier sections of Flatbush. Pakistani immigrants and businesses that catered to them were replacing them. In 1996, a Pakistani immigrant named Shabbir Hussain, who had owned four barber shops in his native city of Lahore, had arrived in Flatbush and was looking for a job. Mr. Semichan offered Mr. Hussain the battered red barber's chair in the front of the shop and put a bright green sign in the window advertising, ''We speak Russian, English and Yiddish,'' along with Mr. Hussein's name translated into Urdu, the Pakistani language. ''There has been no real interaction, except on the leadership level,'' said Rabbi Yechezkel Pikus, executive director of the Council of Jewish Organizations of Flatbush. ''There's a sort of tolerance. You mind your business and I'll mind mine.'' Article on care and maintenance of blueberry bushes; photos (M) Blueberries are rather temperature-specific. Low-bush blueberries (Vaccinium angustifolium) thrive in Zones 2 to 6, high-bush (V. corymbosum) in Zones 5 to 7, and rabbiteye (V. ashei) in Zones 6 to 9. Though Bailey was referring to the high-bush berry, all three exhibit the same beautiful ornamental qualities. All three, said a Canadian government food researcher, Wilhelmina Kalt, bear berries with anti-aging properties. In 1916, five years after the two joined forces, the first cultivated blueberry was produced and an agricultural industry was born. Dr. Coville provided the scientific expertise to propagate and hybridize the berries. Ms. White contributed the plants, calling on local ''Pineys'' to search the area for bushes with the most promising berries. Ms. White paid $2 for every bush that bore berries at least five-eighths of an inch in diameter and named each bush for its finder. When Rube Leek of Chatsworth found a promising one, a quandary arose. Leek wasn't a suitable name, and Rube didn't convey the plant's usefulness. Dr. Coville christened it Rubel; it became a key commercial blueberry parent and is still sold. I've had blueberries in my borders for 20 years. I started with two five- to six-foot-tall high-bush cultivars -- Bluecrop and Jersey -- because two varieties are needed for good pollination and both are suitable for my central New Jersey area. All they required were well-drained, acidic soil, a weekly watering in dry periods, and a mostly sunny location to produce summer berries. Over time, as birds devoured the berries despite a netting over the bushes, I began to admire the shrubs more for their looks than for their produce. Five years ago, I did away with the netting and the big bushes and placed Friendship and Northblue, semi dwarf plants known as half highs, in a mixed border. These multiseasonal plants grow about four feet tall and, if netted, can each produce seven pounds of berries. But I chose them for their handsome look. There are signs researchers are falling in love with blueberries' ornamental qualities. About 10 years ago, breeders at Michigan State University introduced a high-bush-low-bush cross -- Top Hat. Forming a two-foot dense mounded plant, it is perfect for containers and as a bonsai subject. And Dr. Nicholi Vorsa, director of the Rutgers University blueberry and cranberry research laboratory, is evaluating some beautiful high-bush forms for release. One has corkscrew-type stems; another, closely packed green leaves iny that they reflect the powder blue of the berries. While blueberry bushes might not ultimately prove to be a fountain of youth, they certainly can constitute an oasis of beauty and contentment in the garden. The old course designed by Colt is seaside golf at its best, with nestling greens set in little dells among the dunes, spacious, rumpled fairways and springy turf. I asked a member about the bushes that lurk off the fairways and she showed me jeneverbest, the juniper bush that produces strong Dutch gin; kardinaalsmuts, named for its red berries shaped like a cardinal's hat, and the white flowering madoorn bushes. There are no weak holes at Kennemer, but the single most fearsome hole is the 10th, a blind drive over a dune with only a red-and-white striped pole to guide you. While the Hague course has a coastal flavor, it's more overgrown and enclosed than Kennemer or Noordwijkse, with bushes and flowering trees that can easily snatch your ball. To compound the difficulty, the rough is deep and lush. Most of all, the course is a study in assembled shades of green, from pale pastel to the yellowy green river birch to the dark green firs. To keep new flowers developing on butterfly bush (Buddleia davidii), cut spent flowers back to the next set of buds. Keep deadheading cosmos, snapdragon and calendula. Thin sprawling asters to keep them from overwhelming their neighbors. To keep new flowers developing on butterfly bush (Buddleia davidii), cut spent flowers back to the next set of buds. Keep deadheading cosmos, snapdragon and calendula. Thin sprawling asters to keep them from overwhelming their neighbors. The Irish in New York City may be famous for many things, but merengue is not one of them. Yet Patrick Shannon, a newly established merengue singer, grew up blue-collar Irish in Flatbush, Brooklyn. The Irish in New York City may be famous for many things, but merengue is not one of them. Yet Patrick Shannon, a newly established merengue singer, grew up blue-collar Irish in Flatbush, Brooklyn. ''I feel I have a certain look, a bad guy look,'' said Anthony Colangelo of Danbury. He had a tattoo of the grim reaper on one arm and of a peacock on a rose bush on the other, both of which peeked out from the tightest black muscle shirt you could buy without a prescription. General Manager STEVE PHILLIPS would not rule out making a ''major deal if it would improve us'' before tomorrow's 4 p.m. nonwaiver trading deadline. Milwaukee outfielder JEROMY BURNITZ, Texas reliever JOHN WETTELAND and Tampa Bay reliever ROBERTO HERNANDEZ could be possibilities. . . . ARMANDO BENITEZ has not allowed an earned run in 15 consecutive appearances. . . . Outfielder DARRYL HAMILTON (sprained left big toe) began a rehabilitation assignment yesterday with Class AAA Norfolk. . . . JAY PAYTON batted leadoff yesterday, but Manager BOBBY VALENTINE said he had several options for that spot. . . . Reliever RICK WHITE, who is bald and has a bushy goatee like that of the former Yankee DAVID WELLS, who is known as Boomer, was nicknamed Baby Boomer by outfielder DEREK BELL. . . . The last player to hit a homer in his first at-bat as a Met was TODD PRATT, who did it in 1997 off AL LEITER, then pitching for Florida. Angry at the grand jury's decision, about 100 people marched in Brooklyn yesterday from Mr. Dorismond's elementary school, Public School 92 on Parkside Avenue in Flatbush, to Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church, where his funeral was held.