 UGANDA: REBEL LEADERS CAPTURED -- The army ambushed a group of rebels in eastern Congo, capturing five commanders of the Allied Democratic Forces, according to the army spokesman, Capt. Shaban Bantariza. Those captured included Bwambale Ali, the top commander, and two officers identified as Junju and Bilambala. The ambush came less than a month after the rebel chief, Mansur Arinaitwe, surrendered to Ugandan troops in Congo. The Allied Democratic Forces have been fighting since 1996 to oust President Yoweri Museveni. UGANDA: REBEL LEADERS CAPTURED -- The army ambushed a group of rebels in eastern Congo, capturing five commanders of the Allied Democratic Forces, according to the army spokesman, Capt. Shaban Bantariza. Those captured included Bwambale Ali, the top commander, and two officers identified as Junju and Bilambala. The ambush came less than a month after the rebel chief, Mansur Arinaitwe, surrendered to Ugandan troops in Congo. The Allied Democratic Forces have been fighting since 1996 to oust President Yoweri Museveni. While the blazes can be battled, if slowly, it has proved more difficult to stem the flood of people who see the Peten as the promised land. It is a deceptive vision of lush land, since the thin layer of humus is unsuitable for agriculture. Settlers burn trees and bushes to enrich the ground with nutrients, which makes the land arable for three years at most. Then new land is cleared. GORE WEB SITE ATTACKS BUSH PLAN -- Certain that Governor Bush has handed them the perfect campaign weapon with his Social Security proposal, the Gore campaign unveiled a new Web site this week devoted to attacking his plan. Its not-so-subtle address: www.bushinsecurity.com. The home page features a photograph of rolling dice (Mr. Gore likes to accuse Mr. Bush of promoting ''casino economics'') and a picture of a slightly crazed-looking Mr. Bush over the caption, ''When he was asked if people could lose money under his plan, Bush replied, 'Maybe, maybe not.'' Asked to respond to the Web site, Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said, ''Having invented the Internet, you would have thought Al Gore could have used it for something positive and not just another attack barrage.'' He added that he would check the site to see whether it included a link to the White House Web site that promotes the Clinton administration's proposal to invest Social Security money in the stock market, an idea Mr. Gore once supported. UGANDA: REBEL LEADERS CAPTURED -- The army ambushed a group of rebels in eastern Congo, capturing five commanders of the Allied Democratic Forces, according to the army spokesman, Capt. Shaban Bantariza. Those captured included Bwambale Ali, the top commander, and two officers identified as Junju and Bilambala. The ambush came less than a month after the rebel chief, Mansur Arinaitwe, surrendered to Ugandan troops in Congo. The Allied Democratic Forces have been fighting since 1996 to oust President Yoweri Museveni. UGANDA: REBEL LEADERS CAPTURED -- The army ambushed a group of rebels in eastern Congo, capturing five commanders of the Allied Democratic Forces, according to the army spokesman, Capt. Shaban Bantariza. Those captured included Bwambale Ali, the top commander, and two officers identified as Junju and Bilambala. The ambush came less than a month after the rebel chief, Mansur Arinaitwe, surrendered to Ugandan troops in Congo. The Allied Democratic Forces have been fighting since 1996 to oust President Yoweri Museveni. While the blazes can be battled, if slowly, it has proved more difficult to stem the flood of people who see the Peten as the promised land. It is a deceptive vision of lush land, since the thin layer of humus is unsuitable for agriculture. Settlers burn trees and bushes to enrich the ground with nutrients, which makes the land arable for three years at most. Then new land is cleared. GORE WEB SITE ATTACKS BUSH PLAN -- Certain that Governor Bush has handed them the perfect campaign weapon with his Social Security proposal, the Gore campaign unveiled a new Web site this week devoted to attacking his plan. Its not-so-subtle address: www.bushinsecurity.com. The home page features a photograph of rolling dice (Mr. Gore likes to accuse Mr. Bush of promoting ''casino economics'') and a picture of a slightly crazed-looking Mr. Bush over the caption, ''When he was asked if people could lose money under his plan, Bush replied, 'Maybe, maybe not.'' Asked to respond to the Web site, Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said, ''Having invented the Internet, you would have thought Al Gore could have used it for something positive and not just another attack barrage.'' He added that he would check the site to see whether it included a link to the White House Web site that promotes the Clinton administration's proposal to invest Social Security money in the stock market, an idea Mr. Gore once supported.