 Here, life is purposefully low key, in a way that seems oddly normal and strangely suburban given the trust-fund babies lurking behind every bush. People set great store by  the club's greasy hamburgers and slow service. There are family barbecues and limbo parties, and members travel the roads by golf cart. FRIEDMAN-Ethel R. On May 24, 2000, of Brooklyn, NY, formerly of Belle Harbor, and Kingston, NY. Beloved wife of Morris, devoted mother of Deborah and Richard, loving grandmother of Michal, Yael, Jonathan and Evan, and loving sister of Meyer Blum of Delray FL. Family and friends are invited to a memorial service at Parkside Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn NY (Ave V) at 4PM on Tuesday, May 30. In lieu of flowers, donations can be made to either Givat Haviva/Hashomer Hatzair 212-989-9272 or The Jewish National Fund, 1-800-542-TREE. FRIEDMAN-Ethel R. On May 24, 2000, of Brooklyn, NY, formerly of Belle Harbor, and Kingston, NY. Beloved wife of Morris, devoted mother of Deborah and Richard, loving grandmother of Michal, Yael, Jonathan and Evan, and loving sister of Meyer Blum of Delray FL. Family and friends are invited to a memorial service at Parkside Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn NY (Ave V) at 4PM on Tuesday, May 30. In lieu of flowers, donations can be made to either Givat Haviva/Hashomer Hatzair 212-989-9272 or The Jewish National Fund, 1-800-542-TREE. SO what if Bernadette Castro, into her sixth year as New York's vivacious and, when it comes to scaring up millions for pet projects, vociferous commissioner of parks, recreation and historic sites, wasn't always such a Campfire Girl? So what if the original Castro Convertible poster child still hooks more bushes than bass when she puts on her waders and, as parks poster woman, attempts the fly-fishing thing at Connetquot River State Park Preserve? SO what if Bernadette Castro, into her sixth year as New York's vivacious and, when it comes to scaring up millions for pet projects, vociferous commissioner of parks, recreation and historic sites, wasn't always such a Campfire Girl? So what if the original Castro Convertible poster child still hooks more bushes than bass when she puts on her waders and, as parks poster woman, attempts the fly-fishing thing at Connetquot River State Park Preserve?