 Suburban Hatfields and McCoys commonly feud over boundary encroachments (a new driveway or fence that creeps over the property line), trees and bushes (which might block a neighbor's view or sunlight) and eyesores. This thoughtful work has the feel of a lifelong obsession. An Annapolis graduate, Dr. Perkins woke up to genuine leadership in Vietnam, a brutal and unforgettable academy.  At one point he found himself in command of a Marine convoy running a bloody gantlet along Route 1 from Chu Lai to Da Nang. Caught in a withering ambush, shaken and confused, he urged his column forward, concluding that the risk of crossing an open field of fire was better than sitting tight in the bull's-eye of the killing zone. (''A man sits as many risks as he runs,'' Dr. Perkins quotes Henry David Thoreau.) Pinch aster, chrysanthemum, sneezeweed (Helenium autumnale) and Sedum Autumn Joy every couple of weeks until July to maintain bushiness and produce more flowers. a rose bush March 9, 1968, Kien Phong Province, Republic of Vietnam: Mr. Jacobs's citation says that the first lieutenant, then 22, pulled 14 wounded men to safety during an ambush  (he is 5 feet 3 inches tall) and fought off and killed several Viet Cong soldiers as he conducted the rescue, even as blood from a head wound impaired his vision. For Jack Jacobs, 55, who had gotten his commission through the R.O.T.C. program at Rutgers, thoughts about what he felt the day of the ambush are complicated. He was an advisor to a Vietnamese Army battalion, walking in a rice paddy in the Mekong Delta, when he heard the phhhht of a mortar. The disaster took place in the very middle of one of the busiest intersections in all of Brooklyn -- the spot near the Willink Entrance to Prospect Park where Malbone Street, Ocean Avenue and Flatbush Avenue all intersect -- but the wrecked train and its passengers were wedged in a narrow tunnel under the intersection and were not in a readily accessible location. Responding companies from the New York Fire Department who performed the bulk of the rescue work that evening were faced with a disaster that was as much a cave-in as a train wreck. Ms. Frierson was born in Flatbush, Brooklyn, now lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and has rented apartments in every borough in the city except for Staten Island. She clearly remembers the dark days when she was so unnerved by the city's sense of imminent danger that she often had her husband walk her to the store just to buy a tube of toothpaste. Although she said that the killings in Queens last week were ''despicable'' and proved ''how sick we've all become,'' she went on to make this admission: ''As bad as I feel for the people who were killed, I never think something like that could happen to me these days. It's like it's outside the realm of my world.'' ''I was as girl as a girl can be, with all the pretty dresses my mom made for me,'' she said. ''The next day I'd be running in camouflage, hiding in bushes, playing soldiers.'' Roger Cohen tribute to Kurt Schork, Reuters correspondent killed in ambush in Sierra Leone; photo (M) Mr. Schork, 53, was killed on Wednesday in an ambush in Sierra Leone. A dispatch from his news agency described the scene: the armed men in T-shirts bursting out from behind a bank on a dusty road 50 miles from Freetown, the volley of automatic-rifle fire, a bullet through Mr. Schork's head. Another quick, senseless death of a foreign correspondent: what more is there to say? Mr. Schork, 53, was killed on Wednesday in an ambush in Sierra Leone. A dispatch from his news agency described the scene: the armed men in T-shirts bursting out from behind a bank on a dusty road 50 miles from Freetown, the volley of automatic-rifle fire, a bullet through Mr. Schork's head. Another quick, senseless death of a foreign correspondent: what more is there to say? On companionship: ''Like bushes without bees. Lonely is worse than hungry.'' In addition to its opulent furnishings and enviable location just off the majestic Piazza del Popolo, Rome's recently reopened Hotel de Russie vaunts a special attraction for a hotel in the center of the city: a garden, three-quarters of an acre with towering palms, magnolias, orange trees, rosebushes, a small grotto and fountain. In addition to its opulent furnishings and enviable location just off the majestic Piazza del Popolo, Rome's recently reopened Hotel de Russie vaunts a special attraction for a hotel in the center of the city: a garden, three-quarters of an acre with towering palms, magnolias, orange trees, rosebushes, a small grotto and fountain. Discovery may not always cater solely to the desire for enlightenment, as the ever-popular Shark Week demonstrates. Now in its 14th year, this weeklong festival devoted to the carnivores doesn't shrink from gore. Suburban Hatfields and McCoys commonly feud over boundary encroachments (a new driveway or fence that creeps over the property line), trees and bushes (which might block a neighbor's view or sunlight) and eyesores. This thoughtful work has the feel of a lifelong obsession. An Annapolis graduate, Dr. Perkins woke up to genuine leadership in Vietnam, a brutal and unforgettable academy.  At one point he found himself in command of a Marine convoy running a bloody gantlet along Route 1 from Chu Lai to Da Nang. Caught in a withering ambush, shaken and confused, he urged his column forward, concluding that the risk of crossing an open field of fire was better than sitting tight in the bull's-eye of the killing zone. (''A man sits as many risks as he runs,'' Dr. Perkins quotes Henry David Thoreau.) Pinch aster, chrysanthemum, sneezeweed (Helenium autumnale) and Sedum Autumn Joy every couple of weeks until July to maintain bushiness and produce more flowers. a rose bush March 9, 1968, Kien Phong Province, Republic of Vietnam: Mr. Jacobs's citation says that the first lieutenant, then 22, pulled 14 wounded men to safety during an ambush  (he is 5 feet 3 inches tall) and fought off and killed several Viet Cong soldiers as he conducted the rescue, even as blood from a head wound impaired his vision. For Jack Jacobs, 55, who had gotten his commission through the R.O.T.C. program at Rutgers, thoughts about what he felt the day of the ambush are complicated. He was an advisor to a Vietnamese Army battalion, walking in a rice paddy in the Mekong Delta, when he heard the phhhht of a mortar. The disaster took place in the very middle of one of the busiest intersections in all of Brooklyn -- the spot near the Willink Entrance to Prospect Park where Malbone Street, Ocean Avenue and Flatbush Avenue all intersect -- but the wrecked train and its passengers were wedged in a narrow tunnel under the intersection and were not in a readily accessible location. Responding companies from the New York Fire Department who performed the bulk of the rescue work that evening were faced with a disaster that was as much a cave-in as a train wreck. Ms. Frierson was born in Flatbush, Brooklyn, now lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and has rented apartments in every borough in the city except for Staten Island. She clearly remembers the dark days when she was so unnerved by the city's sense of imminent danger that she often had her husband walk her to the store just to buy a tube of toothpaste. Although she said that the killings in Queens last week were ''despicable'' and proved ''how sick we've all become,'' she went on to make this admission: ''As bad as I feel for the people who were killed, I never think something like that could happen to me these days. It's like it's outside the realm of my world.'' ''I was as girl as a girl can be, with all the pretty dresses my mom made for me,'' she said. ''The next day I'd be running in camouflage, hiding in bushes, playing soldiers.'' Roger Cohen tribute to Kurt Schork, Reuters correspondent killed in ambush in Sierra Leone; photo (M) Mr. Schork, 53, was killed on Wednesday in an ambush in Sierra Leone. A dispatch from his news agency described the scene: the armed men in T-shirts bursting out from behind a bank on a dusty road 50 miles from Freetown, the volley of automatic-rifle fire, a bullet through Mr. Schork's head. Another quick, senseless death of a foreign correspondent: what more is there to say? Mr. Schork, 53, was killed on Wednesday in an ambush in Sierra Leone. A dispatch from his news agency described the scene: the armed men in T-shirts bursting out from behind a bank on a dusty road 50 miles from Freetown, the volley of automatic-rifle fire, a bullet through Mr. Schork's head. Another quick, senseless death of a foreign correspondent: what more is there to say? On companionship: ''Like bushes without bees. Lonely is worse than hungry.'' In addition to its opulent furnishings and enviable location just off the majestic Piazza del Popolo, Rome's recently reopened Hotel de Russie vaunts a special attraction for a hotel in the center of the city: a garden, three-quarters of an acre with towering palms, magnolias, orange trees, rosebushes, a small grotto and fountain. In addition to its opulent furnishings and enviable location just off the majestic Piazza del Popolo, Rome's recently reopened Hotel de Russie vaunts a special attraction for a hotel in the center of the city: a garden, three-quarters of an acre with towering palms, magnolias, orange trees, rosebushes, a small grotto and fountain. Discovery may not always cater solely to the desire for enlightenment, as the ever-popular Shark Week demonstrates. Now in its 14th year, this weeklong festival devoted to the carnivores doesn't shrink from gore.