 At the end of the film the shark had to get in the boat with Brody and Quint (Robert Shaw), the hard-bitten captain. Until then it was a work in progress. ''I told Steven, 'If you don't have a shark, let's shoot stuff without one,' '' Mr. Gottlieb said. While the movie has plenty of gore in the water and yellow harpoon barrels tearing here and there along the surface, the beast rarely exposes more than a fin and some teeth. Yarnall was brought up from Columbus yesterday, after a good outing against Toledo, and was immediately named the starter against the Orioles. Yarnall had been scheduled to be in the starting rotation in spring training, but poor performances relegated him to the bushes. Van Bon was contradicted by the new man in the yellow jersey, Alberto Elli, an Italian rider with Telekom. Poor Elli -- 13 years a professional and the Tour's overall leader for the first time at age 36, and the opening question he was asked in a news conference was whether Jalabert had been in the bushes. In addition to the Chelyabinsk militia, which was hit by the Sunday bomb attack, police units from Sergiyev Posad, a town near Moscow, and from the Perm region in Russia's Urals have suffered high casualties in deadly ambushes. BIRD KEEPER WEEKEND at Prospect Park Zoo, 450 Flatbush Avenue, near Empire Boulevard, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, tomorrow and Sunday from 1 to 4:30 p.m. Youngsters can join the zoo keeper for a chat to learn about the zoo's bird population at 3 p.m. at the emu exhibition. Other activities include creating paper birds with colorful feathers and joining an expert from 2:30 to 4:30 p.m. at the macaw exhibition. Zoo hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; weekends, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Admission: $2.50; the elderly, $1.25; children 3 to 12, 50 cents; 2 and under, free. Information: (718) 399-7339. BEDELL-Sylvia. The Flatbush & Shaare Torah Jewish Center express their condolences to the family of Sylvia Bedell, wife of our devoted, deceased past president, Herbert Bedell. Graveside services, Sunday July 9, 11AM, Acacia Cemetery, Ozone Park, Queens. Arthur H. Wolintz, M.D., President BEDELL-Sylvia. The Flatbush & Shaare Torah Jewish Center express their condolences to the family of Sylvia Bedell, wife of our devoted, deceased past president, Herbert Bedell. Graveside services, Sunday July 9, 11AM, Acacia Cemetery, Ozone Park, Queens. Arthur H. Wolintz, M.D., President