 Take patterns of behavior. One would think that mammalian or avian brains, hundreds of times bigger than bug brains, would be able to think up smarter strategies for defense against predators or securing prey. Not so. When it comes to hunting, many insects are ''miniature counterparts of predaceous vertebrates.'' Wolf spiders range open country by night, like leopards. Praying mantises lurk by blossoms, crouched motionless, to ambush nectar-seeking insects, just as blue herons stand by a lake or stream waiting for fish. Members of the spider species Mallos gregaris gather to overpower larger insects caught in their communal web, just as hyenas band together to bring down a wildebeest or orcas cluster to tear a whale apart. ''How come you always get your money before me?'' she demanded. Eugene shrugged and smiled. ''I already know what I'm going to buy with mine,'' she continued. I immediately thought of a stereo, a bushel of CD's, clothes. ''Stock,'' she announced confidently. And she knew exactly which biotech company she was going to invest in. NEIDLE-Marc. Beloved husband of Sandra. Loving and devoted father of Ilyssa. Dear brother-inlaw of Barbara and Richard Leeds. Cherished uncle of Morgan and Blake Leeds. Services today, 10 AM, at ''Parkside Memorial Chapels,'' 2576 Flatbush Ave, Brooklyn, corner Ave V. NEIDLE-Marc. Beloved husband of Sandra. Loving and devoted father of Ilyssa. Dear brother-inlaw of Barbara and Richard Leeds. Cherished uncle of Morgan and Blake Leeds. Services today, 10 AM, at ''Parkside Memorial Chapels,'' 2576 Flatbush Ave, Brooklyn, corner Ave V. BRODSKY-Arthur Irving. On Saturday, June 3, 2000. Beloved husband of the late Betty Brodsky. Cherished father of Harold, Laura and Ellen. Grandfather of Russell, Mark and Susan Brodsky, and of Jaime and Carrie Osterman. Great-grandfather of Wendy, Samantha, Paige and Benjamin Brodsky. Services Monday, June 5, at 11:30 AM, at Parkside Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave. (near Ave. U), Brooklyn, NY. In lieu of flowers, donations to the American Lung Association would be appreciated. BRODSKY-Arthur Irving. On Saturday, June 3, 2000. Beloved husband of the late Betty Brodsky. Cherished father of Harold, Laura and Ellen. Grandfather of Russell, Mark and Susan Brodsky, and of Jaime and Carrie Osterman. Great-grandfather of Wendy, Samantha, Paige and Benjamin Brodsky. Services Monday, June 5, at 11:30 AM, at Parkside Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave. (near Ave. U), Brooklyn, NY. In lieu of flowers, donations to the American Lung Association would be appreciated. Officer Don Nelson of the 67th Precinct in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, arrested the suspect, Lecene Brim, 26, on marijuana possession charges on Friday after he was seen in a car with a bag of marijuana on the seat next to him, the police said. Officer Don Nelson of the 67th Precinct in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, arrested the suspect, Lecene Brim, 26, on marijuana possession charges on Friday after he was seen in a car with a bag of marijuana on the seat next to him, the police said. Not long ago, the two concrete traffic islands in Midtown, near Macy's, were symbols of a blighted New York. Grandly named Herald Square and Greeley Square, they were cracked slabs set in the midst of cacophonous traffic. There were scraggly bushes along the edges and some benches, where homeless people dozed and drug dealers rested between sales. Not long ago, the two concrete traffic islands in Midtown, near Macy's, were symbols of a blighted New York. Grandly named Herald Square and Greeley Square, they were cracked slabs set in the midst of cacophonous traffic. There were scraggly bushes along the edges and some benches, where homeless people dozed and drug dealers rested between sales. The traffic barrels by, like a waterfall. But the black iron fences and gates and the greenery along the perimeter -- bushes, flowers and slender trees -- create a buffer from the honking, sirens and exhaust fumes. Sounds and smells still penetrate, of course, but though the islands are right in the middle of the intersections, they feel like places apart. The Swahili word ''safari'' entered popular American usage after Theodore Roosevelt arrived in 1909 and hired 500 porters to follow him into the bush with everything from collapsible bathtubs to cases of Champagne. Soon thereafter, socialites, plutocrats, maharajas, royalty and movie stars began to parade across Kenya. It was easy to understand why. ''You emerged into thousands of acres of rolling English parkland, a haze of blue lawn rising and falling to the horizon, untouched by the plow and apparently uninhabited,'' wrote James Fox in ''White Mischief,'' an account of upper-class British shenanigans in highland Kenya in the 1920's and 30's. This is the kind of fantasy that Peter and Louise Behr were selling -- or trying to sell -- when I visited them at their camp. Even though the place was nearly empty, they maintained five-star standards in the bush. ''Here is your shampoo, your conditioner and your shower gel,'' said Maurice Tissah, the steward who showed me to my tent on a high bank above the Mara River. The tent was the size of a pricey hotel suite in Paris and was done up 1920's style, with new but old-looking steamer trunks, brass lanterns, a pasha-style pull rope that turned on the lights and diaphanous folds of mosquito netting encircling two king-size beds. After I showered with hot water (using the gel), I sat out on the porch of my tent, watching hippos gambol in the river. The sun was just beginning to slide out of sight, replaced by a slight crepuscular chill, when the steward returned to ask, ''My friend, do you need a hot-water bottle?'' DISTRICT 14: Flatbush, Midwood; second Monday of the month; next meeting June 12, 7:30 p.m., P.S. 249, Caton Avenue and Marlborough Road, Midwood; Board chairman: Alvin M. Berk; District manager: Terry Rodie (718) 859-6357. DISTRICT 17: East Flatbush; third Wednesday of the month; next meeting June 21, 7 p.m.; Downstate Medical Center, 395 Lenox Road, near Classon Avenue,Board chairman: Albert Payne; District manager: Willie Scott; (718) 467-3536. DISTRICT 18: Canarsie, Mill Basin, Marine Park, Bergen Beach, Flatlands, Georgetown, Fraiser; third Wednesday of the month; next meeting scheduled for June 21, 8 p.m., Kings Plaza Community Room, Flatbush Avenue and Avenue V; Board chairman: Saul Needle; District manager: Dorothy Turano; (718) 241-0422.