 GORMLEY-Elizabeth A. Of Florida (formerly of Brooklyn and Elizaville, N.Y.) on August 26, 2000. Beloved wife of the late Donald J. Fond sister of the late Virginia Kilcoin. Sister-in-law of Jane Cosgrove. Loving aunt of Mary Elizabeth Woodburn, Amanda McGehee and Vincent Cosgrove. Funeral from the McManus Funeral Home, 2001 Flatbush Ave. on Friday, 9:45AM. Funeral mass 10:30AM St.Vincent Ferrer Church. Interment Calvary Cemetery. Visiting hours Friday 8-9:45AM. GORMLEY-Elizabeth A. Of Florida (formerly of Brooklyn and Elizaville, N.Y.) on August 26, 2000. Beloved wife of the late Donald J. Fond sister of the late Virginia Kilcoin. Sister-in-law of Jane Cosgrove. Loving aunt of Mary Elizabeth Woodburn, Amanda McGehee and Vincent Cosgrove. Funeral from the McManus Funeral Home, 2001 Flatbush Ave. on Friday, 9:45AM. Funeral mass 10:30AM St.Vincent Ferrer Church. Interment Calvary Cemetery. Visiting hours Friday 8-9:45AM. But all of the lettuces, the pansies, the English daisies and the hardier herbs (like an 11-foot rosemary bush outside one of the guest rooms) keep right on chugging, year-round. KAMINASH-Marjorie (nee Spector). Died August 29, 2000. Devoted wife of Manny. Beloved mother of Benjamin, Rosanne and Nancy. Dear sister of Ruth and Isabel. Cherished grandmother of Jesse, Joshua, Britt, Maura, Zachary, Liam and Tyler. Services at I.J. Morris, 1895 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York, Thursday, August 31 at 12:00 noon. KAMINASH-Marjorie (nee Spector). Died August 29, 2000. Devoted wife of Manny. Beloved mother of Benjamin, Rosanne and Nancy. Dear sister of Ruth and Isabel. Cherished grandmother of Jesse, Joshua, Britt, Maura, Zachary, Liam and Tyler. Services at I.J. Morris, 1895 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York, Thursday, August 31 at 12:00 noon. ''I will not be a doormat,'' Mr. Lazio, a Suffolk County Republican, declared outside Junior's Restaurant on Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn, where he had just consumed a breakfast of scrambled eggs, home fries and cheesecake. ''It is fair to criticize my record. It is not fair to make things up about my record.'' ''I will not be a doormat,'' Mr. Lazio, a Suffolk County Republican, declared outside Junior's Restaurant on Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn, where he had just consumed a breakfast of scrambled eggs, home fries and cheesecake. ''It is fair to criticize my record. It is not fair to make things up about my record.''