 ''Since late last year, or earlier, the Hmong armed groups have been giving the Lao Army hell,'' he said. ''They've raided and grabbed payrolls and grabbed weapons. They've ambushed columns and shot down a helicopter.'' The boxwoods and ivy were yanked off the stone terraces, the tight plantings removed, to make room for sun-loving plants like Arundo donax, which looks like corn, and towers over a huge planting of tall purple bee balm; six-foot, bright yellow Rudbeckia maxima; bronze fennel; and purple smoke bush. The pots and urns that Mr. Johnson brings home from his travels are filled with things like Nicotiana sylvestris, which stands four feet tall over rambling chartreuse and purplish-black potato vines. WACHTEL-Sabina. Beloved wife of the late Alfred, dear sister of Harry Gordon, of Atlanta, GA, and Ceilia Lavove, of Bethesda, MD, cherished sister-in-law, aunt, and cousin. Memorial service Sunday 3:30 P.M. ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY (near Ave. V). WACHTEL-Sabina. Beloved wife of the late Alfred, dear sister of Harry Gordon, of Atlanta, GA, and Ceilia Lavove, of Bethesda, MD, cherished sister-in-law, aunt, and cousin. Memorial service Sunday 3:30 P.M. ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY (near Ave. V). BROOKLYN: GIRL, 15, RAPED  Three men forced their way into an apartment in Flatbush, Brooklyn, yesterday afternoon and sexually assaulted two girls and a woman, the police said. A a 15-year-old girl was raped, a 45-year-old woman was sexually assaulted, and a 13-year-old girl suffered attempted rape, the police said. The men, thought to be in their 20's, knocked on the apartment door at about 2:30. When the 13-year-old opened the door, they forced their way in, brandishing a handgun, the police said. Two of the men were masked. After forcing the three occupants into separate bedrooms and attacking them, the men took jewelry and money and then fled, the police said. The victims were taken to King's County Hospital Center, where they were reported in stable condition. Q. I read somewhere about putting Epsom salts around rosebushes. Is this a good idea and if so, how much should I use, how often and when during the year?