 The most incongruous sight of the Jets' three-day minicamp for rookies this weekend: Bill Parcells turning his back on practice for several minutes Saturday to pet a cat that was hiding in the bushes next to the practice field. The most incongruous sight of the Jets' three-day minicamp for rookies this weekend: Bill Parcells turning his back on practice for several minutes Saturday to pet a cat that was hiding in the bushes next to the practice field. As dusk obscured the orange trees and rose bushes in the courtyard, a group of solemn women pulled off their head  scarves and cloaks, slipped on rubber sandals and readied themselves today for the mikvah, or ritual bath, in a steamy side building of the Delrakhim synagogue. As dusk obscured the orange trees and rose bushes in the courtyard, a group of solemn women pulled off their head  scarves and cloaks, slipped on rubber sandals and readied themselves today for the mikvah, or ritual bath, in a steamy side building of the Delrakhim synagogue. GOLDBERG-Abraham. Of Brooklyn, New York, on April 29 at 95 years, after a joyful and inspirational life. Devoted husband of the late Rose. Cherished father of Muriel (Micki) Ginsberg. Dear father-in-law of Jack. Honored grandfather of Andrew (Marnie) and Peter. Loving brother of Danny and of the late Benjamin, Herbert, Sam and Louis. Founder of Fraser-Gold Carpet Corporation in Manhattan, NY, Goldie was loved by all who knew him in the industry. He was devoted to his friends, neighbors, synagogue, Masonic and Knights of Pythian Lodges. Abe embraced life with vigor and optimism. He loved music and always was ready to break into song and dance. Dad, you changed so many lives. Thank you for the joy you gave us all. Service today, 1 PM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY. Contributions in his memory may be made to Lenox Hill Bikur Cholim, 131 East 78th St., New York, NY 10021. GOLDBERG-Abraham. Of Brooklyn, New York, on April 29 at 95 years, after a joyful and inspirational life. Devoted husband of the late Rose. Cherished father of Muriel (Micki) Ginsberg. Dear father-in-law of Jack. Honored grandfather of Andrew (Marnie) and Peter. Loving brother of Danny and of the late Benjamin, Herbert, Sam and Louis. Founder of Fraser-Gold Carpet Corporation in Manhattan, NY, Goldie was loved by all who knew him in the industry. He was devoted to his friends, neighbors, synagogue, Masonic and Knights of Pythian Lodges. Abe embraced life with vigor and optimism. He loved music and always was ready to break into song and dance. Dad, you changed so many lives. Thank you for the joy you gave us all. Service today, 1 PM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY. Contributions in his memory may be made to Lenox Hill Bikur Cholim, 131 East 78th St., New York, NY 10021.