 It took 50 years, but Junior's has finally crossed the Brooklyn Bridge. Yesterday, Junior's, a Flatbush Avenue landmark that made its reputation on its cheesecake, opened a 60-seat restaurant in Grand Central Terminal. MINER-Frieda, a Brooklyn resident since her birth on March 28, 1912, died in Los Angeles on April 30, 2000, from congestive heart failure. Her daughter, Elaine Korotzer; son, Lawrence Miner; brothers, Ben Gluck, Joseph Gluck, and Hyman Gluck; sisters, Jeanette Prager and Evelyn Newman, four grandchildren and four greatgrandchildren survive her. The tears of laughter that she brought to our eyes have turned to tears of grief at her passing. Services today at 12 Noon from BoulevardRiverside Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY. MINER-Frieda, a Brooklyn resident since her birth on March 28, 1912, died in Los Angeles on April 30, 2000, from congestive heart failure. Her daughter, Elaine Korotzer; son, Lawrence Miner; brothers, Ben Gluck, Joseph Gluck, and Hyman Gluck; sisters, Jeanette Prager and Evelyn Newman, four grandchildren and four greatgrandchildren survive her. The tears of laughter that she brought to our eyes have turned to tears of grief at her passing. Services today at 12 Noon from BoulevardRiverside Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY. Now one of the speakers bureau success stories, Ms. Brandman sat in the balcony at the Flatbush Park Jewish Center synagogue Monday night, clutching a stack of index cards. Mr. Trumpet, 32, was charged last May with thrusting a gun into Mr. Marcelus's face, beating him and stealing his wallet as Mr. Marcelus delivered a pizza to Mr. Trumpet's home in East Flatbush. But last week, after the police discovered Mr. Marcelus's burned and decapitated body wrapped up in a roll of carpet in a parking garage in Queens, Mr. Trumpet was returned to jail in lieu of $750,000 bail. It took 50 years, but Junior's has finally crossed the Brooklyn Bridge. Yesterday, Junior's, a Flatbush Avenue landmark that made its reputation on its cheesecake, opened a 60-seat restaurant in Grand Central Terminal. MINER-Frieda, a Brooklyn resident since her birth on March 28, 1912, died in Los Angeles on April 30, 2000, from congestive heart failure. Her daughter, Elaine Korotzer; son, Lawrence Miner; brothers, Ben Gluck, Joseph Gluck, and Hyman Gluck; sisters, Jeanette Prager and Evelyn Newman, four grandchildren and four greatgrandchildren survive her. The tears of laughter that she brought to our eyes have turned to tears of grief at her passing. Services today at 12 Noon from BoulevardRiverside Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY. MINER-Frieda, a Brooklyn resident since her birth on March 28, 1912, died in Los Angeles on April 30, 2000, from congestive heart failure. Her daughter, Elaine Korotzer; son, Lawrence Miner; brothers, Ben Gluck, Joseph Gluck, and Hyman Gluck; sisters, Jeanette Prager and Evelyn Newman, four grandchildren and four greatgrandchildren survive her. The tears of laughter that she brought to our eyes have turned to tears of grief at her passing. Services today at 12 Noon from BoulevardRiverside Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY. Now one of the speakers bureau success stories, Ms. Brandman sat in the balcony at the Flatbush Park Jewish Center synagogue Monday night, clutching a stack of index cards. Mr. Trumpet, 32, was charged last May with thrusting a gun into Mr. Marcelus's face, beating him and stealing his wallet as Mr. Marcelus delivered a pizza to Mr. Trumpet's home in East Flatbush. But last week, after the police discovered Mr. Marcelus's burned and decapitated body wrapped up in a roll of carpet in a parking garage in Queens, Mr. Trumpet was returned to jail in lieu of $750,000 bail.