 ''That's why we are here on the ground,'' Mr. Sheaka said. ''Otherwise, I see no reason why Pa Sankoh left the bush and came here.'' After his capture, the locals pounced on him and stripped him of all his clothes, witnesses said. MAYER-Jack. Beloved of Ethel Tucker. Office at 32 Court St., Brooklyn. Services Friday 11AM Sherman's Flatbush Memorial Chapel, 1283 Coney Island Ave. MAYER-Jack. Beloved of Ethel Tucker. Office at 32 Court St., Brooklyn. Services Friday 11AM Sherman's Flatbush Memorial Chapel, 1283 Coney Island Ave. SALSITZ-Felicia ''Fela'' (nee Kluger). Beloved wife of the late Leo (Leibush) Salsitz. Mother of Edwin. Aunt of Eva Wald (with whom she was especially close) and Marla, Stella, Halina, and the late Aryeh. Sister of the late Rosia, Mania, Leon, and Samuel. Born in Cracow, Poland. A Holocaust survivor, whose parents Asher and Regina, brother Leon, and first husband Leon Finder perished in the Shoah. She was hidden and saved by Jan Nakonieczny, a righteous one among the nations. She was grateful to start a new life in America. Despite the horrors of the past, she was optimistic about the future, and had a warm, giving, energetic and cheerful presence. She will be missed as the matriach of our family in the U.S.A. and Israel. Memorial contributions may be made to the Jacob Perlow Hospice, Beth Isreal Medical Center, New York. SALSITZ-Felicia ''Fela'' (nee Kluger). Beloved wife of the late Leo (Leibush) Salsitz. Mother of Edwin. Aunt of Eva Wald (with whom she was especially close) and Marla, Stella, Halina, and the late Aryeh. Sister of the late Rosia, Mania, Leon, and Samuel. Born in Cracow, Poland. A Holocaust survivor, whose parents Asher and Regina, brother Leon, and first husband Leon Finder perished in the Shoah. She was hidden and saved by Jan Nakonieczny, a righteous one among the nations. She was grateful to start a new life in America. Despite the horrors of the past, she was optimistic about the future, and had a warm, giving, energetic and cheerful presence. She will be missed as the matriach of our family in the U.S.A. and Israel. Memorial contributions may be made to the Jacob Perlow Hospice, Beth Isreal Medical Center, New York. ''That's why we are here on the ground,'' Mr. Sheaka said. ''Otherwise, I see no reason why Pa Sankoh left the bush and came here.'' After his capture, the locals pounced on him and stripped him of all his clothes, witnesses said. MAYER-Jack. Beloved of Ethel Tucker. Office at 32 Court St., Brooklyn. Services Friday 11AM Sherman's Flatbush Memorial Chapel, 1283 Coney Island Ave. MAYER-Jack. Beloved of Ethel Tucker. Office at 32 Court St., Brooklyn. Services Friday 11AM Sherman's Flatbush Memorial Chapel, 1283 Coney Island Ave. SALSITZ-Felicia ''Fela'' (nee Kluger). Beloved wife of the late Leo (Leibush) Salsitz. Mother of Edwin. Aunt of Eva Wald (with whom she was especially close) and Marla, Stella, Halina, and the late Aryeh. Sister of the late Rosia, Mania, Leon, and Samuel. Born in Cracow, Poland. A Holocaust survivor, whose parents Asher and Regina, brother Leon, and first husband Leon Finder perished in the Shoah. She was hidden and saved by Jan Nakonieczny, a righteous one among the nations. She was grateful to start a new life in America. Despite the horrors of the past, she was optimistic about the future, and had a warm, giving, energetic and cheerful presence. She will be missed as the matriach of our family in the U.S.A. and Israel. Memorial contributions may be made to the Jacob Perlow Hospice, Beth Isreal Medical Center, New York. SALSITZ-Felicia ''Fela'' (nee Kluger). Beloved wife of the late Leo (Leibush) Salsitz. Mother of Edwin. Aunt of Eva Wald (with whom she was especially close) and Marla, Stella, Halina, and the late Aryeh. Sister of the late Rosia, Mania, Leon, and Samuel. Born in Cracow, Poland. A Holocaust survivor, whose parents Asher and Regina, brother Leon, and first husband Leon Finder perished in the Shoah. She was hidden and saved by Jan Nakonieczny, a righteous one among the nations. She was grateful to start a new life in America. Despite the horrors of the past, she was optimistic about the future, and had a warm, giving, energetic and cheerful presence. She will be missed as the matriach of our family in the U.S.A. and Israel. Memorial contributions may be made to the Jacob Perlow Hospice, Beth Isreal Medical Center, New York.