 BERSON-Charlotte. July 17, 2000. Age 83. Beloved wife of the late Lawrence. A very special mother to Bert, Judy, Eleanor (Lester), Marilyn (Barry) and the late Roz. Adored grandmother of Ilene, Gabrielle, Jennifer, Jonathan, Joanna, Stephanie, Amanda, David, Danny, Alana and Lee. Great grandmother of five. Devoted sister, aunt and friend. ''Granny'' to all. Service 10AM Wednesday, I.J. Morris, 1895 Flatbush Ave, Bklyn. BERSON-Charlotte. July 17, 2000. Age 83. Beloved wife of the late Lawrence. A very special mother to Bert, Judy, Eleanor (Lester), Marilyn (Barry) and the late Roz. Adored grandmother of Ilene, Gabrielle, Jennifer, Jonathan, Joanna, Stephanie, Amanda, David, Danny, Alana and Lee. Great grandmother of five. Devoted sister, aunt and friend. ''Granny'' to all. Service 10AM Wednesday, I.J. Morris, 1895 Flatbush Ave, Bklyn. Apple Growers in New York's Hudson Valley are abandoning some orchards entirely this season because of damage to crops from two springtime hail storms; approximately 2.09 million bushels, or about a third of crop grown on 7,000 acres, are expected to be lost in probably worst crop damage in memory; loss comes as number of economic forces have pushed many growers to brink; many fear for way of life and evoke potential consequence of their financial crisis in region where wave of development has cut into apple growing in last decade; seek emergency infusion of cash from federal government; photos (M) Two storms pelted newly formed apples with jagged balls of ice on more than 7,000 acres, and as the apples have grown, the tiny bruises have turned into ugly divots. Two thousand of those acres were so badly hurt that farmers are abandoning them entirely this season. In all, some 2.09 million bushels, about a third of the crop, are expected to be lost in what farmers say is the worst crop damage in memory. Two storms pelted newly formed apples with jagged balls of ice on more than 7,000 acres, and as the apples have grown, the tiny bruises have turned into ugly divots. Two thousand of those acres were so badly hurt that farmers are abandoning them entirely this season. In all, some 2.09 million bushels, about a third of the crop, are expected to be lost in what farmers say is the worst crop damage in memory. ''The cider market is $1.20 a bushel and it costs $4 a bushel to pick it,'' said Russ Bartolotta Jr. of Klein's Kill Fruit Farms in Germantown, N.Y., across the Hudson River in Columbia County. ''Economically, you're committing suicide to go in there and try to salvage. You're going to throw good money after bad.'' A bushel of apples sold for fresh fruit rather than juice would have brought a farmer $6 in 1995. Today, the same bushel brings $3.50, apple growers say. Farmers say, too, that walking away from an apple orchard for a season does not free them from maintaining it. ''You still have to mow and trim the orchards and spray so certain insects and fungus don't get in there,'' said Mr. Bartolotta, who estimates that 90 percent of the apple crop was ruined on his family's 320 acres of orchards. ''There are things you have to keep doing so next year's crop won't be affected.'' Whether in the majors or in exile in a bush league, however, Jack is distinctive in his hapless way. Not for Lardner was the sentimental celebration in which others of the sportswriting fraternity indulge. To call him a sportswriter is like calling F. Scott Fitzgerald a gossip columnist. The critic Maxwell Geismar was not overstating when he credited Lardner with being ''one of the most savage and merciless satirists and social critics of his period who dissected Babbitt before Babbitt was born.'' Lardner was cruelly comical. Jack's skirmish with Joe Hill is an affair of the heart, but his typical reaction to competitors on field and off, and to slights imagined and only too real, take the form of dreams of physical retaliation. Take the time when Allen, Jack's teammate on Chicago's pitching staff, buys a big diamond ring for his girlfriend Marie and makes Jack look cheap in front of his wife, Florrie, who is Marie's sister. It was a brilliantly sunny morning, and the gardener was attending to the lawn. Quietly, my daughter pointed out six red rose bushes and two yellow ones that had been planted in memory of the martyrs. Then she told me that the gardener was the husband and father of the two slain women. EIDINGER-Mildred, on July 16th. Devoted wife of the late Abe. Beloved mother of Karen Sue Eidinger of Potomac, MD., and Mark Neil Eidinger of Belle Harbor, NY. Dear sister of Lillian Markowitz of Brooklyn, NY, sister-in-law of Bea Adams of New York, NY. Service Wednesday, 11:30 AM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY (near Ave. V). EIDINGER-Mildred, on July 16th. Devoted wife of the late Abe. Beloved mother of Karen Sue Eidinger of Potomac, MD., and Mark Neil Eidinger of Belle Harbor, NY. Dear sister of Lillian Markowitz of Brooklyn, NY, sister-in-law of Bea Adams of New York, NY. Service Wednesday, 11:30 AM, ''Parkside'' Memorial Chapel, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, NY (near Ave. V).