 ''SURFACE TRANSIT.'' It was smart of the organizers of the first New York Hip-Hop Theater Festival to make Sarah Jones's one-person play its centerpiece. Ms. Jones first presented it a couple of years ago in the East Village, and since then she and the show have grown. Among artists most respected by other hip-hop poets and performers, Ms. Jones has the clearest sense of distance; she can satirize the phenomenon in ways that open it up for people who think there is something mysterious about it. The eight characters she creates include an octogenarian who burns with the desire to be with it, whatever ''it'' is; a Russian immigrant trying to persuade her small black daughter to ignore racial slurs hurled at her by their Flatbush neighbors; a West Indian black woman with a British accent who pops into a studio for an MTV spot audition; and a white policeman who abuses women and hates gay men but could not possibly have anything against gays because his best friend from childhood ''is one of those'' (2:00). P.S. 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, (212) 477-5288. Wednesdays through Saturdays, at 8:30 p.m.; also 11 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. Tickets: $25; $15 student tickets with identification (D. J. R. Bruckner). Fuel had been leaking from the pipeline at a spot deep in the bush, near a forest of rubber trees. Villagers had been scooping it up with jerrycans, washbasins and plastic bottles that they carried away in wheelbarrows, hoping to resell it for a few pennies above the official rate of 21 cents a quart. Fuel had been leaking from the pipeline at a spot deep in the bush, near a forest of rubber trees. Villagers had been scooping it up with jerrycans, washbasins and plastic bottles that they carried away in wheelbarrows, hoping to resell it for a few pennies above the official rate of 21 cents a quart. To reach the pipeline from here in Oviri-Court, one must quit a dirt road and hike a half-mile into the bush. Wooden planks remain on the muddy stretches to allow access to vehicles -- evidence, villagers said, that an organized ring had come here with a truck and equipment. A big hole had been dug, exposing the pipeline, which now lay underwater. With Russian casualties mounting from land mine attacks in Chechnya, the Federal Security Service today accused a London-based mine-clearing organization of providing military training and assistance to rebel forces still engaged in attacks and ambushes against Russian security forces. Guy Willoughby, the president of the organization, Halo Trust, which is financed in part by the United States and the trust of Diana, the late Princess of Wales, acknowledged tonight that some of the 100 or more Chechens his organization trained between 1997 and 1999 might have ''joined the fighters'' and transferred their skills to rebel formations laying mines and staging ambushes against Russian troops. With Russian casualties mounting from land mine attacks in Chechnya, the Federal Security Service today accused a London-based mine-clearing organization of providing military training and assistance to rebel forces still engaged in attacks and ambushes against Russian security forces. Guy Willoughby, the president of the organization, Halo Trust, which is financed in part by the United States and the trust of Diana, the late Princess of Wales, acknowledged tonight that some of the 100 or more Chechens his organization trained between 1997 and 1999 might have ''joined the fighters'' and transferred their skills to rebel formations laying mines and staging ambushes against Russian troops. The ring had tried to escape a few weeks earlier, when Ms. Parker was throwing rose petals at a wedding. It landed in a bush on the Upper East Side. ''We found it immediately,'' Mr. King said. There's also the violent Los Angeles cop Bateman (a zealous Jon Favreau) and the Chevy Silverado-size sumo wrestler Jumbo (the large but gentle Ace Yonamine) to crank up the level of comic violence. And it wouldn't be a football picture without a born-again Christian (Troy Winbush). '' WITH: Keanu Reeves (Shane Falco), Gene Hackman (Jimmy McGinty), Orlando Jones (Clifford Franklin), Jon Favreau (Daniel Bateman), Brooke Langton (Annabelle Farrell), Rhys Ifans (Nigel Gruff), Michael Taliferro (Andre Jackson), Faison Love (Jamal Jackson), Michael Jace (Earl Wilkerson), Ace Yonamine (Jumbo Fumiko), Troy Winbush (Walter Cochran), David Denman (Brian Murphy) Jack Warden (Edward O'Neil), and John Madden and Pat Summerall as themselves. Mr. Weiner's company sells Gore campaign stickers and other paraphernalia through its Web site, www.goregoods.com. A single bumper sticker is $4 plus $4.95 for shipping; another site, www.goregear.com, sells stickers for $1 plus $2 shipping. This year, sticker orders indicate enthusiasm for the Republican ticket, said Ted Jackson, owner of the Spalding Group in Louisville, Ky., the sole licensee for the George W. Bush campaign. ''This is like 1984, the Reagan re-election,'' said Mr. Jackson, adding that demand is far stronger than it was for the Dole candidacy four years ago. His company's web site, www.georgewbushstore.com. sells stickers in minimum orders of 25 at 75 cents each; one comes free with every order of other goods, like Bush polo shirts or bottled water.