 ''I AM nervous I won't be blooming in time,'' said Dianne Blell, staring in dismay at her Fragrant Cloud and Bewitched rosebushes, which were definitely not cooperating. ''I AM nervous I won't be blooming in time,'' said Dianne Blell, staring in dismay at her Fragrant Cloud and Bewitched rosebushes, which were definitely not cooperating. The Leibers' garden, with its delectable boxwood parterres, yew hedges, rose gardens, potager and vast deciduous woodland park (developed over the last 44 years with the assistance of four full-time gardeners) can hardly be called arriviste. Garden snobs are still chuckling over the Southampton socialite on the benefit circuit last summer who was in such a rush to create a dazzling tableau vivant that she forgot to remove the price tags from the rose bushes before the guests arrived. To Mr. Alexander's chagrin, deer ate his budding roses for breakfast last week. ''They can go through a rose bush in seconds,'' he said, examining the damage. Corn drops as heavy rains in Midwest all but eliminate concerns about drought damage to newly planted crops; in Chicago, corn for July delivery falls 4.5 cents, or 2.2 percent, to $2.0325 a bushel; graph (S) CORN FALLS. Corn dropped as heavy rains in the Midwest all but eliminated concern about drought damage to newly planted crops. In Chicago, corn for July delivery fell 4.5 cents, or 2.2 percent, to $2.0325 a bushel. CORN FALLS. Corn dropped as heavy rains in the Midwest all but eliminated concern about drought damage to newly planted crops. In Chicago, corn for July delivery fell 4.5 cents, or 2.2 percent, to $2.0325 a bushel. The villain, Mart Deeford, has no idea who the Penghills are. But he spends the long night of the title in making deductions that would appeal to Norman Bates, another tricky-tempered fellow with a methodical modus operandi and certain unresolved feelings about women. So Mart calls the local schoolteacher to inquire innocently about which schoolgirls wear pigtails. He stakes out a house -- the wrong one, as it happens -- and gets ready to ambush his prey. He lures a babysitter away from her charge with a lie about an injured pet. Meanwhile, Rachel has a falling-out with her boyfriend, leaves Ann and retreats to the otherwise deserted stalker's paradise of a building that she calls home. The villain, Mart Deeford, has no idea who the Penghills are. But he spends the long night of the title in making deductions that would appeal to Norman Bates, another tricky-tempered fellow with a methodical modus operandi and certain unresolved feelings about women. So Mart calls the local schoolteacher to inquire innocently about which schoolgirls wear pigtails. He stakes out a house -- the wrong one, as it happens -- and gets ready to ambush his prey. He lures a babysitter away from her charge with a lie about an injured pet. Meanwhile, Rachel has a falling-out with her boyfriend, leaves Ann and retreats to the otherwise deserted stalker's paradise of a building that she calls home. The driver, Marvin Beeler, 32, picked up the first woman, Chanel Williams, at a rehabilitation center in Flatbush about noon on Tuesday,  the police said. Mr. Beeler then picked up the second woman, Tiy Bharath, at her home at 557 Montauk Avenue in East New York. The driver, Marvin Beeler, 32, picked up the first woman, Chanel Williams, at a rehabilitation center in Flatbush about noon on Tuesday,  the police said. Mr. Beeler then picked up the second woman, Tiy Bharath, at her home at 557 Montauk Avenue in East New York. HUNT-J. Francis passed away June 11, 2000 at home in Kingwood, Texas at the age of 74. Frank practiced law in Massachusetts, NY and Connecticut from 1949-1959 until hired by ARAMCO. He worked in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia as Senior Tax Counsel until his transfer to Houston, Texas as Chief Tax Counsel where he retired in 1986. Frank was an active member of St. Martha's Church and enjoyed golf and traveling. He was preceded in death by his wife Billie whom he married in 1954 while in the Navy. Frank is survived by his four children Margaret Rodebush, Patricia Brooke, Timothy, and Frank Hunt, Jr.; brother Louis Hunt; grandchildren Kathryn, Wesley, and Michael Rodebush, Amy and Joseph Hunt, Connor, Ryan, Erik, and Chris Brooke, and great Grandson Trexler Brooke. Visitation is scheduled Friday, June 16 from 69:00PM at the funeral home. Funeral Mass, 10:30AM Saturday, June 17, St. Martha's Catholic Church, Kingwood, Texas. In lieu of flowers, contributions to the J.F. Hunt Fund at Jesuit International Missions, 2059 North Sedgwick, Chicago, IL 60614 (Fr. G. Watrin); The Living Bank, PO Box 725, Houston, TX 77265; or National Tuberous Sclerosis Association, 8181 Professional Place, Suite 110, Landover, MD. 20785. HUNT-J. Francis passed away June 11, 2000 at home in Kingwood, Texas at the age of 74. Frank practiced law in Massachusetts, NY and Connecticut from 1949-1959 until hired by ARAMCO. He worked in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia as Senior Tax Counsel until his transfer to Houston, Texas as Chief Tax Counsel where he retired in 1986. Frank was an active member of St. Martha's Church and enjoyed golf and traveling. He was preceded in death by his wife Billie whom he married in 1954 while in the Navy. Frank is survived by his four children Margaret Rodebush, Patricia Brooke, Timothy, and Frank Hunt, Jr.; brother Louis Hunt; grandchildren Kathryn, Wesley, and Michael Rodebush, Amy and Joseph Hunt, Connor, Ryan, Erik, and Chris Brooke, and great Grandson Trexler Brooke. Visitation is scheduled Friday, June 16 from 69:00PM at the funeral home. Funeral Mass, 10:30AM Saturday, June 17, St. Martha's Catholic Church, Kingwood, Texas. In lieu of flowers, contributions to the J.F. Hunt Fund at Jesuit International Missions, 2059 North Sedgwick, Chicago, IL 60614 (Fr. G. Watrin); The Living Bank, PO Box 725, Houston, TX 77265; or National Tuberous Sclerosis Association, 8181 Professional Place, Suite 110, Landover, MD. 20785.