 Carol Rapaport letter on Jodi Wilgoren's June 13 article cites own participation in breast cancer fund-raising walk As a participant in Avon's three-day breast cancer fund-raising walk from Bear Mountain to Manhattan, I, like Jodi Wilgoren (Essay, June 13), experienced many inspiring ''moments.'' As a breast cancer survivor, I also experienced something else.  The 1999 New York walk marked the first consecutive three days during which I did not once think about dying. I think this was because I was too busy living. As a participant in Avon's three-day breast cancer fund-raising walk from Bear Mountain to Manhattan, I, like Jodi Wilgoren (Essay, June 13), experienced many inspiring ''moments.'' As a breast cancer survivor, I also experienced something else.  The 1999 New York walk marked the first consecutive three days during which I did not once think about dying. I think this was because I was too busy living. BACH-Ida L. The Offices, Directors, Management and Staff of Metropolitan Jewish Health System sadly mourn the passing of Ida L. Bach, honorary board member, esteemed supporter, and dear friend. Ida was deeply dedicated to serving the elderly and was an inspiration to others through her selfless acts of devotion. She was a long time officer and treasurer of the Flatbush League, which later became known as the Town League, and served many years as a member of the board of Directors of Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center. Beloved wife of the late Reuben H. Bach, her long years of service and devotion will be remembered always. We extend our sincere condolences and deepest sympathies to her family and friends. Howard Sharfstein, Chairperson Eli S. Feldman, President/CEO BACH-Ida L. The Offices, Directors, Management and Staff of Metropolitan Jewish Health System sadly mourn the passing of Ida L. Bach, honorary board member, esteemed supporter, and dear friend. Ida was deeply dedicated to serving the elderly and was an inspiration to others through her selfless acts of devotion. She was a long time officer and treasurer of the Flatbush League, which later became known as the Town League, and served many years as a member of the board of Directors of Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center. Beloved wife of the late Reuben H. Bach, her long years of service and devotion will be remembered always. We extend our sincere condolences and deepest sympathies to her family and friends. Howard Sharfstein, Chairperson Eli S. Feldman, President/CEO