 ROTH-Rebecca. Young Israel of Flatbush mourns the passing of our beloved member and supporter, Rebecca Roth. Kenneth Auman, Rabbi Mark Goldstein, Pres. ROTH-Rebecca. Young Israel of Flatbush mourns the passing of our beloved member and supporter, Rebecca Roth. Kenneth Auman, Rabbi Mark Goldstein, Pres. Russian Convoy Is Ambushed  Islamic rebels mounted a major attack outside Chechnya's borders for the first time in nearly nine months, killing 18 of 22 Russian soldiers in a convoy as it moved down a mountain road in the Caucasus foothills in midmorning. Three soldiers were wounded and one was missing. * ''AMERICAN PSYCHO,'' starring Christian Bale. Directed by Mary Harron (R, 104 minutes). Ms. Harron's sleekly brilliant screen adaptation of Bret Easton Ellis's notorious 1991 novel pares away most of the book's gore to portray the main character's homicidal butchery as a high-gloss fantasy. The movie's chic blend of satire, comedy and horror is anchored in a star-making performance by Mr. Bale as Patrick Bateman, a fashion-obsessed late-80's Wall Street hotshot who goes on a killing spree. Reese Witherspoon, Chloe Sevigny, Samantha Mathis and Cara Seymour give dazzling cameo performances as the unfortunate women in his life. The movie's message about a soulless, surface-obsessed society still applies (Stephen Holden). * ''AMERICAN PSYCHO,'' starring Christian Bale. Directed by Mary Harron (R, 104 minutes). Ms. Harron's sleekly brilliant screen adaptation of Bret Easton Ellis's notorious 1991 novel pares away most of the book's gore to portray the main character's homicidal butchery as a high-gloss fantasy. The movie's chic blend of satire, comedy and horror is anchored in a star-making performance by Mr. Bale as Patrick Bateman, a fashion-obsessed late-80's Wall Street hotshot who goes on a killing spree. Reese Witherspoon, Chloe Sevigny, Samantha Mathis and Cara Seymour give dazzling cameo performances as the unfortunate women in his life. The movie's message about a soulless, surface-obsessed society still applies (Stephen Holden). ''CARIBBEAN FOOD AND CULTURE OF FLATBUSH,'' Brooklyn. A historical and gastronomic tour led by Alice Baldwin-Jones, an anthropologist. Meets tomorrow at 1 p.m. at the corner of Flatbush and Ocean Avenues. Sponsored by the Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment. Fee, $8; $6 for Center members; $5 for students and the elderly. Information: (718) 788-8500, extension 401. Islamic rebels mount major attack outside Chechnya's borders for first time in nearly 9 months, nearly wiping out convoy of 22 Russian soldiers moving down mountain road in neighboring region of Russia, Ingushetia; ambush kills 18 Russian troops and wounds 3 others; Russian planes later bomb forests near ambush site; map (M) The mid-morning ambush of two troop trucks and an armored vehicle in the Caucasus foothills killed 18 Russian Interior Ministry troops and wounded 3 others. One soldier was reported missing. The mid-morning ambush of two troop trucks and an armored vehicle in the Caucasus foothills killed 18 Russian Interior Ministry troops and wounded 3 others. One soldier was reported missing. ''They were attacked treacherously with grenade launchers by bandits who hid in the roadside bush,''the first deputy chief of the Russian general staff, Col. Gen. Valery Manilov, said. ''We hope that we will track them down and punish them for their crime.'' Russian planes later bombed forests near the ambush site, north of the village of Galashki and just a few miles from the major government-run camps for Chechen war refugees. It was not known whether the attackers were hit. The ambush was a departure for the battered rebels, who had not attacked Russian troops outside Chechnya's borders since the early stages of the Chechnya war last September. The war began last summer after rebels invaded the neighboring province of Dagestan, touching off a struggle with Russian troops along the two provinces' border. And in fact, it is not clear that the rebels, backed into southern Chechnya's mountains by the Russians, can widen the conflict beyond periodic ambushes like the one today. The Russian military says many guerrillas have melted into the civilian populations of Chechnya and Ingushetia. On the other hand, ambushes like today's make it clear that Russian forces have not restored order to the area, as spokesmen are now claiming. The rebels have staged damaging attacks on Russian convoys on the average of every two weeks since general fighting ended in March, killing as many as 32 soldiers in a single ambush. POSSESSION. In Andrzej Zulawski's striking but perplexing horror film, a tormented woman (Isabelle Adjani) has been cheating on her husband (Sam Neill) with a human lover and another partner who starts out with a set of tentacles. ''It's a movie that contains a certain amount of unseemly gore and makes no sense whatsoever,'' Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times. That may have been because he was watching a theatrical version stripped down to around 80 minutes. Here, 45 minutes have been restored, making matters complete, if not that much clearer. 1981. Anchor Bay. $14.98; DVD, $29.98. 123 minutes.