 LINCKS-Margaret. On June 4, 2000. Beloved wife of the late William. Aunt of Carol. Funeral Thursday, 9AM, from the McManus Funeral Home, 2001 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn. Religious service Wednesday, 8PM. Interment Greenwood Cemetery. Visiting Wednesday 2-5 and 7-9. LINCKS-Margaret. On June 4, 2000. Beloved wife of the late William. Aunt of Carol. Funeral Thursday, 9AM, from the McManus Funeral Home, 2001 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn. Religious service Wednesday, 8PM. Interment Greenwood Cemetery. Visiting Wednesday 2-5 and 7-9. On a stage at Grand Army Plaza, the performers will include the Russian American Kids Circus, the Maimouna Keita School of African Dance and the rock singer Corey Glover. Outside the Brooklyn Museum of Art, Jewish and Afro-Haitian, calypso and soca rhythms will be heard. These and other attractions, including games, food and exhibitions and the coronation of the Brooklyn-born comedy team of Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara as homecoming king and queen, are part of the 18th Annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn Homecoming Festival. The event, from noon to 6 p.m. Sunday, is centered around Grand Army Plaza from Eastern Parkway to the Brooklyn Museum of Art and along Flatbush Avenue to the Prospect Park Wildlife Center. On a stage at Grand Army Plaza, the performers will include the Russian American Kids Circus, the Maimouna Keita School of African Dance and the rock singer Corey Glover. Outside the Brooklyn Museum of Art, Jewish and Afro-Haitian, calypso and soca rhythms will be heard. These and other attractions, including games, food and exhibitions and the coronation of the Brooklyn-born comedy team of Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara as homecoming king and queen, are part of the 18th Annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn Homecoming Festival. The event, from noon to 6 p.m. Sunday, is centered around Grand Army Plaza from Eastern Parkway to the Brooklyn Museum of Art and along Flatbush Avenue to the Prospect Park Wildlife Center. I admit I am not the same earthy fellow I was 15 years ago, when I coached in the basketball bushes and talked about organic experiences and went out for late-night fish 'n chips at roadside shacks in Pensacola. Am I a sellout just because I wear suspenders under my suit jacket and do online trading spots on television for P.D. Waterhouse? Times change. Garcia's gone. Consider me part new-age psychologist, part 60's guru, some kind of spiritual cross between Tony Robbins and Leonard Nimoy. The mango is a handsome tree with long, slender leaves that droop with dapper elegance. The trees flower from January through March and set fruit about a month after. A baby mango looks like a tiny green kidney bean and grows from a long stem called a panicle that hangs vertically from the branch. It takes about five years for a mango tree to fruit, and eight to 10 years for it to become productive enough to pay for the cost of growing it. Each year, a tree produces five or six bushels (50 to 60 fruits a bushel), although some produce as many as 20 bushels. Mr. Mitchell's little grove will yield 1,500 bushels. It doesn't take long for the men to fill the 30-pound buckets -- 30 seconds, maybe a minute for hand-picked fruit, five minutes using the pole. The buckets are dumped into 20-bushel wooden bins arranged on the back of a flatbed truck. When the bins are full, they're driven to Mitchell's processing center, where they'll be washed with a high pressure water hose, then sold in bulk. The pickers are paid $2.50 a bushel (55 pounds), and a good picker can pick 2,000 to 3,000 pounds a day. It's hard work, lasting until 4:30 or 5 p.m., and when it's over, a picker will walk away with about $100. SHANDELL-Celia S. Age 90, a strong and remarkable woman. Beloved sister of Rose, loving mother of Doris, Fred and Amy. Adored Grandma of Beth, Joanne, Stacey, Jonathan, Kate and Michael, and Nana to Emily, Daniel, Jed and Calvin. We loved her a bushel and a peck. Services Thursday, June 8 at 12:30 PM at Weinstein's Memorial Chapel at 1652 Central Avenue, Yonkers. SHANDELL-Celia S. Age 90, a strong and remarkable woman. Beloved sister of Rose, loving mother of Doris, Fred and Amy. Adored Grandma of Beth, Joanne, Stacey, Jonathan, Kate and Michael, and Nana to Emily, Daniel, Jed and Calvin. We loved her a bushel and a peck. Services Thursday, June 8 at 12:30 PM at Weinstein's Memorial Chapel at 1652 Central Avenue, Yonkers.