 ''SURFACE TRANSIT.'' It was smart of the organizers of the first New York Hip-Hop Theater Festival to make Sarah Jones's one-person play its centerpiece. Ms. Jones first presented it a couple of years ago in the East Village, and since then she and the show have grown. Among artists most respected by other hip-hop poets and performers, Ms. Jones has the clearest sense of distance; she can satirize the phenomenon in ways that open it up for people who think there is something mysterious about it. The eight characters she creates include an octogenarian who burns with the desire to be with it, whatever ''it'' is; a Russian immigrant trying to persuade her small black daughter to ignore racial slurs hurled at her by their Flatbush neighbors; a West Indian black woman with a British accent who pops into a studio for an MTV spot audition; and a white policeman who abuses women and hates gay men but could not possibly have anything against gays because his best friend from childhood ''is one of those'' (2:00). P.S. 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village, (212) 477-5288. Through tomorrow. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and 11. Tickets: $25; $15 student tickets with identification (D. J. R. Bruckner). * ORRIN EVANS TRIO, Up Over Jazz Cafe, 351 Flatbush Avenue, near Seventh Avenue, Park Slope, Brooklyn, (718) 398-5413. This young pianist from Philadelphia has been one of the most pleasant developments of the last few years in jazz. He likes to surprise his audiences: mid-improvisation, he'll take a liking to one note or phrase and repeat it until it seems to change shape. Or he'll be playing free, and then, with the rest of the group, snap back into the rhythm and harmony of the tune in an instant. He's a grandstander, but he's also keenly interested in where a small jazz group can go together; and his bassist Reid Anderson, and drummer, Nasheet Waits, are among the best in the business right now. Sets are tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30 and midnight; cover charge is $15 a set (Ratliff). COHEN-Hyman. Died August 24, age 70. Survived and cherished by his wife of 50 years Mary, sons Peter and Howard, daughter Esther, grandchildren Paul and Max, daughters - in - law Gina and Deirdre, son-in-law Alan and sister Rebecca. Hyman Cohen was a veteran of the U.S. Army. He was an outstanding member of the community. He was known for his boundless energy and commitment to many worthy causes. He served as Vice President of the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center and as Chairman of its Baord of Governers; President of School Board District 21; Vice President of the Brighton Beach Community Group; Treasurer of the Infants Home of Brooklyn; President of the Ocean Front Development Corp, a non-profit organization for the betterment of the community. He was a member of Community Planning Baord Number 13, member of the Board of Governers of the Shore Front ''Y,'' and a member of the Jewish Veterans. For many years he sponsored and organized the annual dinner for the benefit of the New York Aquarium in Coney Island. He was a member of the Board of Trustees of the Brooklyn School for Special Children and a member of the Board of Directors of the National Kidney Foundation of New York and New Jersey. He was Chairman of the Kingsborough Community College Foundation. He was a loyal executive of Alexander Muss & Sons for 45 years, primarily as Vice President and General Manager of the Brighton Beach Bath and Racquet Club. He was also an officer of Deere Real Estate Services, Inc. Hy, will be remembered for his generosity, vitality and courage. Services today 10 AM, at Parkside Memorial Chapels, Inc, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, New York. COHEN-Hyman. Died August 24, age 70. Survived and cherished by his wife of 50 years Mary, sons Peter and Howard, daughter Esther, grandchildren Paul and Max, daughters - in - law Gina and Deirdre, son-in-law Alan and sister Rebecca. Hyman Cohen was a veteran of the U.S. Army. He was an outstanding member of the community. He was known for his boundless energy and commitment to many worthy causes. He served as Vice President of the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center and as Chairman of its Baord of Governers; President of School Board District 21; Vice President of the Brighton Beach Community Group; Treasurer of the Infants Home of Brooklyn; President of the Ocean Front Development Corp, a non-profit organization for the betterment of the community. He was a member of Community Planning Baord Number 13, member of the Board of Governers of the Shore Front ''Y,'' and a member of the Jewish Veterans. For many years he sponsored and organized the annual dinner for the benefit of the New York Aquarium in Coney Island. He was a member of the Board of Trustees of the Brooklyn School for Special Children and a member of the Board of Directors of the National Kidney Foundation of New York and New Jersey. He was Chairman of the Kingsborough Community College Foundation. He was a loyal executive of Alexander Muss & Sons for 45 years, primarily as Vice President and General Manager of the Brighton Beach Bath and Racquet Club. He was also an officer of Deere Real Estate Services, Inc. Hy, will be remembered for his generosity, vitality and courage. Services today 10 AM, at Parkside Memorial Chapels, Inc, 2576 Flatbush Ave., Brooklyn, New York. At an illustration workshop tomorrow, children will hear the story of the attack in ''The Social History of Flatbush,'' by Gertrude Lefferts Vanderbilt. Her 1920's account is told from the point of view of her grandmother Femmetie Hegeman Lefferts, a young girl during the war. Battle of Long Island drop-in illustration workshop, tomorrow from 1:30 to 4:30 p.m., and battle storytelling, on Sunday at 1 p.m., at the Lefferts Homestead, Prospect Park, Flatbush Avenue near Empire Boulevard, Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, (718) 965-6505. Free.