 Leslie Land column answers readers' questions on bush clover (Lespedeza thunbergii) and mulch; drawing (M) Q. Two years ago, I planted two small bush clovers (Lespedeza thunbergii). Last summer, they grew well over six feet tall and produced gorgeous purple blossoms in August and September, drowning a rose bush next to them. This spring, all those branches are dead and new growth is coming up from the base. Will it be just as huge this summer? If so, should I move the rose bush or can I trim back the lespedeza? Q. Two years ago, I planted two small bush clovers (Lespedeza thunbergii). Last summer, they grew well over six feet tall and produced gorgeous purple blossoms in August and September, drowning a rose bush next to them. This spring, all those branches are dead and new growth is coming up from the base. Will it be just as huge this summer? If so, should I move the rose bush or can I trim back the lespedeza? If the rose bush is small or prone to fungus, it should be moved. If it's medium to large, and robust, it probably won't suffer long-term harm from a late lespedeza embrace, especially if those loving arms are fewer than nature intended. Speaking of which, the words bush clover can terrify anyone familiar with your plants' evil cousin, the highly invasive Chinese lespedeza (L. cuneata). L. thunbergii isn't worry-free, but it's usually less threatening to the surrounding countryside. It's also inclined to be more tender than generally advertised, though individual plants have survived as far north as Maine. Some elderly Okinawans, who grew up near where remains of three American marines missing since near end of World War II were found, say Katsuyama villagers ambushed and killed men, thinking they were three black marines who villagers believed had repeatedly come to village to rape women; tale refocuses attention on widespread rape of Okinawan women by American servicemen, one of most widely ignored crimes of war; map; photos (M) Some elderly Okinawans, who grew up near where the remains were found, are now willing to tell a long-held secret: a group of villagers ambushed and killed the three men, thinking they were the three black marines who the villagers believed had repeatedly come to the village to rape the village women. The marines were so confident, the villagers said, that they would sometimes come to Katsuyama without weapons. One day, the villagers, with the help of two armed Japanese soldiers who were hiding in the jungle, ambushed three marines in a dark narrow mountain pass near a river, they said. The Japanese soldiers shot at the marines from the bushes and several dozen villagers beat them to death with sticks and stones. From management on down, the Pacers came into this game offering more propositions than a California voting booth. Ownership stooped to the bush-league level of begging ticket brokers to not supply the cast of Spike Lee's next film with prime courtside real estate. Yet the most troubling of signs were the complaints that this series was slipping away because the coach, Bird, was holding back youth and speed.