 There are ornamental grasses in the liberated paradise, a dwarf peach tree and everyone's dream of a profundity of seasonal flowers crowding in, Mr. Simpson's fertility god scarecrow towering above. Against one garden wall, a gabled tool shed and small summer house with sofa add a never-never land aura, along with a slate-top table for warm-weather dining nestled among the raspberry bushes, birds chirping above. As the yuks-master of Metro-North, he says he is the quiet one in his family, which consists of his wife, Joanne, their 6-year-old daughter, Ariana, and two stepsons, Peter, 21, and Alex, 18. They live in a restored country Victorian in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn. As the yuks-master of Metro-North, he says he is the quiet one in his family, which consists of his wife, Joanne, their 6-year-old daughter, Ariana, and two stepsons, Peter, 21, and Alex, 18. They live in a restored country Victorian in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn. Of course, there are bushels of fruit available in season from neighbors and markets, so Cunningham starts putting up those iconic jars of preserves that glow all winter in the cellars of the truly rural. ''As I hover over my boiling caldrons like one of Macbeth's weird sisters, I brood on the possibility of botulism, the 'big B,' ''she writes. ''Even 'The Joy of Cooking,' a tome that waxes poetic over preserves, sounds a tad grim when it notes Clostridium botulinum is a germ so deadly that one ounce can kill a million people.'' Conan, who was captured and held for a week by the Iraqis while covering the Iran-Iraq war nine years ago, smiled serenely through a graying red beard. ''It's true, I never said, 'What a great ambush.' Reportorial detachment is good, but it's nice to finally be for something. I want these guys to win, to do well. I got rushes covering wars and political conventions and the impeachment hearings, but this is all by myself, filling three hours on the radio, feeling really alive.'' But it is still the bushes and far from home. His two college-age children and wife, Liane Hansen, an NPR anchor, live outside Washington, too far to commute. She says he looks 10 years younger, and he says he is happy, but he has had twinges as the political season heated up. Was he doing the right thing? If King wanted to find the genesis of his bad reputation, he might try looking in Hollywood. Except for ''Carrie'' and ''The Shining,'' most early King films -- think ''Pet Sematary'' or ''Maximum Overdrive'' or ''Children of the Corn'' -- were dopey gorefests. As King the author became a brand name, his movies gave serious readers everywhere reason not to read him. From the Pico-Robertson district in Los Angeles to the Five Towns on Long Island, from Brookline outside Boston to West Rogers Park in Chicago, Orthodox Jews have come to define, even to dominate, what were once the redoubts of their less-observant brethren. The shift that swept through Midwood and Flatbush in Brooklyn more than a decade ago now has reached the very heartland of the secular Jewish intelligentsia, Manhattan's Upper West Side, where the sidewalks of Broadway and 86th Street teem with Sabbath shulgoers and the faithful dance down West End Avenue to celebrate Simchat Torah. Teaneck, N. J., has been nicknamed Dati-neck, by some of its growing number of observant residents, dati being the Hebrew word used by Israelis to describe their Orthodox citizens. For that matter, Israel itself may offer the ultimate example of a tipping point, one played out on a national canvas, with Tel Aviv the citadel of secularism and Jerusalem the crown of the theocracy. Cosmos, our guide, was like a Rastafarian Outward Bound leader; he assured us that he would take us ''deep into the bush.'' We drove for half an hour up the rocky west coast of the island, then cut into the interior on a small side road. ''Concord Falls,'' Cosmos said. ''It's only a 20-minute hike.'' A veteran of several Caribbean waterfall hikes, I had doubts. ''DEATH,'' decides a tormented Cuban Army veteran, the lone survivor of an ambush during the war in Angola, ''is a quick way to cure madness.'' Now living in Florida and haunted by guilt and memory in the form of a winged Bengal tiger that stalks his imagination, he has already failed abjectly at suicide -- the latest attempt foiled by a stray dog that jumps on him just as he is poised to open his veins. The dog he names Strike Two, probably because it has prevented strike three, the exit he so desperately craves. Together they wait in an auto salvage yard for someone, anyone, to kill him. ''It was a very big vacant area,'' Dr. Weiss said. ''It needed something for aesthetics. This is about as attractive a thing as I could put in and far more functional than trees or bushes. I enjoy golf.'' Ms. Plimpton, 29, will keep her name. Until two weeks ago she was the education program director of the Green Mountain Audubon Society in Huntington, Vt. She is also an emergency medical technician for the Richmond (Vt.) Rescue Squad and for the Sugarbush Resort ski patrol. She graduated from Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass. Ms. Plimpton, 29, will keep her name. Until two weeks ago she was the education program director of the Green Mountain Audubon Society in Huntington, Vt. She is also an emergency medical technician for the Richmond (Vt.) Rescue Squad and for the Sugarbush Resort ski patrol. She graduated from Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass. This is a pleasing illusion: the island actually narrows at this point. But Surf City marks the end of one Long Beach Island and the beginning of another -- the boundary between what you might call the township of T-ShirtBagelPizzaRealtyIceCream MiniatureGolf and the more relaxed, spread-out, genteel and (why beat around the bush?) moneyed upper island. This is a pleasing illusion: the island actually narrows at this point. But Surf City marks the end of one Long Beach Island and the beginning of another -- the boundary between what you might call the township of T-ShirtBagelPizzaRealtyIceCream MiniatureGolf and the more relaxed, spread-out, genteel and (why beat around the bush?) moneyed upper island.