 Prosecutors say Kevin Walker stole 11 small houses or apartments in Bedford-Stuyvesant and Flatbush sections of Brooklyn by forging rightful owners' signatures and transferring deeds into his own name; say he used phony deeds to secure over $900,000 in mortgage loans and to sell some of properties to unwitting buyers for total of over $700,000; photo (M) From 1996 to 1998, prosecutors said the man, Kevin Walker, 35, of Sayville, N.Y., was able to steal 11 small houses or apartment buildings in the Bedford-Stuyvesant and Flatbush sections of Brooklyn. His victims included not only the private lending companies that gave him the mortgages and the title insurance companies that guaranteed the real estate deals, the authorities said, but also the owners who had their properties sold out from under them -- and the people who eventually bought them. Nachum Greenspan, for example, was surprised to find one day two years ago that his dead mother's home in East Flatbush had changed hands. ''We're very concerned  because the house has been sold -- there are other people living in it now,'' Mr. Greenspan said yesterday. ''A guy walks up to you and mugs you on the street. Well, this is a bit more sophisticated. But really, it's the same kind of thing.'' The experience of Mr. Greenspan, a computer programmer from East Flatbush, was typical. He discovered what had happened to his mother's home on East 91st Street a couple of years ago, he said, after the brick two-story house was gutted by fire in 1996. GREENWALD-Sandor. On August 28, 2000. Beloved husband of the late Anna, devoted father of Myrna and Edward Weisselberg, & Rochelle Greenwald Bonafede, cherished grandfather of Deborah, Joanne, Michael, Dianne, and Joseph. Loving great grandfather. Dear brother of Mary Gluck, Pearl Solner, and Helen Falkowitz. Services on Wednesday, August 30, 2000, 1 P.M. at ''Boulevard-Riverside'' Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York. GREENWALD-Sandor. On August 28, 2000. Beloved husband of the late Anna, devoted father of Myrna and Edward Weisselberg, & Rochelle Greenwald Bonafede, cherished grandfather of Deborah, Joanne, Michael, Dianne, and Joseph. Loving great grandfather. Dear brother of Mary Gluck, Pearl Solner, and Helen Falkowitz. Services on Wednesday, August 30, 2000, 1 P.M. at ''Boulevard-Riverside'' Chapels, 1895 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn, New York.