 ''You now have a lot of fabrications, tall tales about the R.U.F.,'' Eldred Collins, the spokesman for the rebel group, said in an interview at Mr. Sankoh's compound today.  Denying that the group was holding any peacekeepers hostage, he added, ''They are scattered in the bush because they do not know the terrain.'' Maybe the Hollywood wheeler-dealer archetype had finally gone too far? Don't bet on it. He's still out there, hiding in the bushes, just as savage and seductive as always. The Connecticut Grand Opera and Orchestra's general director and principal conductor, Laurence Gilgore, saw ''Three Penny Opera'' as a continuation of the company's past programming including avant-garde productions of Offenbach's ''Bluebeard's Castle'' and Mozart's ''Don Giovanni.'' And yet there are moments that suggest something more, such as this moving passage, dry as a bone, in which Tuffy recalls his childhood: ''It was underneath these boughs a 10-year-old Winston watched a group of boys rape and beat a jogger, kicking her motionless body into the mulberry bushes and leaving her for dead. When he was a little older he nearly decapitated bicyclists by knotting the ends of a section of fishing wire to carpenter nails, stretching the filament across the footpath and hammering the nails into the trees about shoulder high. At night the line was invisible . . . lifting the biker off the bicycle so cleanly, the riderless bike would coast straight down the hill and into the waiting hands of Winston and his friends. . . . Then Winston would begin to cry.'' A couple of weeks ago, I picked up a new magazine called Simplicity, whose premiere issue features ''a quiz to test your happiness quotient.'' To help improve your score, it offers a Web site, www.simplicityonline.com, dedicated to creating ''a virtual universe that's not just about making your life easier, but also more euphoric.'' When I got home and checked the mail, I found another interesting artifact: a brochure promising happiness from a few spurts of a new ''stud spray'' (derived from ''bushy herbs'' favored by Bulgarians and Brazilian tribesmen). Pump some under the tongue, and -- presto! -- you'll ''Go From Zero to Hero.'' A couple of weeks ago, I picked up a new magazine called Simplicity, whose premiere issue features ''a quiz to test your happiness quotient.'' To help improve your score, it offers a Web site, www.simplicityonline.com, dedicated to creating ''a virtual universe that's not just about making your life easier, but also more euphoric.'' When I got home and checked the mail, I found another interesting artifact: a brochure promising happiness from a few spurts of a new ''stud spray'' (derived from ''bushy herbs'' favored by Bulgarians and Brazilian tribesmen). Pump some under the tongue, and -- presto! -- you'll ''Go From Zero to Hero.'' One must be hard-core to even contemplate a Worrell, because as the fleet hopscotches its way up the Atlantic seaboard -- each leg averages about 100 miles, and two of them are overnight runs -- the air and water temperatures plummet while the odds of being ambushed by a weather front thundering off the coast shorten. Re ''Turning a Kiosk Into a Borough Gateway'' (April 2): The north face of the kiosk, nearest Flatbush Avenue, was -- until it was removed a couple of years ago -- the location of my all-time favorite traffic sign: ''No standing at all times.'' Re ''Turning a Kiosk Into a Borough Gateway'' (April 2): The north face of the kiosk, nearest Flatbush Avenue, was -- until it was removed a couple of years ago -- the location of my all-time favorite traffic sign: ''No standing at all times.'' Fortunately, since the Craigs own 45,000 acres of the surrounding countryside, you can go on guided and guarded walks to work off some of the food, or on morning horseback safaris, ending in a delicious breakfast cooked out in the bush, so you can eat your eggs and bacon watching zebra and even rhino watching you, then walk back. Wilderness Trails, Lewa Downs, Kenya, is represented by Bush Homes of East Africa in Nairobi, (254-2) 571661, fax (254-2) 571665; www.bush-homes.co.ke. Rates start at $660 a night for two in a room, including meals, table wine, beer and activities. My trip to the bush was littered with the footprints of frustrated sightseers. ''Never saw one,'' said an American tourist I met in New Delhi. ''Just go to see the scenery,'' a veteran traveler told me before I left. ''Good luck,'' a naturalist friend said with a sympathetic shrug. Even my guidebook pointed out that many travelers ''feel hard done by when it comes to tiger spotting.'' ''You now have a lot of fabrications, tall tales about the R.U.F.,'' Eldred Collins, the spokesman for the rebel group, said in an interview at Mr. Sankoh's compound today.  Denying that the group was holding any peacekeepers hostage, he added, ''They are scattered in the bush because they do not know the terrain.'' Maybe the Hollywood wheeler-dealer archetype had finally gone too far? Don't bet on it. He's still out there, hiding in the bushes, just as savage and seductive as always. The Connecticut Grand Opera and Orchestra's general director and principal conductor, Laurence Gilgore, saw ''Three Penny Opera'' as a continuation of the company's past programming including avant-garde productions of Offenbach's ''Bluebeard's Castle'' and Mozart's ''Don Giovanni.'' And yet there are moments that suggest something more, such as this moving passage, dry as a bone, in which Tuffy recalls his childhood: ''It was underneath these boughs a 10-year-old Winston watched a group of boys rape and beat a jogger, kicking her motionless body into the mulberry bushes and leaving her for dead. When he was a little older he nearly decapitated bicyclists by knotting the ends of a section of fishing wire to carpenter nails, stretching the filament across the footpath and hammering the nails into the trees about shoulder high. At night the line was invisible . . . lifting the biker off the bicycle so cleanly, the riderless bike would coast straight down the hill and into the waiting hands of Winston and his friends. . . . Then Winston would begin to cry.'' A couple of weeks ago, I picked up a new magazine called Simplicity, whose premiere issue features ''a quiz to test your happiness quotient.'' To help improve your score, it offers a Web site, www.simplicityonline.com, dedicated to creating ''a virtual universe that's not just about making your life easier, but also more euphoric.'' When I got home and checked the mail, I found another interesting artifact: a brochure promising happiness from a few spurts of a new ''stud spray'' (derived from ''bushy herbs'' favored by Bulgarians and Brazilian tribesmen). Pump some under the tongue, and -- presto! -- you'll ''Go From Zero to Hero.'' A couple of weeks ago, I picked up a new magazine called Simplicity, whose premiere issue features ''a quiz to test your happiness quotient.'' To help improve your score, it offers a Web site, www.simplicityonline.com, dedicated to creating ''a virtual universe that's not just about making your life easier, but also more euphoric.'' When I got home and checked the mail, I found another interesting artifact: a brochure promising happiness from a few spurts of a new ''stud spray'' (derived from ''bushy herbs'' favored by Bulgarians and Brazilian tribesmen). Pump some under the tongue, and -- presto! -- you'll ''Go From Zero to Hero.'' One must be hard-core to even contemplate a Worrell, because as the fleet hopscotches its way up the Atlantic seaboard -- each leg averages about 100 miles, and two of them are overnight runs -- the air and water temperatures plummet while the odds of being ambushed by a weather front thundering off the coast shorten. Re ''Turning a Kiosk Into a Borough Gateway'' (April 2): The north face of the kiosk, nearest Flatbush Avenue, was -- until it was removed a couple of years ago -- the location of my all-time favorite traffic sign: ''No standing at all times.'' Re ''Turning a Kiosk Into a Borough Gateway'' (April 2): The north face of the kiosk, nearest Flatbush Avenue, was -- until it was removed a couple of years ago -- the location of my all-time favorite traffic sign: ''No standing at all times.'' Fortunately, since the Craigs own 45,000 acres of the surrounding countryside, you can go on guided and guarded walks to work off some of the food, or on morning horseback safaris, ending in a delicious breakfast cooked out in the bush, so you can eat your eggs and bacon watching zebra and even rhino watching you, then walk back. Wilderness Trails, Lewa Downs, Kenya, is represented by Bush Homes of East Africa in Nairobi, (254-2) 571661, fax (254-2) 571665; www.bush-homes.co.ke. Rates start at $660 a night for two in a room, including meals, table wine, beer and activities. My trip to the bush was littered with the footprints of frustrated sightseers. ''Never saw one,'' said an American tourist I met in New Delhi. ''Just go to see the scenery,'' a veteran traveler told me before I left. ''Good luck,'' a naturalist friend said with a sympathetic shrug. Even my guidebook pointed out that many travelers ''feel hard done by when it comes to tiger spotting.''