 The handsome chipmunks have prominent black stripes down their backs that stand out against their tawny brown fur. Underneath their eyes are clear white stripes, which make them look quite perky. The whole length of the animal, including the somewhat bushy-tipped tail, is usually about eight inches. During the early fall months it is possible to note the fat cheeks of chipmunks. They stuff their cheeks with all kinds of food, then they store it underground for the long haul through winter. The winter storage cache could be as large as a half bushel, depending on the size of the burrow and the family. Although chipmunks do not truly hibernate as do bears, they do enjoy sleeping during the winter months. But if a winter's day proves to be warm and sunny, these beguiling creatures will pop up out of their dens just to have a look around. A plant that will grow where many plants won't can expect to be planted there. I've seen many a garden with a collection of undernourished coral bells hugging a western wall or grubbing for moisture under the rose of Sharon bushes. The handsome chipmunks have prominent black stripes down their backs that stand out against their tawny brown fur. Underneath their eyes are clear white stripes, which make them look quite perky. The whole length of the animal, including the somewhat bushy-tipped tail, is usually about eight inches. During the early fall months it is possible to note the fat cheeks of chipmunks. They stuff their cheeks with all kinds of food, then they store it underground for the long haul through winter. The winter storage cache could be as large as a half bushel, depending on the size of the burrow and the family. Although chipmunks do not truly hibernate as do bears, they do enjoy sleeping during the winter months. But if a winter's day proves to be warm and sunny, these beguiling creatures will pop up out of their dens just to have a look around. Floyd Bennett Field is at the end of Flatbush Avenue, with an entrance just before the Marine Parkway bridge tollbooth. Once a naval air station, the field is home to the Ryan Visitors Center, a small aviation history museum; the Blue Angels Radio Model Flying Club, for radio-controlled airplanes; and Ecology Village, which runs programs for school groups. For a list of events and exhibits or an application for the garden, call (718) 338-3799. Lulu walks in. She's tall, in her 40's, and has a curly bush of red hair. She wears blue lenses and her lips are wrinkled. She sits next to Bobby Hair. A Whipple supercharger brings the horsepower up to about 485, Mr. Brown says, along with a Gale Banks Engineering exhaust system. Larger sway bars and firmer bushings at the front and rear are the main suspension enhancements. A Whipple supercharger brings the horsepower up to about 485, Mr. Brown says, along with a Gale Banks Engineering exhaust system. Larger sway bars and firmer bushings at the front and rear are the main suspension enhancements. It is a voice from Flatbush, which rises in pitch and intensity when Paterno is angry. Omar Easy, a tailback, said Paterno's voice ''is kind of different.'' The handsome chipmunks have prominent black stripes down their backs that stand out against their tawny brown fur. Underneath their eyes are clear white stripes, which make them look quite perky. The whole length of the animal, including the somewhat bushy-tipped tail, is  usually about eight inches. During the early fall months it is possible to note the fat cheeks of chipmunks. They stuff their cheeks with all kinds of food, then they store it underground for the long haul through winter. The winter storage cache could be as large as a half bushel, depending on the size of the burrow and the family. Although chipmunks do not truly hibernate as do bears, they do enjoy sleeping during the winter months. But if a winter's day proves to be warm and sunny, these beguiling creatures will pop up out of their dens just to have a look around. -- Jodi Wilgoren 3. Those gracefully gnarly-looking trees outside the Chiat-von Gal house are shad bushes, so named because they bloom in the spring when the shad are running. They are plentiful along eastern Long Island's Napeague strip, which is now being heavily developed. Wild shads are highly prized, and rescuing and transplanting them has become quite an industry, with trees fetching into the five figures. To buy one, call Bob Pucci at Whitmores: (631) 329-0446.