 There are at least seven villages on le Tortue -- its population is about 30,000 -- but no roads, no telephones, no running water, no electricity and no police. Transportation is strictly by foot, via a web of thin trails lined with cactus bushes. David walked the trails, up and down the steep seafront bluffs, until he stopped at La Vallee, a collection of huts scattered randomly along the shore. On the beach I counted 17 boats under construction. They looked like the skeletons of beached whales. Most were less than 30 feet long, but two were of the same cargo-ship girth as the boat that had tried a rare Haiti-to-Florida nonstop in January but was intercepted by the Coast Guard off Key Biscayne, Fla. Three hundred ninety-five Haitians, 14 Dominicans and 2 Chinese passengers were shoehorned aboard, all of whom were returned to Haiti. According to survivors' reports, 10 people had suffocated during the crossing, the bodies tossed overboard. Among the many things people in industrialized countries today take for granted is that we will not die of a sore throat or infected scratch from a rosebush. Effective protection provided by antibiotics, anti-malarials and other microbe-killers was not available 50 years ago, and a new report from the World Health Organization warns that if we continue current practices, such protection will not be available 50 years from now. Almost every major infectious disease is becoming resistant to available medicine, and scientists are not developing new medicines fast enough to keep up. The W.H.O. warns that we cannot count on new drugs being developed, and so must preserve the currently available antimicrobials by ending our misuse of them. Among the many things people in industrialized countries today take for granted is that we will not die of a sore throat or infected scratch from a rosebush. Effective protection provided by antibiotics, anti-malarials and other microbe-killers was not available 50 years ago, and a new report from the World Health Organization warns that if we continue current practices, such protection will not be available 50 years from now. Almost every major infectious disease is becoming resistant to available medicine, and scientists are not developing new medicines fast enough to keep up. The W.H.O. warns that we cannot count on new drugs being developed, and so must preserve the currently available antimicrobials by ending our misuse of them. I find the flotsam intriguing, in a morbid way, but these islands are valuable as well as compelling. Inundated all spring, they explode with life as soon as the floods recede and quickly become so dense that bushwhacking across even the most slender of them in waders is impossible. While it's inconvenient negotiating around them, they provide quality habitat for nesting birds and secure bedding areas for deer. The gardeners have not reported their problems to the police this year, but are trying to plant less showy, less expensive plants in vulnerable areas, and yes, more thorny plants like holly and barberry bushes. They tie down their containers and wire their evergreens to buried stones or bricks. They buy cayenne pepper to ward off the four-footed thieves -- squirrels. It's a good idea to pinch the plant back once when it's about a foot tall, to encourage it to bush out. Because they produce so much foliage, dahlias also need to be fed once or twice during the season. Any general-purpose fertilizer will do. Anecdotes were collected from Miss Ferriday's surviving friends and relatives who visited the site after her death to walk through the garden and talk about their recollections of what grew where and in what abundance. Stumps and depressions confirmed the earlier presence of trees and bushes no longer there. But memories don't always lead to solid evidence. A couple of acquaintances recollected that Caroline Ferriday's give-away beds (where flowers were cut to give away to friends) belonged where there is now a group of lilacs. ''So we keep searching for photographs and talking to people to find out what is correct,'' Ms. Zitter said. ''We don't have any documentation that these were her give-away beds.'' CROSS -- We've got a society of people that want to see gore, right? Like movies with blood and gore, everybody runs to the theater to see people get shot up. When there's an accident on the highway, almost every car stops and looks over. We are held to a higher standard, because our society decides we like to see blood and gore. You guys better be good or else we're going to tell on you. Charles Quackenbush, California insurance commissioner, is fighting accusations that he allowed half dozen insurance companies to shortchange earthquake victims, and that in return companies financed nonprofit foundations that he set up to funnel political slush money; Quackenbush, one of only two Republicans who hold statewide office, has talked of running for governor or United States Senate; he denies accusations, saying that, at worst, he is guilty of careless administrative oversight; insurance companies, which paid out $16 billion in claims from 1994 Los Angeles earthquake, insist they never underpaid any of 600,000 victims, but they say it was less painful to finance Quackenbush foundations than to fight off his threat to take $3 billion more in fines; photo (M) The commissioner, Charles Quackenbush, one of only two Republicans who hold statewide office, is fighting accusations that he allowed half a dozen insurance companies to shortchange earthquake victims, and that in return the companies financed nonprofit foundations that he set up to funnel political slush money. The commissioner, Charles Quackenbush, one of only two Republicans who hold statewide office, is fighting accusations that he allowed half a dozen insurance companies to shortchange earthquake victims, and that in return the companies financed nonprofit foundations that he set up to funnel political slush money. Mr. Quackenbush, who has talked of running for governor or the United States Senate, denies the accusations, saying that, at worst, he is guilty of only careless administrative oversight. But committees of both houses of the California Legislature are investigating, as is the California attorney general, Bill Lockyer. With each new revelation, and each new demand for Mr. Quackenbush's resignation or impeachment or trial on criminal charges, Republican officials wonder whether the 2000 election could turn out to be a worse disaster than the 1998 election. Specifically, Mr. Quackenbush is accused of striking a sweetheart deal with insurance companies in which he agreed not to fine them $3 billion for shortchanging claimants after the 1994 Los Angeles earthquake and they agreed, in turn, to make $12.8 million in tax-deductible contributions to foundations that he set up to help quake victims -- foundations, it is said, that he then used to funnel money to friends and into schemes to advance his political career. In one instance, the legislative committees have been told, $263,000 in foundation money was given to a football camp attended by the Quackenbush children and $500,000 was given to the Greater Sacramento Urban League, whose board includes Mr. Quackenbush. In another instance, according to other testimony, $400,000 in foundation money was used to pay Mr. Quackenbush's longtime political advisory team for help in establishing the foundations, and then, at the team's recommendation, $100,000 in foundation money was used to pay for a poll regarding Mr. Quackenbush's political popularity, followed by a $3 million payment for a television campaign on earthquake preparedness that prominently featured Mr. Quackenbush. Mr. Quackenbush told one investigative committee that he was ''mortified'' by the ''perception'' of any wrongdoing by the foundations. He faulted the officials to whom he said he had delegated responsibility to run the foundations. Officials for the insurance companies, among them Allstate, Farmers, State Farm and 20th Century, insist they never underpaid any of the 600,000 victims of the 1994 quake, one of the costliest disasters to strike this country and one that has cost the companies $16 billion so far. Still, the companies say it was far less painful to finance the Quackenbush foundations than to fight off the commissioner's threat to take $3 billion more in fines. To make sure the companies did not balk at his offer, some officials say, Mr. Quackenbush put up a display of the kinds of adverse news articles they might face should they be fined. When the scandal broke several months ago, Republican leaders kept quiet in hopes of keeping the party from being tied to it. But over the last 10 days, as more and more details and accusations have emerged, especially charges that Mr. Quackenbush was closely involved in running the foundations day to day, not just in overseeing them generally, party leaders have begun to speak out. A number have joined the rising chorus of Democrats demanding that Mr. Quackenbush resign and a few have even sided with the smaller chorus of Democrats who are talking of an impeachment inquiry if Mr. Quackenbush does not resign. A poll released on Thursday by the Field Institute, one of the state's leading polling organizations, found Californians favoring Mr. Quackenbush's resignation or impeachment by roughly two to one. The legislative hearings resume on June 26, with Mr. Quackenbush scheduled to testify.