 After suffering through nearly three years of depressed commodity prices, American farmers hope that improved trade relations will let them sell millions of bushels of surplus corn, soybeans and other crops to China over the next few years. After suffering through nearly three years of depressed commodity prices, American farmers hope that improved trade relations will let them sell millions of bushels of surplus corn, soybeans and other crops to China over the next few years. MICHAEL A. WHITE  Flatbush, Brooklyn At one time, British tsetse control reportedly included ''fly boys'' -- young men who stood shirtless in the bush slapping flies and were paid a bounty for each killed. Because the fly likes dense brush near water, the illness particularly affects women and the babies they carry on their backs as they collect water or wash clothes. If infected, even babies must suffer melarsoprol treatment. Trainers pulled her off longtime mounts. To keep working, she rode 30-1 shots in bush-league tracks against jockeys she once could  beat in her sleep, and lost because she held back. Other jockeys called her ''chicken'' and told her to quit. Until now, Ms. Sybrandy's only political involvement was to gather  bumper stickers and buttons at the local Democratic headquarters. But this year, she said, she looked at her political participation and decided to ''kick it up a notch'' and create a site (www.all4gore.com) to promote Mr. Gore in a way that gave her more clout. Until now, Ms. Sybrandy's only political involvement was to gather  bumper stickers and buttons at the local Democratic headquarters. But this year, she said, she looked at her political participation and decided to ''kick it up a notch'' and create a site (www.all4gore.com) to promote Mr. Gore in a way that gave her more clout. So far, the Bush campaign seems to have suffered the greatest sting from parody sites, particularly over questions about whether he used drugs. The Bush campaign, in fact, tried to restrict one scathing Web site, www.gwbush.com, arguing that the site should be regulated as a political committee, but the campaign's complaint was dismissed last month by the Federal Election Commission. And as Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore know well, it also provides an opportunity for critics to exploit their foibles. For instance, www.all gore.com, recently featured a parody of Mr. Gore saying, ''Elian can live with me.'' And anti-Bush Web sites  like www.georgybush.com feature parody songs in Spanish and English that can be put on CD's for distribution. Even if much of the material is in jest, however, the creators of these parody Web sites say their intent is serious. ''We will play a small role in the campaign because there are many people coming to our site and who have heard what I have to say,'' said Zack Exley, creator of the gwbush.com site, which he says gets  300,000 to 500,000 visits a month. ''I am trying to make some points that have not been made in the mainstream media.'' Jeremiah's weekends are not usually so serene. He lives in a three-bedroom apartment in the Breukelen Houses with seven other people: his mother, a sales associate at the Toys ''R'' Us on Flatbush Avenue; her fiance, Neville Murphy; two sisters, Lauryn, 11, and Cydney, 14; two brothers, Joshua, 2, and Matthew, 7; and a nephew, Elijah, 4. Last year, he spent the summer at a day camp in Brooklyn. EVERYBODY LOVES RAYMOND. This series has made a tradition of doing flashback season finales. Last year it was the day Ray and Debra met. This year the subject is Robert, Ray's insecure policeman brother, and why he and his ex-wife, Joanne, broke up (something to do with his peculiar habits, like touching food to his chin before eating it). In the present, Robert has been out of commission since he was gored by a bull at a rodeo in Queens. Now he's going back to work, but at the family dinner to celebrate his return, he sees Joanne at the restaurant and begins to think about her. At the end she leaves her business card. Will he call? Or will he stay with his current sweet-heart of a girlfriend, Amy? I've been watching birds for six years. It all began at a brunch in Manhattan when someone happened to mention that soon the warblers would be arriving in Central Park. I didn't know what precisely warblers were, but I knew in some uncanny way that when they arrived I would go out to find them. The next day, I signed up for a course in beginning bird-watching at the New York City chapter of the Audubon Society. There were two classes and two field trips -- one to the Jamaica Bay wildlife refuge and one to Central Park. To get to Jamaica Bay, I took the A train to Broad Channel in Queens, where I saw glossy ibis and snow geese and egrets rising against the Manhattan skyline, sharing the air with jets taking off from Kennedy Airport. On the trip to Central Park, not two blocks from where I live, I saw warblers -- tiny, colorful neotropical migrants, flitting with mysterious life in the trees and bushes of the Ramble, the 36-acre woodland at the heart of the park. I've been watching birds for six years. It all began at a brunch in Manhattan when someone happened to mention that soon the warblers would be arriving in Central Park. I didn't know what precisely warblers were, but I knew in some uncanny way that when they arrived I would go out to find them. The next day, I signed up for a course in beginning bird-watching at the New York City chapter of the Audubon Society. There were two classes and two field trips -- one to the Jamaica Bay wildlife refuge and one to Central Park. To get to Jamaica Bay, I took the A train to Broad Channel in Queens, where I saw glossy ibis and snow geese and egrets rising against the Manhattan skyline, sharing the air with jets taking off from Kennedy Airport. On the trip to Central Park, not two blocks from where I live, I saw warblers -- tiny, colorful neotropical migrants, flitting with mysterious life in the trees and bushes of the Ramble, the 36-acre woodland at the heart of the park. The pastel beauty of the rose garden consists of 15,000 bushes of 800 to 900 varieties. Donna Fuss, the rosarian, invites anyone to count them, as she has often in her job tending the garden for the Friends of Elizabeth Park. The Friends formed in 1977 by some members of the Federated Garden Clubs of Connecticut at a time when the city, running out of money, was about to raze some of the gardens. Resources are not lavish even with the Friends to help. Mrs. Fuss said she quickly uses her yearly rose bush replacement budget of $8,000, which comes from donations. ''It's like a maze out there and you have to have a certain kind of machine that can make the turns without taking out the bushes or the flowers,'' Mr. Prill said. Workers also prune bushes and trees. A real struggle for them in recent years is to try to get rid of non-native plants, like autumn olive and Oriental bittersweet, that are choking trees and native plants. The problem is worse in the last few years, Ms. Quirk said, possibly because the maintenance crews were smaller for several years  and had less time to cut back the weeds. Giant Outdoor Chess Garden; tomorrow through June 2, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. daily; Metrotech Commons, Myrtle Avenue between Jay Street and Flatbush Avenue Extension; free; (718) 488-8200. Caleb Crain reviews book An American Album: One Hundred and Fifty Years of Harper's Magazine, edited by Lewis H Lapham and Ellen Rosenbush; drawing (M) and Ellen Rosenbush. and Ellen Rosenbush. Reader, I have eaten them. There were a few obstacles to the mastication. First, the trouble of eating in loaves what is normally eaten in slices. Second, an absence of what Lewis Carroll calls ''ticketing.'' Lewis H. Lapham and Ellen Rosenbush, the editors of ''An American Album,'' have supplied no headnotes to guide the modern reader. For example, Stephen A. Douglas's 1859 defense of a territory's right to choose slavery is presented for rumination, but whether it should be digested by the stomach for sophistry or the stomach for full historical disclosure, Lapham and Rosenbush do not advise. In 1927 Sarah Comstock wrote what may have been the first modern magazine profile (the subject: Aimee Semple McPherson; the method: start with the glamour, then carefully chip all the artifice off the gestalt). But there is no hint as to who Comstock herself was, and whether she wrote any more. TOWARD the end of the millennium, odd, century-straddling parallels occur to the anthology reader. Pico Iyer's week in the Los Angeles airport recalls George Ward Nichols's nine days on a Mississippi steamboat -- the feel of travel without having to move, the exotic scene in a domestic locale. Ryszard Kapuscinski experiences a 1969 war in Honduras much the way Frederic Remington experienced 1898 in Cuba: as a young reporter roughing it, shaken out of a quaint-seeming adventure by gore. And the righteous anger of Lewis Lapham in 1994, when newspapers declined to speak ill of a dead Nixon, weirdly echoes George William Curtis's fury in 1878, when newspapers treated the death of Tammany Hall's Boss Tweed ''as if he had been a hero or statesman.'' In the name of the public interest, the Harper's editor tsk-tsks the popular reaction. The target seems safe -- not only dead but a known villain -- and the editorial stance a bit unfair: Is the editor defending the people from emotional manipulation, or chiding them as softhearted dunces? Exactly. After suffering through nearly three years of depressed commodity prices, American farmers hope that improved trade relations will let them sell millions of bushels of surplus corn, soybeans and other crops to China over the next few years. After suffering through nearly three years of depressed commodity prices, American farmers hope that improved trade relations will let them sell millions of bushels of surplus corn, soybeans and other crops to China over the next few years. MICHAEL A. WHITE  Flatbush, Brooklyn At one time, British tsetse control reportedly included ''fly boys'' -- young men who stood shirtless in the bush slapping flies and were paid a bounty for each killed. Because the fly likes dense brush near water, the illness particularly affects women and the babies they carry on their backs as they collect water or wash clothes. If infected, even babies must suffer melarsoprol treatment. Trainers pulled her off longtime mounts. To keep working, she rode 30-1 shots in bush-league tracks against jockeys she once could  beat in her sleep, and lost because she held back. Other jockeys called her ''chicken'' and told her to quit. Until now, Ms. Sybrandy's only political involvement was to gather  bumper stickers and buttons at the local Democratic headquarters. But this year, she said, she looked at her political participation and decided to ''kick it up a notch'' and create a site (www.all4gore.com) to promote Mr. Gore in a way that gave her more clout. Until now, Ms. Sybrandy's only political involvement was to gather  bumper stickers and buttons at the local Democratic headquarters. But this year, she said, she looked at her political participation and decided to ''kick it up a notch'' and create a site (www.all4gore.com) to promote Mr. Gore in a way that gave her more clout. So far, the Bush campaign seems to have suffered the greatest sting from parody sites, particularly over questions about whether he used drugs. The Bush campaign, in fact, tried to restrict one scathing Web site, www.gwbush.com, arguing that the site should be regulated as a political committee, but the campaign's complaint was dismissed last month by the Federal Election Commission. And as Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore know well, it also provides an opportunity for critics to exploit their foibles. For instance, www.all gore.com, recently featured a parody of Mr. Gore saying, ''Elian can live with me.'' And anti-Bush Web sites  like www.georgybush.com feature parody songs in Spanish and English that can be put on CD's for distribution. Even if much of the material is in jest, however, the creators of these parody Web sites say their intent is serious. ''We will play a small role in the campaign because there are many people coming to our site and who have heard what I have to say,'' said Zack Exley, creator of the gwbush.com site, which he says gets  300,000 to 500,000 visits a month. ''I am trying to make some points that have not been made in the mainstream media.'' Jeremiah's weekends are not usually so serene. He lives in a three-bedroom apartment in the Breukelen Houses with seven other people: his mother, a sales associate at the Toys ''R'' Us on Flatbush Avenue; her fiance, Neville Murphy; two sisters, Lauryn, 11, and Cydney, 14; two brothers, Joshua, 2, and Matthew, 7; and a nephew, Elijah, 4. Last year, he spent the summer at a day camp in Brooklyn. EVERYBODY LOVES RAYMOND. This series has made a tradition of doing flashback season finales. Last year it was the day Ray and Debra met. This year the subject is Robert, Ray's insecure policeman brother, and why he and his ex-wife, Joanne, broke up (something to do with his peculiar habits, like touching food to his chin before eating it). In the present, Robert has been out of commission since he was gored by a bull at a rodeo in Queens. Now he's going back to work, but at the family dinner to celebrate his return, he sees Joanne at the restaurant and begins to think about her. At the end she leaves her business card. Will he call? Or will he stay with his current sweet-heart of a girlfriend, Amy? I've been watching birds for six years. It all began at a brunch in Manhattan when someone happened to mention that soon the warblers would be arriving in Central Park. I didn't know what precisely warblers were, but I knew in some uncanny way that when they arrived I would go out to find them. The next day, I signed up for a course in beginning bird-watching at the New York City chapter of the Audubon Society. There were two classes and two field trips -- one to the Jamaica Bay wildlife refuge and one to Central Park. To get to Jamaica Bay, I took the A train to Broad Channel in Queens, where I saw glossy ibis and snow geese and egrets rising against the Manhattan skyline, sharing the air with jets taking off from Kennedy Airport. On the trip to Central Park, not two blocks from where I live, I saw warblers -- tiny, colorful neotropical migrants, flitting with mysterious life in the trees and bushes of the Ramble, the 36-acre woodland at the heart of the park. I've been watching birds for six years. It all began at a brunch in Manhattan when someone happened to mention that soon the warblers would be arriving in Central Park. I didn't know what precisely warblers were, but I knew in some uncanny way that when they arrived I would go out to find them. The next day, I signed up for a course in beginning bird-watching at the New York City chapter of the Audubon Society. There were two classes and two field trips -- one to the Jamaica Bay wildlife refuge and one to Central Park. To get to Jamaica Bay, I took the A train to Broad Channel in Queens, where I saw glossy ibis and snow geese and egrets rising against the Manhattan skyline, sharing the air with jets taking off from Kennedy Airport. On the trip to Central Park, not two blocks from where I live, I saw warblers -- tiny, colorful neotropical migrants, flitting with mysterious life in the trees and bushes of the Ramble, the 36-acre woodland at the heart of the park. The pastel beauty of the rose garden consists of 15,000 bushes of 800 to 900 varieties. Donna Fuss, the rosarian, invites anyone to count them, as she has often in her job tending the garden for the Friends of Elizabeth Park. The Friends formed in 1977 by some members of the Federated Garden Clubs of Connecticut at a time when the city, running out of money, was about to raze some of the gardens. Resources are not lavish even with the Friends to help. Mrs. Fuss said she quickly uses her yearly rose bush replacement budget of $8,000, which comes from donations. ''It's like a maze out there and you have to have a certain kind of machine that can make the turns without taking out the bushes or the flowers,'' Mr. Prill said. Workers also prune bushes and trees. A real struggle for them in recent years is to try to get rid of non-native plants, like autumn olive and Oriental bittersweet, that are choking trees and native plants. The problem is worse in the last few years, Ms. Quirk said, possibly because the maintenance crews were smaller for several years  and had less time to cut back the weeds. Giant Outdoor Chess Garden; tomorrow through June 2, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. daily; Metrotech Commons, Myrtle Avenue between Jay Street and Flatbush Avenue Extension; free; (718) 488-8200. Caleb Crain reviews book An American Album: One Hundred and Fifty Years of Harper's Magazine, edited by Lewis H Lapham and Ellen Rosenbush; drawing (M) and Ellen Rosenbush. and Ellen Rosenbush. Reader, I have eaten them. There were a few obstacles to the mastication. First, the trouble of eating in loaves what is normally eaten in slices. Second, an absence of what Lewis Carroll calls ''ticketing.'' Lewis H. Lapham and Ellen Rosenbush, the editors of ''An American Album,'' have supplied no headnotes to guide the modern reader. For example, Stephen A. Douglas's 1859 defense of a territory's right to choose slavery is presented for rumination, but whether it should be digested by the stomach for sophistry or the stomach for full historical disclosure, Lapham and Rosenbush do not advise. In 1927 Sarah Comstock wrote what may have been the first modern magazine profile (the subject: Aimee Semple McPherson; the method: start with the glamour, then carefully chip all the artifice off the gestalt). But there is no hint as to who Comstock herself was, and whether she wrote any more. TOWARD the end of the millennium, odd, century-straddling parallels occur to the anthology reader. Pico Iyer's week in the Los Angeles airport recalls George Ward Nichols's nine days on a Mississippi steamboat -- the feel of travel without having to move, the exotic scene in a domestic locale. Ryszard Kapuscinski experiences a 1969 war in Honduras much the way Frederic Remington experienced 1898 in Cuba: as a young reporter roughing it, shaken out of a quaint-seeming adventure by gore. And the righteous anger of Lewis Lapham in 1994, when newspapers declined to speak ill of a dead Nixon, weirdly echoes George William Curtis's fury in 1878, when newspapers treated the death of Tammany Hall's Boss Tweed ''as if he had been a hero or statesman.'' In the name of the public interest, the Harper's editor tsk-tsks the popular reaction. The target seems safe -- not only dead but a known villain -- and the editorial stance a bit unfair: Is the editor defending the people from emotional manipulation, or chiding them as softhearted dunces? Exactly.