 SNOW-Joan Marie (nee McPadden). Joan died July 29, 2000 after a brave battle with cancer. She will always be remembered for her vibrance and her dedication to educating children. Beloved wife of the late James Gerard and loving mother of James, Martin, Mary Catherine, John, and daughter-in-law, Paula. Dedicated sister of Brian McPadden and cousin, Patricia Monteforte. Funeral Wednesday, 8:30 AM from the McManus Funeral Home, 2001 Flatbush Ave, Bklyn. Funeral Mass, 10 AM, St James Cathedral-Basilica. Interment St Charles Cemetery. Visiting Tuesday, 2-5 and 7-9 PM. The family respectfully requests in lieu of flowers, donations be made to charity. Some preferences: Calvary Hospital, Catholic Near East Welfare Assn, or the South Bronx Educational Foundation. SNOW-Joan Marie (nee McPadden). Joan died July 29, 2000 after a brave battle with cancer. She will always be remembered for her vibrance and her dedication to educating children. Beloved wife of the late James Gerard and loving mother of James, Martin, Mary Catherine, John, and daughter-in-law, Paula. Dedicated sister of Brian McPadden and cousin, Patricia Monteforte. Funeral Wednesday, 8:30 AM from the McManus Funeral Home, 2001 Flatbush Ave, Bklyn. Funeral Mass, 10 AM, St James Cathedral-Basilica. Interment St Charles Cemetery. Visiting Tuesday, 2-5 and 7-9 PM. The family respectfully requests in lieu of flowers, donations be made to charity. Some preferences: Calvary Hospital, Catholic Near East Welfare Assn, or the South Bronx Educational Foundation. For years, he documented how logging was driving adjacent chimpanzee groups into warfare. All around Central Africa, he said, logging roads have provided quick access for hunters supplying the exploding urban market for bush meat, killing everything from snakes to gorillas. He has worked himself through bush tracks in his native Louisiana to leading-rider status in Texas, and has been a top contender in Chicago and Kentucky. He says he is a restless sort and, like Ebina, intends to ride full time in New York. He finished second here on opening day. ON THE SCREEN -- In the commercial on health care, a map of Texas with a bandage slung around the Panhandle appears. In the commercial on the environment, the same map is shown, only with fumes billowing from the Panhandle as if from an industrial smokestack. Both close with the words, ''For the facts, visit www.texasunderbush.com.'' ON THE SCREEN -- In the commercial on health care, a map of Texas with a bandage slung around the Panhandle appears. In the commercial on the environment, the same map is shown, only with fumes billowing from the Panhandle as if from an industrial smokestack. Both close with the words, ''For the facts, visit www.texasunderbush.com.'' www.georgewbush.com